O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	To you, dear sons, I have completed this book which is the latter part of the science of medicine combined with its completeness. And I have done the end through its demonstrations and by its statements.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to my mind that I should complete this book with this treatise, which is a part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the art of hands is practiced in our region and is unknown everywhere, it has been lost and discarded, and nothing remains from it except for small descriptions in books by the ancients that have been performed by hand.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And because of this, errors and vanity have come about, and minds are closed, and knowledge has become distant.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	It seems that I will revive this treatise in its entirety according to the path of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and will come together with the forms of the cautery instruments, and other tools of work alongside their declaration and preparation, just as it is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because no good masters are found in our time, the art of medicine has been extended.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary for the one who intervenes to master in the art of anatomy, as Galen says, as long as he knows the measurement of the limbs, and their forms and connections and separations, and have knowledge of bones and nerves and tendons, and the number of bones, and their movement and mobile and stationary veins, and the location of their exit.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And so says Ipython that with speech we are many, and with action we are few; indeed in the art of hands.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you at the beginning of this book that if someone doesn't know the things we have spoken, they may go wrong and mislead people; thus I have seen many times more than others who interfere in this science and abandon their knowledge and experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	And I saw a foolish man treat an abscess on a woman's neck, and cut the arteries beneath it. Because so much blood flowed out that the woman died in her death throes between his hands.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And I saw another physician who treated a stone in an elderly man's bladder, and the stone was large; he removed part of the bladder with it, and killed the man within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I have already been summoned to extract, and saw the location of the disease and the size of the stone, and if they were well cut it would kill him.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And saw another case where he was called to treat the leg of one of our country's Duke who had broken his leg, and had an injury as well due to the break. The patients were full of ignorance, forcing the break onto the wound in various places using strong force, not allowing any healing for the wound, making it so until the second month; he was instructed not to disintegrate the break; stayed this way until the leg swelled up completely and the foot, leading to his downfall.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was summoned to come to him, and I quickly went to relieve his leg; and when I heard it being dislocated so smoothly that he felt no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But every pathway of corruption had already been confirmed throughout the body or member, and it could not be healed; and the process of decay continued to spread within the limb until the entire member was lost.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And as for another instance where one abscess weakened another intertwined abscess, and then it inflamed due to the wickedness of its lordship.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For the ulcer, when it is pure of melancholic humours, does not allow one to touch it with iron if it isn't in its entirety within what can be removed all that which has been corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And because of this, skilled children, you are required to know that the work of hands is divided into two parts: meaning, an area where there is danger in multiple positions; and I will show in each section of this book where it has strength and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	Because it is necessary for you to keep this in mind, so that no one may speak ill of you.
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	If you take your weapons in readiness, and treat your illnesses lightly yet firmly, and use the best way so that through God's grace you come to salvation and are ready; and leave terrifying diseases without complaint for healing; and remove your weapons from those who make you doubt, and have faith in what you can do so that you may go from this world to glory with honor.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.»	Galen advised in some of his admonishments: "Do not take in for treatment false illness, that you might be called a foolish sight by others."
J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc .iij. chapitres.	I have composed this treatise according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapters discuss fire cauterization and medical cauterizations, and organize chapters up to the joints; and descriptions of instruments, metal tools for cauterization, and all that is necessary for the operation.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapters deal with cutting and piercing, as well as suction cups and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, among similar matters; and organizes chapters along with descriptions of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapters are about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar matters; it organizes up to the joints from the head onwards, along with descriptions of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Just as we recall our work, it is fitting that I explain the quality of each aid and the harm of each constitution.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the qualities of help, and harm, are the longest word and subtlest science and the secrets answer to it; and many wise people spoke about this, agreeing with it. And they suffice me with their words, for I fear its length.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that the fire cautery universally helps with all types of body composition where there is substance, for it deals with two compositions: these are known as hot body with substance and dry body with substance.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In the composition of a hot and dry body combined with substance, there was no agreement and they said that fire cautery is a great help. And another group said the opposite: that fire cautery only benefits diseases that come from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is so hot, and should never be treated with diseases of heat or drying; and it is said who says otherwise that the cautery provides great help for hot and dry illnesses that come into the body.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the body of the person and their moisture to the constitution of fire, you find that the body is cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this word.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it true on every occasion through experimentation.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And with any passage, do not interfere beyond him who has proven it, and who knows through long usage the chapter of cauteries, and the variety of skin types in men, and their dispositions and causes of illnesses, and the occurrences and space during treatment; we have no fear for other skin types, especially for cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all these matched and agreed with the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, children, that when assembled in fire, a cautery has secrets of healing arts, and it offers more benefit than a hot medical treatment.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and does not come out except at the body part that is heated, and does not harm other parts if you do not name it.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	Hot medicines travel from one part to another by removing, and cause diseases in the affected limb; and by chance they excite the patient.
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	Fire, due to its height and the goodness of its substance, does not do this if there is no excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And I have found this through experimentation and the length of service and study that I have put into the art, which corresponds to the truth of things; and for this reason, I apologize for the length of my words, because I do not want to withhold from you the secret of fire and its quality, how it removes diseases from bodies, as the philosopher demonstrates in his demonstration. Now accept this knowledge in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that they decided on what times the cauterizations should be performed, and prescribed them carefully.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cauterization is suitable in all times, because the damages occurring are alleviated by the aid of the cautery; and likewise if the cauterizations are for necessary pains that cannot wait until larger harm befalls to the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And never think like those who are fools, my dear child; for a disease cured by cauterization does not have a return. And they say it this way; but it is not as they believe, because cauterizations are just medicine that changes the complexion and dries out the fluids that cause pain, and works better than medicine for hastening its power, and through the virtue of its work and its authority.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And the possibility is that diseases come about in any way according to the disposition of the sick person and the location of the disease and its virtue; and they accumulate in him unnecessary things through the acquisition of meats and similar matters. If only cauterizations are given where there is little excess matter and moisture, as with cauterizations for pain, and similar things, then such pain does not recur; but this happens seldom.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And no one understands why cauteries are called the ends of medicine, and this is seen; but they do not believe that cauteries can follow medicine, but their understanding is false, and it is said that cauteries are at the end of medicine because when we administer methods for cures in any disease and they don't work, then we administer our cautery, and it works.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore, it is true that cauteries are at the end of medicine, not according to the understanding of those who misunderstand.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The old ones said that gold cauteries are melted better than iron ones, and they mentioned this only because of the quality of gold and the purity of its substance; and they stated that the metal parts of a cautery do not cause rotting, but this is not visible as I have proven it and found out that some people do experience this. And gold cauteries are more melted than iron ones, just as they said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And yet, when you heat the gold instrument, you do not know immediately by the color of the gold when it is heated, and it quickly cools down; and if it is heated too much; it gets too hot to use; and thus there is enough prevention.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this reason, we use our fire cautery that has been prepared for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	So I have ordered this chapter on how to find the shoulder joint until this point, because it makes the search for it lighter.
dou cautere olivaire	with the olive cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	The use of cautery is appropriate in cases of moisture and cold within the brain. There are two kinds done by reason of an illness called 'soda', and due to various humors descending from head to eyes, and ears, as well as from numerous dreams and toothache, and throat pain, and especially for all diseases coming from cold such as paralysis, soda (a type of stroke), apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery involves purging the patient with a solutary medicine to transform their body for three or four weeks, depending on how well the disease, its intensity and regularity suit the body. Then it allows the recovery of the diseased part afterwards.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then hold their hands together in your palms and place their hands on the bridge of their nose. Afterwards, put the root of your palm against the root of their nose between their two nostrils; let them breathe as you move your middle fingers to where they bleed, then heat up the cautery which is called 'olivare', this is its form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it in its natural position with ink, and move your hand down gradually while pushing lightly against it; then raise your hand alone, and if you see the bone .i. a small dot; and if you do not see it, continue using the cautery until you see the bone as I've instructed. After this, take .i. pinch of sulfur, put it in oil and wet cotton inside, and place it on the bone, letting it stay there for three days. Afterwards, apply buttered oil on the skin; let it remain until the scab falls off; then treat the wound with balm known as 'tetrafarmaçon', until it heals over.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And they said that the more an open wound stays exposed, the more it purges out impurities; and because of this help, movements occur.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And it was said that one should leave the cauterization for so long that part of the bone gets burned, and then remove that which is burned from the bone, and treat it.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And it is said that the cautery should be left in place for as long as necessary, pressing so strongly that one lifts up to the bone as wide as a thumb that women insert into their fuses when they are menstruating because the body's fluids can then escape; and should the wound remain widely open after this? Afterward, it must be treated and sewn.
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two ways of applying the cautery do not seem to me to be entirely good for everything, except where there is a channel for fear; and I think that I should leave them like this. For the joints weaken through continuous exposure to nature, as we attest in other limbs; even when the joint of illness is weak due to nature, and my first application of cautery feels more soothing and less painful to me, so from this usage, I work thus together for their benefit.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	from the old pain in the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When throughout the head comes chronic pain and lasts for a long time, one should use the patient's elbows and pills that are called 'cochies', and treatments of chief [possibly referring to herbs] and ears and bandages; and if one applies the cautery as we have previously said, it may prove effective.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take care that the shoulder of the sick person is not too cold and robust in nature; therefore, apply the cautery under the fire for a bit as we have spoken about.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After you perform the cautery on each part of the shoulder until it reaches the bone, as we have said previously, do one more cautery where your hand is called "vassel"; and make two others in which suction cups are placed; and lift your hand so that you do not reach the bone: patients feel much greater pain with this cautery than with others, and I will speak further about it elsewhere; and it must be known that the cauterizations of the shoulder parts should be more precise than when one cauterizes the middle part of the head, and this is the form:
dou cautere dou chief	For the fire cautery,
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When suddenly in part of the head comes an intense pain,
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The cauteries of fever require you to soak a piece of wool in sweet alcohol, then apply the peel and cover it with one band around each shoulder, positioning them so that the alcohol can reach the skin. Then secure it well for 12 hours; afterwards remove it and let it out on its own for two days or three.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the oil treatment as long as it is clean; and if you see that you are doing with some burning medicines that I have written or the tenth treatise on burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere. Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	The iron cautery is done in this manner. Heat up the shape of the cautery as follows:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And call it "closed" because its head is made in the shape of a bell where there is .i. point of curvature, and in the middle it has a small appearance; and place it on the painful area, and hold your hand and gently turn the iron until half of the thickness of the skin is burned; then lift your hand so that the artery doesn't burn, when it is done, let out an abundance of blood.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After that, put cotton in a sailcloth, and apply it on the wound for three days; then change to damp cotton soaked in butter, and continue treating the wound with oil as long as it remains clean; if you wish to cauterize this headache with the iron cautery ("cultellare"), do so at its tip, but be careful not to cover the artery in this headache that is not old.
de emigraine	Regarding the use of a fire cautery, instruct the patient to allow their hair to grow long and evenly; if they are pricking at their base, hold them steady so they don't move until they fully grow.
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you are treating migraines as we have discussed in the divisions of diseases previously, if it does not benefit and you find that none of the cauterizations mentioned from the medicine and iron do not apply, then it is necessary for you to heat up the cautery which is called 'cultellare' until it's white; and do this on the part of the body where there's a line approximately half an inch long, and use your hand once, making sure that you don't cut into the artery and stop before reaching the bone; and guard against the jaw clenching when eating, ensuring only the jaw is moving and not any spasm affecting the patient, and guard against blood drainage from the artery if it's been cut, or sudden fear even in someone who doesn't know this procedure and hasn't experienced it; and leave your work for me to finish; but I will tell you how to stop bleeding when the artery has been cut, and show you where it is done in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you find that this cautery does not work for the disease and the patients are suffering, use it on the head as we have said before, and treat the wound until it has healed; and if you observe to administer the cautery that we have said in the chapter about extracting the artery, with a two-bladed knife; and these cauterizations are better than others and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	The pain of the ear from both cold and heat
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When pain comes from cold in the ear, and we have applied solutive medicines and other treatments that we mentioned under division, and if the pains do not subside, then heat this cautery called "points", according to its form.
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After applying points all around the ear, or around both if pain is in both ears, and after removing somewhat from the root of the ear right where you have marked its edge; place ten points around each ear. After that, treat the area until it becomes healed.
de la torture de la bouche	Of the torment of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Treatments that need to be healed by the fire cautery are only those that move from pus, as we have explained in sections of diseases; and no cautering should be done on symptoms that come from scarring and rash of nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you treat this sign of torture that moves from pus in the ears and from discharges from the nose and gargling, if it is not effective, then it is necessary for you to cauterize the hair with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, and another a little beyond the temple, and the third on the junction of the two lips; and place the cautery where the healthy part opens, and make it cauterize the head of the ear above slightly below the nose horn, and another in the temple as long as an inch; and leave the cautery burning until half of the skin is burned; and this is the shape of the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And as for the sign of the knife wound that we have described earlier, but it is a bit more subtle; so it needs that the knives be a little thicker. After treating the wound as I have said before, until it heals properly.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When dealing with an old apoplexy and you're treating it as we have described, and if the patient doesn't improve, and the sick person has a fever, then do this: four cauterizations. Two of them on the two tips of their head, one around the head, and one where the neck is called 'vessel' as we previously mentioned, and the final one on the mouth of the stomach; and treat it just as we have described before.
de litargie	Of Liturgy
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this illness, you should give the patient large berries and pills that lighten the brain; after that, you examine the head of the sick person thoroughly, and then place the strappado made of tamarisk on their occipital region. And this is how to use a cautery: do it as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If it's healing like this, well done; and if not, you should do the following: apply three fire cauteries down to the neck while descending, leaving an interval of one thumb between each one. Treat as with the others, and if you see them adjusting, and the patient is suffering, then apply another cautery in the middle; and if necessary, two more above the two horns, and treat until it heals. And use the cauteries known as 'olivare', as I have said previously.
de la froidor dou chief	from the cold of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary to cleanse the head of warts and what we have previously discussed; after treating the head with a cautery, then apply it to the patient, on each horn of the head and one at the base and three on the spine of the neck; and if you need more, and the horns are moist and the patient is suffering, and the disease has spread, then apply four more cauterizations on the spine of the back; and leave until the most sensitive area is completely dry, then lift your hand; afterwards treat until it heals, and use the cauteries known as 'olivare' that we have previously mentioned.
de l’epilempsie	Regarding the application of a cautery with fire, instruct the afflicted to allow hair growth until it is long and even; and if they poke at their origins, restrain the eyes so that they do not move until they grow.
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	The epileptics should only use fire cautery if they are of the phlegmatic type, and it is necessary to first modify their diet with years' worth and other treatments that we have mentioned in the division where the diseases are large and suffer from medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it's a child who can't bear the discomfort, make them gargle and chew frequently with good meats; after that, they should have their head in the middle, and I do one fire according to what we said before, and one fire on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the disease is strong and causing suffering, make fires as I said for those who are paralyzed and have softening of muscles, over the spine at the back and neck, and apply olive wood fires in the manner that I have described.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is young, make him a fine fire cautery according to this method:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When it is due to melancholy that the excesses or moisture are corrupted and blood is thickened, then apply the cautery of partial cauteries as we have said for the one who has paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if it is due to the cause of melancholy that the excesses decline towards melancholy, and there are symptoms in the body of moist maladies, then let them drink something that purifies the brain according to what was stated previously in this section.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the king of the patient's ailment; after make two thread from well-made linen, as one circle, if put it into the head; and the patient sit upright, and must be held in all directions; after present the treatment, and rub with old bee wax; and heat the fire moderately so it can be applied without causing pain; afterwards empty the circle through the head, and let it cool down; and do this to the patient once a week for another procedure, until they are well.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere. Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	If you see that the cauterization is taking place, make several points all over the cautery. This way of cauterizing moistens the brain significantly more; and then put damp cotton in bee wax and fat on it.
de l’awe des eulz	regarding the wisdom of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the eyes first come by means of the signs that I have described in division, then you should start and continue to provide the patient with things that cleanse the head, and protect it from all moisture. Make them sweat or take several baths fasting.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After commanding him to move his head and have the fire cautery applied around the head, then apply two cauterizations on each temple when both eyes are descending or when one eye is descending while the other remains still. And for every cautery, take care of all veins and arteries that are near the brain; and apply the cautery long according to the width of the temples; and guard against bleeding out; if you see too much blood coming out, stop it with something as you know how to do so.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	And I will teach you about the extraction of arteries and incisions in how to apply the cautery; and every time, do not cauterize or burn anywhere near the two bones behind.
dou cors des larmes	of the tears' boughs
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed, and present on the veins, or out from the arteries that are at the apparent backside of the head; and it's seen that they're excesses of cold humors, then I make them to be treated with cautery as I said at the beginning: first. apply fire to the head, and secondly. two cauteries on each of the four temples, and thirdly. two more cauteries under each of the four bones; and if it needs more care, carefully cauterize above the eyebrow, with one small cautery in total.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	of the tears' paths within the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you administer the medicines according to what we have said in the division, and if it does not benefit, then try giving the patient three bad eggs; after that, rub the head, and apply a cautery right in the middle of the olive oil cautery; and make two cauteries using the 'claw' type cautery on each eyebrow, slightly above the hairline; and beware to avoid touching the artery so you don't cut it.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the shape of the cautery which is called "claw":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare». de coi ci est li forme:	And when the paper of the ear is softened by illness and moisture, then use this cautery which is called "olive". This has this shape:
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see to apply two cauteries on the two ears as long as they are; and do not let your hand rest until that third part of the paper is burned, according to the manner I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	of the hair which points the ear
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	No time has there been when the hair of the ear turns into wax and touches the ear, and in this case one uses cautery according to two ways: that is to say by fire, or with burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they have grown and are even, then heal the patient; afterwards draw on the paper of the eyes a figure that looks like a leaf of myrtle, and mark its beginning under the sign opposite the hairs; then apply moist cotton dipped in egg white and garlic paste to the eye, then heat the cautery according to this shape:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After applying the cautery to the area you've marked, do so gradually a little bit at a time, until the skin is burned in that spot; and signs of healthy healing are when you see the paper retreat, and the hairs stand up at the eye's edge; then lift your hand, and leave it like that for three days. Next, place wet cotton in butter until the scab is removed; afterwards apply ointment until it becomes clean.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And when hairs and paper start to soften after this, then resume the cautery on that same area as you did first. If hairs have fallen out, apply the cautery until the paper rises back up to its natural position in a uniform way, ensuring it doesn't pinch or irritate the eye.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The instructions for the hot cautery are to guide the patient on letting hairs grow until they are large and uniform. Then create a shape of parchment resembling a bay leaf. Next, take French soap and live charcoal; each will require one-third, and grind them well together. Grind it quickly so that it doesn't cool down. Then apply this mixture according to the shape of a bay leaf on paper covering the affected area. If the ailment lasts for only an eye's span, you must cut into it within an eye's span. And if in both eyes; then stuff cotton moistened with egg white beneath each eye. Ensure the patient's side is toward your body and place your elbow while applying the medicine. Press one-third of a spoonful of the mixture along with some saliva every time the patient feels irritation from the medicine, for it feels irritation like fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, if the medicine prescribed to you is needed.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien. Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the suppuration is past, if you lift the limb from the wound, and raise it again if you see the paper lifted in the same manner as it was lifted by the constraint of fire or incision; and if it's like this, then it's well. If not, still apply the medicine to the limb or until the medicine has taken effect, so long that your movements are equal, and your eyes adjusted; then place a wet cotton in butter until the burnt skin is covered, after treating the wound from the ointment called 'dyafen' and others, until it heals.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.  Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if you need to guard very well over your work so that no medicine touches the eyes. And when the paper becomes moist and the hair sticks in the eye, then reapply the medicine to that limb which is softened by the paper correctly; as you did before. After this, treat it until it heals; and this is the form of the leaf of mirtle:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the eyes of men vary in size and smallness, and according to this are your restrictions; and do not have the right path respond to him who studies this craft.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	Of treating fistulas by cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have explained in the sections on diseases and your treatments are not beneficial, then it is necessary for you to apply a cautery treatment according to this manner.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to place their head in your healthy position; and guide the surgeons' hands on their head between your palms so it does not move or slip from its place. After that, apply cotton soaked in egg juice or garlic juice to the eye; then heat up the cautery which is made: and place it close to the eye as if it were the shape of a goose feather, combine it with the point of the cautery touching it; if you see, make sure it points from one feather tip to the other, and if you can see, make it resemble a tent. But always remember that the position that works best for your operation is what truly matters.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After pressing the fistula when it has been opened, and treating the putrefaction, drying it out; if it is closed but still produces something, take it outside of the body; after this, place a cautery on it. Hold your hand at the part below the nose near the eye with the cautery, so that you don't lose control of your hand movements; and put the cautery in the grease around the eye, and allow it to decompose.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien. Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse .iij. jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se .xl. jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If you come to the beginning of the cautery up until the bone, that would be well. If not, then repeat the use of the cautery once more, and do so again if necessary, and leave it for three days; after this place a damp cotton in butter, and continue with the ointment cure as long as there's no fever, and if forty days pass without fever, then apply corrosive water until the bone is exposed. Follow these instructions according to what suits your chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent. Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure .i. camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	And there is a way of performing a cautery on a fistula that none of the old ones mentioned. Understand about the fistula and prepare for it; after this, place in the wound one fine piece of chalk as you see its form:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	And they do it in the quantity of one and a half pints; hold your hand or cudgel tightly, and don't move the injured part until the heated metal has reached its oil; and one must place cotton soaked with moisture over the eye: the lead when applied to diseased tissue, and healthily heals diseased areas.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin. Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	And if the fistula is healed by the cautery as we have described, that's good. If not, then one should administer pertussis to the nose, and bring the fistula back into the body according to what is proper for its own natural function.
des crevaices en levres	cuts in lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Rarely, there appear tears in lips which are called 'hair', and similarly in infants' lips.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these tears as we have discussed in sections, and if the treatment doesn't help, then apply this: take a small surgical instrument for cauterization according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And immediately place it in those tears until you reach the base; afterwards, heal the wound with tallow until it is healthy.
de l’aposteme de la goule	from the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess appears at the root of the throat or in the uterus, or on the palate, or under the roots of the teeth, after becoming putrid and swollen it becomes a fistula; and you treat it as we have said in divisions, but it fails to improve: therefore, it is necessary that you have one cautery according to the size of the fistula; after the removal or erosion of the fistula, hold your hand until the metal reaches the bottom of it, then any further; and do this once or twice, following the treatment we mentioned in treatments, while it remains healthy. If treated like this, it is good; and if not, you should expose its location and remove the infected bone as found in your chapter.
dou movement des dens	The shifting of teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums soften due to moisture and teeth move, you treat it through medicines but if this fails, then place the head of the patient in a healthy position; afterward heat up the cautery as follows: take one stick next to the tooth. And place the end of the cautery immediately inside the tooth, while holding your hand so that the heat reaches the root of the tooth; after that lift your hand and start using the cautery according to your will; afterwards fill the infected area with salt water, let it sit for an hour and then remove it.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this way, the teeth that were moving are stabilized, and the gums that were soft are made firm, and the moisture that was corrupt is dried.
de la dolor des dens	Of toothache
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When toothache comes from coldness, or there is coldness or frostbite, and medical treatments don't help, then one must use cautery according to two ways: and butter cautery and fire cautery.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Butter cautery if it is like this: you take butter from a cow, and use the tip of a iron or silver spoon; afterwards take cotton and wrap it on the tip of a needle, and immerse the wet end in the cold butter until it solidifies; then apply it quickly to the painful tooth and hold it until it has cooled down; and do this often until its effect reaches the root of the tooth, and if you see wet wool or cotton immersed in cold butter on the painful tooth, put them again on the aching tooth, and place a hot iron there until the heat reaches the pain in the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain. Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	The assembly of fire for the cautery is such that you take one iron or ardent coal, and let it be large enough so that the heat does not reach the mouth of the patient; after heating the cautery, from which it will cool later, place it on a tooth and hold your hand until the cautery cools down; do this often, as the pain will be relieved either that day or the next. And it is necessary that the patient fill their mouth with good butter in anticipation of this cautery, and then press hard; and this is the form of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And perform the cautery at whatever you desire or are able to do; and this is the form of the iron:
des scrophules	removes tubercles
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait ij. aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou .ij. se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi .iij. jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the scrophules are due to cold blood and moisture, and do not respond to digestion by medicines, then apply the cautery as described below in this form, making two openings for the fumes to exit from the other side; place the hot cautery on the abscess once or twice, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess; if the abscess is small, adjust the cautery according to the size of the abscess and leave it like that for three days; apply moistened cotton soaked in butter until all pus is removed; afterwards, cure with ointments and poultices until healed.
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc. Aprés li fai .i. autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	When moisture invades the channels of the heart, and especially when it comes from a cold constitution, then it's necessary that the body should be cleansed by diuretic medicines first; after this, apply the cautery at the base of the throat, but make sure not to come too close to the throat, nor burn the blood much except just a bit. Next, do another cautery at the junction of the neck and head of the spine, and use the cauterizations that we call "clavicle" as shown before; then cure accordingly until it is healed completely.
de la toust	It seems like this text might be incomplete or perhaps contains a typo. The translation would depend on the correct content. If 'de la toust' refers to something specific in context, such as 'treatment of the eye', here's an assumption for its English translation:
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all and the diseases of the womb are due to cold moisture, and the patients do not have fever or dryness, and if it is an old disease, then apply two fire cauteries on their force in their veins; and another one directly under the buttocks between the two nipples. And let the cautery called "clavile" be according to the shape that was previously mentioned.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a .xxx., ou enqui entor. Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a .iij. rains selonc ceste forme:	And if you see this, apply the fire cautery at the entire point which is called "pains" from which the shape of this was previously described in the disease of the ears; and have the points until thirty, or beyond that. After treating the area according to what was said before, apply three rings according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And for these, make the fire cautery lighter, because you do it three times in each area.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	On the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	After that, bandage the limbs on his back and sides; afterwards, lift out the kidney which is inside the testicle with your left hand; and if the joint has dislocated internally, apply the cautery iron which has two points like this:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	and cauterize the kidney until it pierces up to the ribs, and join together four applications of the cautery, and this is done by using the cautery which has three points, because there are three stages in the cauterization process; and the nerves follow the delicacy of a tent, which is the shape of the cautery with three points:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And always attach this one on this first nerve because there are seven cauterizations needed.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After placing the cautery, knead with thread; afterwards let the patient rest, and do not stretch the limbs for too long until they are well supported.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant. Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	And if it is dislocated upwards, where little has happened, then make the cautery on the thick part of the clavicle, or use several cauterizations. For the joint is closed, and the moisture is removed and the patient's injury is healed.
dou cautere de pleuresin	of the weeping cautery
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancient ones said that it is necessary to do pleursin cauteries from the roots of aristologe, and in this manner: take a long root of aristologe, the longest you can find, and let it be dry, also making sure it's as big and as long as your fingers; and boil it in oil, then apply it to fire, and cauterize one cautery between the elbow joint and neck region, and two smaller cauteries slightly downward towards the area under the beard; and two cauteries between the fifth rib and sixth, behind a little bit; and one cautery below the buttocks, and another on the stomach, and one in-between the two shoulders, and two more at two ribs farther down than the cautery between the shoulders; and do not squeeze your hand, instead apply it widely like when smelling.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a .i. raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie. Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	And the old ones said that no man uses fire-cautery with one raseur (a medical tool), and they warm it up and place it between the ribs until it reaches the abscess; and once relieved of pain, as we have mentioned for the abscess under the liver. But in this work there is fear or perhaps now the patient dies, or a fistula occurs which cannot be cured.
de la mice	Of mice
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the mouse in those that we have said about divisions of treatments, and it does not benefit at all, then they apply three methods of cautery which are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices .iij. cauteres, ou .iiij., en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	Amongst them is a method that involves making three or four cauteries, in a line according to the length of the mouse, according to the figure of the heart as we explained before; and do not press your hand throughout the cautery, and let the patient feel their presence at their back.
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	And another method of cautery is to heat the cautery which has two ends, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift the head where the mouse comes from the left side, where the pain arises, and let the elevation you raise the head according to the head, according to the length of the body, and the cauteries should be according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les .ij. ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra .iiij. Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a .iij. ners. Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After having lit the two fingers, let them burn until they are perceived on the other side, and then remove the cautery. Thus there will be three. If you observe, completely cauterize with the full cautery at three points. After treatment when it has expelled putrefaction for a long time, this proves that other treatments mentioned before were beneficial.
de ydropisie	regarding dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes». Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres entor la boude, et .i. sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et .i. sus la mice, et .ij. derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et .i. endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	The fire cautery is not suitable for dropsy, except in the method called "asclytes". When you treat according to the methods we have discussed before and if your treatment does not benefit, then it's necessary that you make four cauterizations around the anus, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one under the kidneys, and two at the back on the spine, and one near the keel. And let the cauteries be well close to the kidney region.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After letting the cautery open for a long time to fumigate, do not stop the remedy from the patient after the cautery; and then healing would hasten, and both the two remedies would work together with God's help.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The shape of the cautery for the belly should be like the illustration we showed before; and for that one used for the back it should be similar to an olive, as described earlier.
de l’enfleure des piez	Regarding swelling of the joints
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner. Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	When the joints are swollen in someone who is hydroptic and filled with yellow bile, it is necessary to apply the cautery on the back of each joint between the little finger and the ring finger. Then lift your hand with the cautery without turning it. Do not insert too deeply in the center; otherwise, it would go beyond the yellow bile, and then proceed with the application of heat according to this form:
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After doing this on the two legs, do it twice on each leg at the tip of the cutlass. And let the cauterizations be long, one before in front of the knee and the other behind, in the middle of the leg; and leave the cauterizations unattended for a long time without curing them until the pus comes out; after that cure the other treatments that we have mentioned.
de la menoison	from memory
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	When the stomach ailment comes from cold and moisture, as long as the retention and digesting powers in the stomach and intestines are weakened and unable to function properly; and you see the patient suffering greatly with strong green symptoms, then apply a large cauterization on the stomach following what was discussed previously or cauterize the stomach using circulating cauterization. And apply three small cauterizations around the throat at each small spot, and two small cauterizations on each hip, and four cauterizations on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see the moisture abundant and the patient suffering, make a cautery on the elbow, and one on each knee, and two small cauteries on the stomach beneath the large one. Because the treatment is advantageous when there's good help present.
de la cure des emorroydes	of the treatment of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: .iij. sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et .i. cautere desoz la boude. ij. dois;	When the hemorrhoids are or have a base, or one or more, and they are old, being large, cold, and moist pus, and if treatment does not work as we have described in divisions, then proceed: three on the spine of the back, that is all exposed beneath the loin bone little by little in triangular fashion, and one cautery under the buttocks. Two more;
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on .i. grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et .i. autre sus le foie, et i. autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens. Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you think that the stomach is cold and the food does not cook properly, and you see swelling of the faeces, then on the faeces perform one large cautery on the stomach as described previously, and another on the liver, and another in the belly with the whole cautery. Leave the cautery for a long time. Afterwards treat the wound until it heals completely.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the flesh ailment which is named 'theul'
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you treat 'theul', heat up the cautery until it is glowing white-hot, and then place it entirely against the 'theul'; keep your hand on the cautery as long as its tip reaches the origin of the vein from which the pus flows; do this once or twice, and if there are multiple 'theuls', cauterize each one just like we have explained; after treating with beneficial remedies when they are clean; and if you use a large-hot cautery to treat 'alchatim', it will provide more assistance.
de plaie mal curee	of poorly treated wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot bear surgery or opening [a wound], as we will describe in its proper place, if such illness arises that can only be cured through cauterization.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont. Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou .ij. ou .iij., selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes. se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	When there's no opening present and it's aged with festering, rotting pus and corrupted moisture, test the entire area with a fine probe thoroughly. Make sure you know fully how many parts that probe has moved into.
de la maladie des reins	Of kidney disease
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When abdominal pain originates in the kidneys and is accompanied by large wind movements, it does not affect all women equally. Therefore, it is appropriate to apply a cautery to both kidneys and on the clavicle, as we have mentioned previously; and if we cauterize in the middle, three cauterizations will be made in line, and they will provide more assistance.
de la vessie	From the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is swollen and weak from heat and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then perform a cautery in the lower part on the bladder, where the pubic hair begins, and one to each side, and let each cautery be as long as a finger; and do one cautery behind the back, or two if needed; and have the cauterizations shaped like a 'Y' according to the form previously described.
de la marris	Regarding the marriage
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the marriage is cold and moist, and does not allow for conception with others, and the flowers are corrupted and their ends delay; and when they come, one feels great pain: then it is necessary to do three cauterizations inside the womb, as we have said or the bladder cautery, and two cauterizations behind the back; and have the cauterizations shaped like a 'Y', as we have said.
de la hainche	From the hip
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the viscous fluids descend to the cavity of the hip, and for this reason it moves out of its place. The signs are that the leg is longer than the other when measured together; and it's found that the legs start at the visible departure point, thus you should cauterize the wound on the cavity of the hip with one cautery seeming like a circle, and mark before the hip inside the cavity where the cavity turns; and let the cavity be within the circle. And if the cautery is made as those that have been cauterized in the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if these cauteries are not present, make three large olive-shaped cauteries and let the cautery be as flat as all the knives; and apply the treatment until it is healed.
de la dolor de la hainche	关于髋部的疼痛
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes into the hip joint, and it's due to coldness and moisture, and patients are treated in accordance with what we have discussed about division and treatment for these conditions, but if the disease is old: then you should cleanse the patient of thick fluids using foul-smelling pills or other good pills that resemble them.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu. Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche .iij. cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a .iiij. selonc ceste forme:	After you perform the cautery; and the method of the cautery consists in two ways: which is to say, a combination of hot medicines, and fire cautery. The fire cautery can be done in several ways, among which one way is like this: you cauterize on the hip joint with three triangular cauteries according to this shape, and each has good depth and largeness, and there is space between each cautery as big as a thumb, and these are olive oil cauteries; never do you make a cautery in the middle of the main part of the hip joint, for there are four of them according to this shape:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see fit, cauterize with a circular cautery as we have mentioned before in the dislocation of the hip joint; but do it so that the circles contain the entire hip joint, and all parts of the knee are burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe. Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai .ij. cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et .i. cautere desus la cheville .iiij. dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor .iij. poins ou .iiij. au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And this is the method for sciatica treatment, when pain stays in the hip, and does not reach up to the thigh or leg. And if it reaches up to the thigh and the leg, then apply two cauterizations there where the pain persists, and one above the ankle three inches, on the left side a little; use cutlery cauterization methods and burn away the thick part of the muscle; and should the patient feel that the pain extends down to just below or close to the foot, cauterize there where he feels the pain, three points or four at the point called 'points' on the cauterization.
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if more work is needed, then proceed with it; and should the pain be spreading from the knee towards the thigh, apply cutlery or circular cauterization, and make sure to diligently carry out all your cauterizations without allowing them to stop short of burning nerves and major arteries, and do not cause the patient any greater harm or contraction.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez. Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	And I have seen several people who performed cauterization on the ankle up to the foot, and left it until their leg was swollen all over, and likewise with their feet, they became inflamed and rotten in all of them. After a stomach solution, they died from it.
Et se li dolors est en .ij. parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere. // Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai .i. tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de .ij. pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait .i. mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And if the pains are in two parts together, make cautery on one and other, according to this manner.
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And heat it until it turns completely red and emits steam, then place it on the hip boil, and twist over the healthy side. And apply one cautery once and let it sit for three days; then apply a poultice of butter, and keep the wound open long after that. Continue with ointment treatment until it heals.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasim says that we use very little of this cautery for the fear of his judgement, and yet few people use it. Nevertheless, this is a good cautery, which one can tolerate, and leaves where it appears.
de la dolor dou dos	of the pain of the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether by falling or impact or from too much evacuation, or due to exposure to cold matter, none of these conditions warrant cauterization, for it is akin to what arises from the infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	After the patient has been treated for bad pills or other similar conditions, one should apply this to their back where the pain is felt, marking three lines of length and applying burns at each line according to the size and quantity that the body can withstand; proceed with the burn technique as described for the "point" cautery. And if you see fit, do three or four burns around the median cautery following this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	This disease often affects small children, and at the onset it is characterized by a lack of strength when they stand up, followed by fear. You will find an inflammation in the last spinal nerve on the back and sometimes there appears a phenomenon on other nerves.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and observe its cure, if you apply it with a hot iron in this manner on the body.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument. Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant .ij. lignes ou .iij., et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre. Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	Then let the iron cautery touch each part of the spine equally. And if you see this, apply the hot iron to the spine for two or three lines and place them close together. After the cure is done as long as it is sound in accordance with what we have said, be careful not to use the cautery when the area is inflamed which might affect a nerve.
de la dolor des jointes	of the pain in joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When joint pain is due to moisture spread throughout each limb, and when pain comes in the foot, which they call "gout" properly, and when it is caused by cold and its treatment can be cured with medicines that cannot cure it, then it should be treated using cautery in this manner: make a series of iron cauterizations around the joint of the foot, and apply olive oil as follows:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point». Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you need to touch the foot of the patient, if it is ordered that you apply heat all over the cauterizer saying "point". And should pains come up to the knees and other joints, and this happens often, then you should apply heat on each knee three times or four from each part, across all the olive oil cauterizers; and if you need more, make more, but do not remove your hand until such time as the wound is healed.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre. Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile .ij. lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines. Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	And should the pains descend to the knees and back, then administer the cauterization as we have said in our chapter. And if the pains are located on the hands, apply points inside the fold two lines; and if there is still no pain on the back, apply points on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and should the pains come down to elbows or shoulders, cauterize each part, and well govern the patient and take medicines. For if you give him good governance and purge phlegm, he will be healed with the help of God.
de la routure dou syfac	Of the rupture of the uterus
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When rupture occurs in anger, and the bowels descend to the kidneys; it is something new. Therefore, when you are curing his eyes, do not let him drink during that time; and use things that calm the stomach so that the wind descends from his stomach. After that, make him sit on his back between your hands, and instruct him to scratch his armpit until the bowel has healed, then remove it with your fingers, and apply heat to the rupture over bone where the knife was used; ensure it resembles half of a circle above his chest. Then prepare the cautery as described here:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles. Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui .i. cussin et .i. serjant sus les cuisses, et .i. autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Until it is white and smells of stink. Then remove the bowels by lifting them up; and have your attendants cut his hand to prevent them from turning back; and work well on his thighs at the patient's instruction, and place one cushion and one servant under his knees, and another under his buttocks that scratches his hands; then put the cautery at the sign across your entire palm, and hold it steady with both palms until you reach the bone. And if you don't reach the bone on your first attempt, continue trying again as many times as needed up to the bone; and be careful not to let the bowels escape when you apply the cautery; do not burn them; and so that the patient does not suffer further harm or any other illness.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien. Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés .iij. jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides .xl. jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your actions are worthless. And it is necessary that children's cautery measures be subtle according to their size, and also large people should have cautery as large according to their measure; after three days cure his side by applying butter until the scab comes off; after this use other ointments until he heals completely, and let him rest on his back for forty days so that the wound is well healed; and it is necessary that his treatments be prolonged so much that the bowels do not protrude when he will want to walk in chambers.
Et aprés .xl. jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse .xl. autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement. Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And after forty days, when he wishes to stand up, a well-made bandage should be applied, and this for another forty days; with good rest, he should engage in light activities and avoid overconsumption of water and food, as well as excessive shouting. And when he follows this instruction, he will be entirely healed. I shall explain the treatment for cutting (possibly referring to surgical procedures) later in this chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	regarding the rupture of the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai .j. cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a .iij. angles selonc ceste forme:	When abdominal ruptures occur and are known, and you see they no longer grow, apply fire to the affected area according to its quantity, using one-third of a spoonful for each application; after that, treat it as we have instructed before. And none of the old texts suggested using a three-cornered cautery at the angle in this manner:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile. Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first sign of rupture is that the area swells and you make a line across the width above the injury, and another below, and then hold your hand with the metal part of the cautery over the entire length. But the first applications of heat are lighter and wetter.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	from old pain in no limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor. s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence .i. autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	When pain comes to no limb, whether from falling or being hit, and this pain lasts long, and the treatment of medicine does not help, then it must be cauterized with a cautery called "points", and apply the heat according to the length of the member and its smallness and weakness, as well as its twisting location and pain. If it responds to the first application, that is good; if not, try another round of one more heat on top of this one, because such treatments are designed to affect the limb closest to them, so you must continue the cauterizations until the body heals.
de meselerie	Regarding cautery from fire, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie. Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai .v. cauteres sus lou chief: .i. emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et .ij. sus les .ij. cornes, et .i. derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	The healings are aided many times by cautery and especially the disease that comes from the putrefaction of bile and melancholy. If you see cautery, take care so that this disease is in the beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and does not spread or remain, and you doubt that corruption penetrates the entire body, then do this:
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	And if the measles are everywhere scattered; and it is clearly missing, then it is necessary that you apply this cautery with these cauterizing methods to the head, and once on the nape of the neck, and seven cauterizations on the spine of the back, and one large near the chest and another below, and two near each shoulder blade; and two on the ribs, and two on the tendons of the foot, and one for each joint in hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and be careful not to burn any nerves that are behind the heel, do not burn them. And never apply a cauterization near bone on the shinbone, and another on the bone of the stomach, and another on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus. Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers. Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	And know that the more I use the cautery, the more assistance I give, and it benefits him; and know that when a sick person doesn't feel pain from the cautery as a healthy person would, because their body is already completely corrupted. And you should have large and small cauteries according to limbs and joints, as you will find in methods for metal tools. After the cure, wash the area several times with honey and other treatments until it heals properly.
de enfleure	To bloom
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez. Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	When swelling appears in any limb and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters but doesn't heal, then one should perform cauteries on the limb according to its size; and let each cautery go somewhat inside the hollow of the diseased area; then treat it with ointments until it heals properly. And whenever a new swelling appears at the hand or foot or back, along the exit of the nerve that paralyzes the limb, thus one extracts the swelling; and always no one should interfere unless they are knowledgeable about limbs and the exits of the moving nerves in the body.
de albaras	Of cauteries, instruct the patient to let their hair grow long and evenly; if they prick at their roots when young, hold them steady so they don't move until grown out.
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called "albaras" matures and medicine no longer helps, then one should use a small fire cautery according to the size of the spot, until the boil is removed and its color changes. Then apply cornmeal several times mixed with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood from chicken and blood from duck, each in proportion. Mix all together, bind it with a cloth, and leave on the affected area until healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The treatment of a sore by cautery
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble .i. cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.  Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	When the ulcer begins and you see it stopping, if you halt its progress by applying a cautery to the spot that seems like the first circle around the ulcer. And always, they say one should apply the cautery in the middle of the ulcer; and I always think this isn't good because I fear it might lead to inflammation and corruption. I've already decided against doing that several times; and a more correct method is to apply the cautery around its edges, using the cautery named 'circule', as we have described earlier when speaking about various types of cauterization.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of swelling that cannot die
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi. Car elle se hastera de meureir.	When someone has a disease called "adubelati", and it doesn't want to die, either due to its overgrowth or because of the old age of the illness when the body is too weak (meaning the person is very old), having little blood, or due to tension; then you see that it hastens towards death: in this case, apply small cautery treatments using several rounds; after that, leave them be. For it will hasten its own demise.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it pierced through with all the cautery, heat the cautery as shown here:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis. Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And put your hand in the middle of that disease called "adubelati" while both cauteries pierce through the head, and make sure both cauteries are such that the patient feels them going out to a degree where the process of decay is stopped. After treatment until it becomes completely healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	The fire cure by iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches. Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit. Et puis le laisse .iij. jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption. Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.  Et se tu vois aprés .iij. jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus. Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	Another way of disease is called "corrodens", and it is nothing else than an infection of the body part because it eats away at the limbs like dry wood burns. If you see this disease in a limb that can bear heat, then heat up both the iron cauteries to be small and large according to what suits the limb where the illness is; after applying the cautery all around until you remove all corruption, leaving nothing behind, ensuring no remaining corrupted part remains. And then leave it for three days, and while the burns from the fire heal with oil, take care of any remaining corruption. After that, apply ointments that generate new flesh for three more days. If after three days there is no sign of healing, start applying heat to the infected parts again. And this disease can be cured in one go using medicine against fever instead of the iron cautery; however, iron cautery is more powerful aid. I have already explained the medicine against fever in its division: take it whenever needed.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	Of the roots coming to stones
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet. Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc .ij. manieres. C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude. Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe .i. cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi .iij. jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines. Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	There are times when stones cause a disease that we call 'clos' according to our understanding, and it is a large lump that irritates the foot. And for this illness of clos there are two ways of treatment. This means fire cautery and hot water cautery. Fire cautery is that you heat one cautery like a feather from a goose, and make it out of good iron at the size so that it can envelop all sides of the nail, and ensure fine margins; after that place everything heated on the nail, and twist your hand around the nail completely until it reaches to the end of the nail; then leave it like this for three days until pus begins to form; then make a plaster from pounded wild marjoram mixed with oil, and leave the plaster overnight, and the nail will detach from its roots. Then cure the area with ointment until healed.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines. Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	And if they have been turned inside out by the stone and it happens many times both in hands and in stones, then it is necessary that you apply hot water cautery; and here's how to do it: take a reed or iron rod, or a feather from a goose, place it on the nail and althelul, which means warts, and place the stick such that it touches all around, then put a little hot water, hold your hand well and twist your hand as the edge of the stick reaches to the root of the nail, and then find the hot water penetrates deeply until reaching the root; let the patient endure the burning from hot water for an hour; then leave it like this, and all roots will be uprooted. Do another application in the same way until you remove all those who are within the stone, then treat with ointments that generate flesh.
li cure dou trembler	The treatment for shaking
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When some shake due to cold or nerves, or a quartan fever or otherwise, it is necessary that you apply four or five cauterizations on the spine of the back. And one cautery between each vertebra; and one on the skin, and one under the stomach with the olive cauterization; if this continues to cause shaking, hasten his recovery from the cold illness.
des pustules puans	puant sores
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues. si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire. Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	When visible through openings the body, or pus-sores that come from large corrupted matter, if it is necessary at first when they appear, to apply a fine cautery to each head of the pustule: a delicate faggot of myrtle wood, whose tip is taken by fire, or from the long root of aristolochia, or with the lenticular cauterizer. And never should it be burnt at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and they do not grow out en masse, but their excess is dissolved which causes them, and are healed; but it should be done after bloodletting.
quant li artere est copee	When the artery has been cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many times great variations of blood from the artery that has been cut at the wound come out towards the outside, or during incision of an abscess, or with the fire on the limb, and similar situations; it is a very vexing thing to stanch.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And yet when this happens to any of you, if you quickly place your index finger on the wound of the vein, and hold it very tightly until the pulse subsides under your finger, and no drop passes anymore; then light several small and large olive oil cauteries until they are all red. Then take .i., or large or small depending on the wound and the location where the artery is located, and place the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, and hold the cautery there until the pulse is fully congealed.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it jumps out when you remove your finger from the vein, and the cauteries are extinguished, take quickly another one of the cauteries that are at the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not stop performing this one after the other until the stump is completely burnt; and beware that you don't burn the nerve underneath, and that no harm comes to the patient; and know that when bone leaves the artery, it can be hard to properly reattach it yourself even if the artery is large, as long as it isn't treated by one of these four methods: through cautery, or extraction when not yet treated, or with strong string tying, or using medicines applied that have power to stop bleeding; and bind and restrain it accordingly.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Who will administer the reattachment, by tightly binding with cloths or placing hot things on, or other similar actions, if it doesn't benefit them.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this happens to anyone and they have neither tools nor medicine at hand, should place their thumb on the wound of the artery as we have said, and stretch them out until they are completely burnt above the wound and above the artery; and don't move your hand but keep it moistened with cold water often while it is very cold until the bone becomes frozen, swollen, and burnt. And prepare to do the tasks that require cautery and medicines for this situation.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	This begins the second book of treatments for amputations
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have spoken in the first chapter about every disease where it is necessary to use a fire cautery, or medicine that burns, and we discussed their causes, tools, forms of the cauteries; and I placed that chapter up until here, and I will go through this chapter using the same path so that one finds them more easily than before.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And as I start this, it must be known that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first chapter of using the fire cauterizations, and for this reason, more caution is needed.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and treating wounds, and extracting arrows, and cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie. Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures. si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	And I advise you not to embark on folly. For many ways of people come into cures. Some come from those who are so affected by their illness that they die lightly due to the fear and panic they find in their disease, and the severity of their malice; and for these one should have fear.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse. Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	And among these are those who give you their sense and say: "Wait, I am a coward"; illness is unkind. It is not fitting for you to agree with those who come to you in this manner, but place more constraint on your honor than on your covetousness, do not act rashly but wisely of those whom you are certain about, and of whom you can take and know; use prediction and guidance in the cures of your ailments that lead to health; and this will help you acquire good reputation, glory, and lasting memory.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Dear son, Our Lords give you good understanding and righteousness, and if you wish to inspire by the holy inspiration of their hand, Amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or I have instructed you this chapter by considering it in parts, according to what is before or the section about cauteries that I have discussed up until the foot, so you will find it easier to understand for those who need it.
dou chief plein d’aigue	the head filled with water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	Know that this disease comes so often in infants at birth, and when the mother holds the head of the infant too tightly; and it happens none of those times due to a cause that we know.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I never see this disease except in infants, and among all those that I have seen, it hastened their deaths; and for this reason, I think it is worth mentioning that I will divide the work into sections of treatments.
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw one of their children the shoulder was full of water, and the head swelled each day until it could no longer bear it; and believed so much in the moisture that he died, and this moisture is assembled around the bone in the syphac region, between the heart and the bone; and the veins are thus arranged when the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscesses are small, you cut a large gash through the head until it's wide; and so long as the moisture flows; and see this shape of the syphac:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is more abundant, and the abscess is larger, then make two cuts in a cross-shaped manner, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is around the bone, and you see the corners of the head opening from each part, and water spills out when you press it with your hand internally, and this does not stop: then it is necessary that you cut through the head in three cuts according to this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers. Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	And after making the incision, extract all moisture. After stopping the oozing from cuts and powders, apply wine and oil, and leave this manner for up to a fifth of days; then release it, treat the wound through changes and applications, and allow the head to heal similarly, and finally feed the patient dry meat from a small amount of moist until the limb is strengthened and healthy.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another method of incision is that you look where the opening of the abscess is large, and gather water; for it is not always in front; nor always behind; nor always on the right; nor always on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Therefore cut where the abscess is open, and fill with water, and make a wound according to what you can do; and be careful not to cut the artery; and watch for blood flow, so that the patient dies from the bleeding and the evacuation of moisture.
de reume	In reference to cautery using fire, command the patient to allow hair growth until it becomes long and uniform; if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they fully grow.
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When it comes to any illness that is called 'catarrh' in the eyes or at the bottom of the nose and such diseases are old, and the cure from medicine doesn't bring benefit, then the final treatment includes cauterization along with cutting off the two main arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout .i. drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de .ij. pars. tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	Therefore, when you cover the eyes, let the illness operate behind the head; after this, rub the area with a coarse cloth until the arteries are visible, then pull out the illness's neck to both sides using one cloth. Then look where the vein lies and check the positions of both eyes from front and back after the ears, ensuring they have returned to normal; then mark both eyes with lime, then cover each one with a sharp knife blade up to bone for two parts, making sure it goes along the width of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see it, pinch off the sperm on both sides of the artery and vein above, cut them also as two inches through.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the veins are incised, let the blood flow out continuously from up high.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de .iij. dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est .vj. c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins. selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not open upon feeling it, you should measure the length of the space as three inches and then cut until you reach the bone; and what needs to be taken out of the blood is about seven parts per cent, and by chance a little more or less according to how the patient can endure it and the filling of the artery. Then look at the wound: if there remains a point close to syphilis under it, or if our incision does not reach that point, then heal the wound and bind it, and apply the salve until it is healed.
de emigrainne	This line seems to be incomplete in the provided text, so there isn't a clear translation for "de emigrainne". It might need more context from following sentences to properly understand its meaning or purpose within the medical treatise. However, considering "emigrainne" could refer to something related to grain (as medieval texts often covered agriculture and farming techniques alongside medicine), it might be suggesting instructions on managing grain storage, planting, harvesting, etc., but without more context this is speculative.
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When old age arrives, and severe coughing comes along, due to moisture from tears and heat in the temples and elsewhere throughout one's aging body, as well as similar things. The treatment is done through ways of medicine cure techniques and all such methods do not benefit it fully; we would extract the arteries in the temples and cauterize them, just like what we have recounted.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the method of extracting them is such that the patient feels through their temple hairs, and listens to the artery opening at the temple, for it opens well by its pulsation, and responds only in some who are too cold; and if it responds, then strangle your neck with a few cloths, then rub the area with a hard cloth, and raise the area with hot water until the artery clearly appears. Then take the sponge that has this form:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des .ij. chiés. Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	Then slightly peel the skin until you see the artery, then pull it up with forceps, and remove well any membranes that are off from each part; and if the artery is subtle, then turn it at the tip of the little finger. Then cover that part according to the size of both shoulders. For if it isn't covered, then don't let anything cut everywhere.
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And treat the bleeding from these two places until this point. And if the artery is large, it must be tied with two threads of a thick silk thread so that there won't be decay before the healing of the wound and so that blood doesn't accumulate thereafter; then cut off any excess between the two threads at that very moment, and then, if you see fit, cauterize gently along the cautery cut until reaching the bone as long as the joints are cut. And this is a minor procedure, provided the patient does not have fever and they have a warm constitution.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For the cauterization is help to finish off the wetness; because it provides more effective assistance against wetness.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	When it is necessary for the extraction of arteries, one must fill the hole with old cotton and place well-made tents there; and once they are removed, cut them with dry medicines that produce pus and tents until the wound heals; and if you don't have access to this, cauterize along this cautery trenching in two parts, but ensure the trenches are well spaced to allow heat to last longer. If you do not have this available now, put your tool inside as long as the tent is frozen, and remove it with cold water until the tent stops, and apply according to what is necessary; and that which is minor and more suitable for extracting arteries is when you cauterize along this cautery trenching in two parts, but ensure the trenches are well spaced to allow heat to last longer.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instruments are too tight, they hold less of their heat.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it must have between the two knives, one should have a large gap. And when you intend to heat both ends, and place the hot iron until it reaches up to the bone, and cut the vein in two places; and let them be distant from each other among the two shoulders because there is no welding of this cautery everywhere; and this is how the cautery should look:
des larmes	Of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears from the eyes are draining through the veins that lie under the nose of the head of strength, and medicine cure doesn't prove useful, and you see the skin turn red due to this, and feel heat on your forehead as if there's a pulse; and wherever they are damp and moist such that paper hairs fall out, and the papers are heated, and scorched by the heat of the tears, then it requires this remedy.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai .iij. fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com .ij. doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres .ij. as .ij. costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as .ij. costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des .ij. mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de .iij. dois au traver joins;	And they called the old "bruise healer", and you should instruct the patient who has this disease to grow hair on their forehead, then make him three slits or cuts evenly across the forehead according to its length; and let one of these cuts be as two in going along the entire front until it reaches halfway up to the eyebrow, and the others two each at the ribs above the eyes, and keep clear of the incision of the arteries that are above the eyes; and keep your hand away from the continuity of the two jaws, and let each wound have the size of three in going through the joints;
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de .ij. pars de coi ci est li forme:	And have a piece of sponge ready and soak it in cloth to wipe away the blood, then apply the sharp wound dressing from two parts where this is formed:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	After the incision made behind the temple up to the second incision; and scrape off all the bone in between the two cuts right down to the bony surface. Then make another cut from halfway through this incision up to the other second one, and then extract that dressing.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	If you insert a tool in the first crack that is called "cultellaire", and it has sharpness on one side, and on the other side it is hard, not sharp, and this is its form:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure. Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place the tool cutting towards the inner skin of the ear, and the hard part towards the bone, and insert the tool until it reaches halfway through. And remove all vessels that descend from the head to the bones up until the continuous incision meets what opens into the ear canal, and then continue further in the middle crack until reaching the other opening; and remove blood evenly, and express the wound for the taken blood; then place a patch of old cotton in each crack, and place cloths soaked with wine and oil and vinegar above it, and ensure that no pus comes out; and on the third day, loosen the bandage, and apply a large amount of water dressing, then administer treatment with basilic ointment mixed with rose oil, and other treatments for wounds until it heals.
dou reume des eulz	from the pus of the bones
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When it comes to severe and recurrent fevers, and you see the eyes tired and small, and weakening of sight, and burned paper; and the hair falls out, and one sweats profusely in chills, and the body experiences external pain, then by these events you should know that those substances and that fever do not come from many veins, and with this treatment method, it is as follows.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large. i. poc. Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les .ij. levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And thus you instruct the patient to look behind their forehead, then make a large incision in the middle of the forehead, and another one wide. Begin from the left temple incision to the right temple incision, and when this cut reaches the bone; keep your hand away from the nerves in the temples that move with chewing; once the bone is exposed, drain all the blood using a sponge, then clean between the two lips of the incision and place old cotton and linen cloth. Then cover it with cloths soaked in wine and oil, while avoiding to cause an abscess; when it has been removed, it is necessary that you rub the bone until cartilage begins to grow, then treat it with desiccating substances, as they quicken cartilage formation.
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this manner: take two parts of the oat flower and four parts of colofon, and make plaster; then administer it on these wounds to speed up cartilage growth everywhere.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of the treatment of ear-sticking injuries
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	Everything that causes injury to the ears is one of the four things: or grains, or beast, or mine stone or similar thing like iron; or seed, like beans, peas; or flowing thing like water and oil and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel. Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus. Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	When it causes injury to the ear with a stone or any other thing that does not fit in the ear and does not grow in the ear, place the ear under sunlight. If you see the stone, if you can distill a drop of violet oil or sesame oil, then proceed with extraction; and have them sneeze out camphor, and when sneezing begins, stop up their nostrils, and put pieces of cloth or wool into the ear; and hold the ear above. Many times this treatment brings relief; and if it doesn't bring relief, then you proceed with extraction using fine forceps, which is described as follows:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it comes out with forceps, that's good; if not, proceed with extraction using fine silk thread of small thickness; and if it doesn't come out this way, make a thimble from catgut or pull the end of the thread near the ear canal quite firmly, and stop up the space where the wick is in beeswax so that the thread cannot enter with the wax; then press the glue onto the stone or whatever it may be, and pull forcefully. And many times this brings relief; and if it doesn't bring relief in such manner, then take the glue out and replace it with a tool suitable for this, and put some cotton inside; then press the glue onto the stone or whatever it may be, and pull forcefully.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if none of these things we have said cause her to jump out from all this, hurry to cut the ear in such a way that pus and blood drain away, and twitch; and the method of cutting is that you first make a surgeon's incision on the auricular muscle, remove some blood according to the measure of its strength, then let the patient sit between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small cut at the root of the ear where the fat hangs down; and let the cut be as round as a crescent moon until you reach the bone, then break the bone according to your power, and suck it rapidly into your mouth; and treat it until it is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it is gravel and it inflates, then administer extraction; and if it cannot come out, then administer one small spatula tool according to this shape:
et amenistre incision de celui grain. Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	And make an incision on that grain. But do not do this when you think the grains are moist due to moisture in the ear, until you have made many pieces; then remove them with delicate tweezers and a suction tool, as we said before, so that the extractions become easy.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton. Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est. s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin. se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent .i. jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	In hot water then, when the patient sneezes in the ear, instruct them to perform an expectoration of cold fluids and generously stuff the ear with old cotton. And lie down directly on that same ear where the heat resides. If it sneezes out forcefully through this method, that's good. If not, take multiple stones according to their length and softly place them in her ear; then heat each slightly over a flame; and place one or two pieces of these stones into her ear, and have her lie on the other foot from another side, and strike another stone against the stone inside the ear; and continue this procedure of one stone after another until all of the hot water escapes completely out, so it will all sneeze out completely. And if you notice, take a single reed, place the larger end in her ear, and light the other end with fire until the larger end of the reed becomes burnt; then repeat this process of different reeds until all the hot water has escaped, as we have explained for stones.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the extraction of small beasts such as fleas and similar things, treat it in the manner we have described for removal; but if they are of large size that can be felt, then perform the pinching extraction; and this is the easier thing to remove that is found inside the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of worms tangled in the ears, when you are treating it as we have described for divisions and distillations, and if the cure does not help, then you must examine the ear with the sun: if there is no worm appearing, extract them using fine pincers; and if they do not appear, take this form of sugar here.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus. Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent. Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And make it narrow below and wide above. And take the most subtle part of the ear according to the amount of suffering from the patient's illness, then apply this all over the ear; do this often until all the liquid comes out. And if they do not want to come out, you may numb the area with cotton like I have mentioned in the case of the stone; and if they don't protrude as we have said, administer distillations that the old ones have proven effective for worm cuts, and you will find them or a guide on distillations; and if you distill your oils and medicines into the ear with this instrument, following this form as you see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And it should be made of silver or of tin with small perforations on the bottom and top for distillation; and to press inside the distillation use a properly made tool of tin suitable for this task. Take one piece of raveling cotton wrapped around the tip part, then pour your oil or juice into it, and let it be in the ear; then fill the raveling with all the cotton and gently press your hand until the oil is distilled or until some drops come out from the ear; and listen to the patient inside, and know that after such a distillation, the medicine should not be too cold because otherwise the medicine would not be as effective.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Regarding ear piercing
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born without any intact parts in their ears; and this same thing happens to people due to wounds or birth in the ear, and these injuries happen inside the ear sometimes, if one cannot see them; and they happen only once inside the ear, when you can't see them. And they never occur twice, where one can see it well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	That which happens inside and cannot be seen comes from the injury of healing in various stages, and in this situation where one can see that you should place the ear under the sun; and look inside: if you see the evident swelling, if the work has become completely filled with pus as described here:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And let it be so that you cut in front and behind completely flat, so as not to irritate the ear; if the swelling is due to newly formed flesh or a bump of the ear, then use subtle pricks on it, and gently scrape it until all the flesh is removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren .i. raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille. Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	And if the pustules are in front of the ear, take one fine, light razor and warm it a little over fire, then place it inside the ear. If you feel the pustule that causes pain in the ear when touching it lightly, do so carefully not to injure the nerves in the ear; afterwards put into the ear a plug according to its size at the tip, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do this every day until the wound heals or you take a plug and moisten it with rose water, and dust it with powdered vitriol. And if you see swelling in the ear, it must be that you remove the plug and put another one moistened with candle wax made from rose oil and beeswax, until the swelling is gone; then treat it until it's healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if bleeding occurs, immerse an sponge and soak it in cold water, then place it on the ear, and perform other treatments that stop bleeding which include remedies for distillations.
de la char des papieres	From the substance of the papers
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	When handling wet and dry hairs in papers, it is necessary that you spread them using tweezers and forceps. Then, take a piece from its roots; afterwards, place sulfur on the part of the paper.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if you don't peel it off, cauterize it with a narrow lens cautery, and after the incision, it will start to move; and many times, there are no remains from its roots. And when they are cauterized by fire, those roots burn completely and never return.
de la gresle	Regarding ice or cold treatments
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope. se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	Many times in papers, there appear some things that seem to gleam by their form and hardness, and because of this, this illness is called "granuloma", and it's a collection of large moisture on the surface of the paper. The operations are as follows: watch if the granuloma moves from one side to another, and this is a simple thing to know; do it then broadly, then lightly sear each part, then take them with tweezers, and remove them. If you cannot remove it without piercing a bit of the paper, or causing any harm to the patient; and if the rupture is large, and there's one seam, treat until it's healed; and if it's small, don't exert much force, because ointments will soon restore it and stimulate tissue growth.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the granuloma descends into the ear towards the upper part, turn the paper, and place the granuloma under tweezers, then remove and press from both sides; and if the paper is moved by the incision, it does not harm anything; and when the granuloma has been removed, wash with salty water, treat the area that stimulates tissue growth until the patient is healed.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat of the lumps
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil. Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	Excrition is a kind of grease that gathers on the surfaces of paper, and this happens more often in children than adults, and causes much distress to their eyes, and they excrete tears during mornings, and cannot look at sunlight because tears quickly affect their eyes; and due to this, they lie with their heads on their arms throughout the day, sleeping while papers beneath them are damp from the excretion that opens in their eyes. And when you press your hand under it with your fingers and feel the excrement between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the method of the process is that the patient places their head in your hand; and then take .i. linen cloth, and set up a tent in manner of a circle according to the quantity that contains excrement from each part, then put it on; press with your fingers on both sides, so that the excrement is gathered within the circle; then cut in the midst of the moisture with a sharp knife a groove wide, and not more than the wound when you open a vein; and let the leather be tight enough until you see the excrement from the groove, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Then remove it all in one piece of thick linen between your fingers at the front, and turn your hand to the right and left until it is dispersed; and make sure you do not mix in the groove, that you do not reach up to the whole knife until it reaches the eye, that you do not hurt it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the incision does not open at the beginning of the cut, you should gently increase the cut size; then pull it as we have said. Then soak it in moist cloths and water, place it on the wound, and strain with bandages.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree. Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez. Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there are such people who grind meal and put it on to ferment the moisture that has remained. Then clean them as they become healthy. And if pus starts coming out at the wound, then treat with plastering until they heal.
des poilz des papieres	of the paper hairs
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When hairs grow out of place and become old, they harm the eyes, causing diseases such as habitual tears and paper softening and albugine formation. These are reasons for eye damage; and treatment should follow these four methods: either by a fire cautery, or with medicine according to what was discussed previously in the chapter on cauteries, it can be done through surgery and stitching, or sutures, depending on what I will explain next.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	You must place the head of the eye in your good health, then turn the paper of the eye with your left hand; if it is turned correctly, that's fine; if not, take one thread and sew it above at each end of the paper. Then do this along the edge of the paper where hairs grow beneath these hairs, sewing a single thread above across the whole paper, then turning it flat using a razor. Afterwards, cut through the part under the paper, under the displaced hairs, all the way from the large tear to the small one; then remove that thread and place a small cotton tent on top of the paper, followed by placing an 'H' shape figure on the paper, like a bay leaf. Indeed, it must be ensured that this figure matches the size you see when lifting up the paper which is folded over everything.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les .ij. lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des .ij. angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout .i. fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les .ij. sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a .iij. jors ou .iiij.; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	And if it is necessary for this to require a large quantity of paper according to how the paper has softened; then make all across the surface of the eye drainage above the two lines you have marked, and start from the large tear until the small one; and if there are one or more tears close to the natural hairs in the thickening of about an inch, then place the needle in one of the corners of the eye socket, then scrape it all out. Then join the two lids together with a stitch made by hand using one thread of fine wool on both sides of the whole area, and clean out any blood, and let dry the excess threads above each eyelid where glue-like substances might accumulate if you see fit; and if not, just leave them alone for 3-4 days. Then treat the wound without stitches with drying and tightening substances, because the paper heals due to the adhesion of the wound and the joining together of the paper, but the stitch gets wet (as the old ones said), and it is an operation without fear;
et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a .iij. oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	And if there's another way: and you sign the paper with a design that is as similar to the leaf of myrtle, as we have described, in 1.5 inches cut according to the form which is here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	Then, cut those that are above evenly according to the shape shown here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait .i. fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute .i. autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	And if you are unable to hold the forceps and they aren't even, take a needle with two threads instead, and put it in the figure. Take another thread of the length of the larger vein, and then place the second thread across the smaller one. Then join together the ends of these threads evenly between your fingers; lift your hand evenly as well, lifting all the skin over where you have marked out, just like we described before. Then stitch the two edges of the wound together neatly; and while it is still healing, treat with ointment if an abscess appears at your incision site, soothing it with balm remedies.
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	And it is not the case that paper hair transforms; so you should use what we have said about incisions; but the stitches in one and another are more artificially done.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The treatment of canines follows this form: and you should convert the paper and cut inside according to what I have said, and then create four canines by art, and also two fine strings as long as the paper and as wide as the tip is; and place the tips of the two parts on either side; then assemble both finely above where the paper covers the eye, and tighten the two canine lines from each part formed; and leave it like this for a few days, and the skin that has been tightened will shrivel and turn black and spread, until it escapes by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope aunes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des .ij. cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it takes longer, and if the healing process progresses, then treat until it is healed properly; and when the wound has been stitched up, and if the paper lifts off, and hair will no longer grow; and this is the form of the two canines that you should create according to this figure, and in accordance with this length and width:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	The surgical procedures are such that you need to take a fine needle, and attach one end of two thin silk threads to it. Then combine the ends together finely, making their lengths about a handspan long. Next, prepare another short thread of silk and tie the head to this thread. Proceed by placing the patient's head in the healthy position and ensure that sunlight illuminates everything during this process; for these are delicate and small procedures. Then insert the needle into all parts of the stitches at the base of hair until you reach natural hair above, performing this action swiftly on top of natural hair. Next, remove any hair up to the needle's location, and insert the natural hair into the needle if there's more than one or two hairs; then take out your hand ensuring that all hair is extricated from every part of the paper with natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the thread has been treated and no hair comes out with it, then pull the thread off at the other end until you've used up all the thread you have arranged. Do this until the thread is pulled out beyond what's normal and can be seen by your eye; thereafter, remove the thread and the thread itself, and close the cut for two or three days, until the hair returns to its place and grows flesh at that spot. And if the hairs are small, then accompany one long hair of natural animal with it, lifting it up together while you let it down, ensuring it's extended properly before lifting it.
de la porriture de l’oil	Regarding eye infection
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de .ij. manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.  Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	When this disease, known as "aleacrati" or gangrene comes to the eye, there are two ways: one natural and the other unnatural. It occurs suddenly from wounds, cuts by a tailor or cautery, and through similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent. Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	And the method of the operation in this is that you cut open that seam, and open the lips of it, and insert linen bandages inside, and bind them until it heals; and you must not use things in its treatment that dry out and restrict. For if you do this, the disease will return worse than the first one; but work with softening substances, like fenugreek; and soak water or boiled linseed oil and linseed seed oil into it, and apply butter to neither of the eyes, and wrap a linen bandage around it, and treat it with such.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasures of your cure are that you must be careful not to stitch it back together in the same form as before; and all these operations we have mentioned are only remedies for this disease, so that it does not return in the same form as before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	The flow that comes to the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens. Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait .i. fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en .ij. chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a .i. spatumile large.	This disease that is called "axacrati" truly is natural and accidental. Accidents come from wounds, splits, cauterization, and similar things; and the path of this disease within it means you take a needle, which has two threads inside, and insert it into flesh. And the thread passes through the left tear duct as far as possible so that the threads lie in two parts of the flesh; then the flesh lies above all along the needle, and there is space for two small pieces to fit.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren .i. raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent .ij. fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des .ij. fendures des .ij. angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «.j. griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les .ij. parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the paper figure comes out as it should, that is good; if not, take a razor and place it in the slit, then turn the paper, and make two slits inside the paper. And let the flesh of the two slits be at the corners of the incision you made, and make angles so that when they are assembled, the figure looks like a letter with two Greek strokes "γ". Then remove this flesh according to its size and thickness compared to the paper, then adjust the two removed parts symmetrically, using thread. Then perform the treatment of what we have mentioned about mollifying medicines and applying them until it heals.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the illness comes from a wound or stitch or cautery, it is necessary that you create an opening full of hair along the paper cuts, and according to what was mentioned previously; then cut between the two skin layers like I said; and must perform the operation according to the shape of the illness as they are very diverse in form. And the surgeons prepare for every surgery so that they can understand how to return the figure to its natural shape; and even the patients themselves, according to what is appropriate for the operation and instruments in various arrangements.
dou soudement de la papiere	immediately from the paper
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this seam occurs in a way that the paper is joined with the white of the oil, and it cannot move or perform its natural operations, then it is necessary to place the tip of a razor under the paper, lift it upwards; then stretch it using forceps, until you reach a fine wisp of the thread, not too thick nor too sharp, so that the patient does not suffer from excessive harshness and oiling of the eyes; make your incision, carefully removing this joined part, without causing damage, in such a way that the paper regrows according to its natural form; and heals all that has been joined together, avoid making any cuts with salted water, then wash it with gentle freshwater and clove water; afterwards place between the paper and eye a linen tent, cover the eye with wet wool, and after several days use soap and other healing substances until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	Of the edge of the eye
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	Know that the edge of the eye is in two ways: it's nervously and resembles one hard texture, and another which isn't nervous but resembles a white moisture frozen, that when touched with iron and treated with hot pincers, they can't; both appearances start near the large tear duct, and grow gradually until they cover all vision and light and movement of the eye.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the method of incision is such that the patient positions their head in your well-being position, then expose their eyes; lift the eyelashes with your hand first, and then hold the edge of the eye with small pinches, and place them above; then take a needle, and insert two horse hairs or calf hair, or cow hair, and one strong thread; then slightly bend the needle's tip and push it into the edge of the eye, and pierce all the way through with the needle, and bind the edge of the eye with the string and place it above, then burn all the hair on the side of the edge that surrounds the tear duct and silk to the root of the hairline until you reach the fine inner layer of the eyelid, and leave the natural eye or tear duct in such a way that through the incision does not leak the usual body fluids; and only once the edge is set halfway above with the string, as we have described; then burn off all the fine inner layers from where this description ends here is how it forms:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And make sure the cautery does not touch the fatty tissue and damage it, and that the tip of the instrument doesn't pierce; after incision pour a bit of broiled fat in the wound, and then make a collar with silver and let it stay until another day; then cure him as necessary until he is well.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail isn't sensitive and you can't drive in the needle, and the cuticles don't enter, this condition of a nail-like thing from medicines is treated many times; and it grows just as I mentioned in division, and if you see it get thickened, let that be done by the eye of the patient, and take the cautery with light but sharp force according to this shape:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	Pull the nail gently from above, and if you see that it doesn't thin out at all and it presses against the reason (the wound), then apply a collar made of silver into the eye, and a red collar and some broiled fat; leave this in until the other day. Then start another operation in the same manner, until she is entirely healed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing obstructs your view, such as pus-filled sores, then proceed, and first treat the pus-filled sores until they are clean. Then resume the work procedure just described, until they are clean.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if there's an appearance of the flesh around the eye that disrupts the view due to great harm, then suspend it on a string, and take only a part of it, not all at once, making sure tears don't seep; then apply red collyrium from litargy powder into the eye.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	Of the flesh that grows near the pupil
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tune bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	Of some individuals, a red flesh may be born only once and covers the pupil, restraining against the eyelids and appears outwardly like a rose of balsam; and in such an instance you must ensure that your hand is steady during the operation, then remove these eyes, and all this flesh with uncinate instruments suitable for the task, and hold them with force; then cut out the first piece of flesh, continue cutting until you reach the edge, making sure not to damage the eye during the operation; and make an incision at the spot where we discussed earlier in the chapter regarding the nail incisions and small forces used when removing a sebaceous substance, as demonstrated after this chapter.
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	And when the incision is completed and all the flesh has been removed, the eye uses the oil of burnt seashell or you distill a red cloth with similar corrosive medicines, and puts on the oil outside cotton with an egg's content to ensure there is heat; if it stays in place without any pain, and if the skin doesn't heal and you doubt about the presence of an abscess, then leave the oil and cure the abscess by things that soothe hot abscesses; then return to your work as long as it remains healthy, and thus make several incisions under this semblance in the oil.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But nevertheless, it is necessary that you treat each weak channel of the natural way; and of accidental ways, in iron work; and do not insert your hand into any of these works until you see that this limb endures that operation.
des voines des eulz	of veins and eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors. Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	When the veins appear red and covered over the eye, and endure strain upon sight, weakening the eye for several days. Therefore, it is necessary for the first person you examine to look at his eyes, in which this symptom occurs; there is no other disease except that symptom. So treat as follows: instruct the patient to place their head on your healthy side, then suspend all those veins along the entire neck according to their wisdom, and let the neck muscles be subtly doubled according to this shape:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And let there be two inches by degree in one side according to this shape:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then, with this treatment, gently force those veins, and let blood flow out an hour later, until you see the veins leave the eye; and be sure not to pierce the eye at the points of the lancets. Perform this operation at noon in front of the sun, and be very meticulous in your work so as not to disturb only these veins. And when you have done this, apply a garland of green and red cologne to clear out what remains from the symptom.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you don't have the ability to do all of this at once, then make a dressing with things that calm the pain in the eyes and leave it on for some days until the eye pain is soothed and confirmed free from pus, then start again following this method as shown until they are healed; and this is how you strengthen them.
de la fistule de l’oil	of the tear duct of the eye
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The treatment for what is called 'arissati' fistula: when you cure it with a cautery and with hot water medicine as I have described before, and if it isn't healed, then be careful where you incise over the abscess, at the point where it should die off, and drain all the moisture that's there, until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is exposed, and you will see the corruption and the darkness, if you take possession of all the tool of which this form is made; and it is called "hard chief", and should be made of iron in the shape of a .i. chief's horn, and it should be pointed like a razor as it is in the current form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And place the corrupted part of the bone on your hand, then press your fingers into it until you know that this corruption has stopped; and do this once, then return the part to its original position.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi xl. jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent .i. foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a .iij. angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	Once the wounds are healed, and the cartilage starts to grow, and the body of the bone is still healing, it remains like this for forty days, and it doesn't reappear and isn't an abscess again, and no bad incidents happen, then you know it's healthy; if not, there may be another method than bringing back the fistula at the site of the knee according to this shape: and then uncover the bone a second time with iron and medicine. Once uncovered, take one metal rod according to this shape, and place the iron shoulder with three angles, and let the shaft be thinned down like an arrowhead as you see here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil .i. poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then place it on the bone of the shoulder blade and move away your hand from the eye. i. poche, then return to fully stretch until it pierces the bone and allows you to feel through that passage where your wind travels if you hold your hand on your nose; and then restore the limb with dry medicine as I instructed, and when the body appears and strengthens your limbs, then the substance goes to your nose; should be lighter matter at the patient's experience.
de l’issue de l’oil	from the exit of the eye
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the eyes open fully and completely, and there is no disturbance in the neck or diminution, it's necessary to bind the patient. Then heal them, then place suction cups or tourniquets without piercing for draining, then place on the eye. A bandage made of castor oil and aloe and incense and sarsaparilla should be applied to the eye, and then drain the eye, and plaster it with strips and cloths; and the manner of the cloths is that you take cloths that are quite soft, double each one in four layers, and then place them one on top of another according to how many inches the eyes need. Then apply a hard binding band over this for draining without piercing, and repeat using suction cups for draining. Then remove the suction cups and allow the eye to be drained day and night, and if the bandages loosen, it's necessary to tightly drain them again; then remove the band after day and night, and if you see that the eye has healed, it is good; if not; continue applying the plaster and cloths and bandage and suction cups until they are healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	of the breaking of a woollen bandage
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When disruptions occur in the woollen bandage, it opens up, and comes with bits of paper like a grain of resin, and is observable; therefore, if you see it covered, the operations are such that you pierce into the root part at this point below it, then pierce another hole with a double thread from this part near the tear; and make it penetrate, and leave the first needle according to its position; then cut off a part of the bandage with the double thread and tie it around the edge of the wound, and tighten it well, then remove the needle and place on the eye a moistened wool cloth in abundance of egg; and leave it until the yarn becomes detached with the bandage, then cure the eye with comforting things until the wound heals; and in no way should the wound be allowed to heal by itself through one part of a circle of linen, until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eyes show great appearance, then pierce at the subtle pustule which comes through the eye, and draw out the watery humor and drain down the eyes, and enter in immediately; then tighten it until it is healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	By the power of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de .ij. pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit. si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee .i. poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	This disease known as "alcunnati" is not healed by oil that is gathered in the eye, resembling a drop falling down, and it is not a drop; and the way its symptoms appear is when you make the patient lie on their side with one hand behind their head for half an hour, then place your hands around their head, applying pressure until you see drops come above their eyes; then insert them, don't let them descend and remove any cloudy matter, and observe the condition of the eye as before; and if they do not descend themselves, know that it is a drop, and when the passage of the drop doesn't happen as described. When you have the patient lie between your hands, take the thin spatula and make cuts through the corneal membrane about one part along the continuity with the corneal surface and crown until the oil comes out; and once it has come out, pour in a hot drop of oil mixed with honey, or a hot drop of fenugreek that's been boiled with honey, then treat with another cure until she is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	From the drops of the eye
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit. Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre. se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	We have experienced the sensations of waters during division and what needs piercing; so do it according to the situation. You need to place the patient between your interlaced hands, away from sunlight, and hold the healthy eye tightly while compressing it very firmly; then position the paper next to the eye on your left or right hand depending if the diseased one is on the left or right side; after this, take the tool named "almagda" in your right hand if the diseased eye was on the left, or vice versa. Now, place the point of the tool under the eyelid about as wide as a finger near the lower part of the black part of the eye, then use the tool called 'almagda' to pierce through the paper and bend your hand until it penetrates into the tear duct area; you should feel that 'almagda' comes to an empty space. The length of the path of 'almagda' should match roughly with the length of the space from the lid to the edge of darkness, marking the position of the eye socket; if see bones in the paper because of the transparency of the cornea, then place the tool up until where the water is or ends, and express it through another passage. If the water is flowing downwards now, you'll see the patient looking directly at their eye and the tool within it.
Aprés repose .i. petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens. Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.  Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	After a short rest, and should the water ascend through the second passage, apply force with the tool, and once it's firmly in place and no longer rises, gently remove 'almagda' while twisting your hand back and forth; then slightly reinsert some sebum into the eye, and take out the eye from this. Then place under or in ointment-soaked wool or oil rose petal generously with egg whites, and bind it with a healthy eye. Now, and those like us, let's apply a poultice with plenty of eggs on top.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if 'almagda' can't enter the eye due to its hardness, for there are people with very rigid eyes, then you should take the tool called 'alberit', which has this form:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai .i. leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide .i. dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en .j. leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And then pierce only the conjunctive, do not go too far forward but make it .i. subtle; then apply balsam of almond as we have said; and upon completion of this work provide to the patient another dose, in which he rests on his back for .j. hours; and remain free from all movements, eat light meats, and do not move your head either to the right or left, and bind him according to his position until the third day; then release him within the same dark room, test his vision, let him see some things, and then reapply the bandage until the seventh day; and it should not be that you do this in the time of the cure or after an incision now, but it should be that you take care of this because the fever rises quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice .i. orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse. Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	When cutting pus sacs comes out, that you release the eye before the seventh day, and prepare for the one who relieves pus. And when it is calmed, then release the vision and place two corners on his face for covering a day each, and remain within this dark room. Then leave the house gradually, and turn back to his place; know that no students should interfere in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one came to us who was from Ireland, who told us that people there used almond oil, through which the fever is drained, but still I have never seen anything like this in our land, nor have I ever read about it in ancient books; and perhaps it's a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the appearances of the forms of magda, because those who do not know them see them; and they are properly of araign's nature:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And their head is from this same subtlety, and the tail at three angles on each side.
de la char sor le neis	from the flesh where the nose is.
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color. En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; puis cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	None of them are born or have noses like various joined carcasses, some of which resemble scorpions at the mouth; and there are also those with a red color on their flesh, and those with good-colored flesh. In this case, for these chars that are good colored but not red, it is necessary to place the patient between your hands facing the sun; work on their nostrils, pour ash onto those carcasses, and remove them; then hold what you can bear at the fine sharp tip of the nose on one side until you know that this char has been completely burned.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if there remains any part we cannot correct, when you open the entire body with all necessary instruments gently and lightly, ensuring no obstruction; and if it's not obstructed or an abscess is sealed, treat it as necessary; and if it's an infected abscess, act quickly and cauterize until the pus is expelled and all flesh has been removed completely, then clean out with water or wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, acoi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes .i. fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice .i. doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil. Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu .iij. jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	If it is the nose that's injured, and moisture leads up to the palate, know that it's healthy; and if moisture doesn't penetrate as intended, know that there was new flesh inside the bone, where the instruments didn't come through for cutting: then you must insert a thread of linen somewhat thick, and hold its ends with your hands, and place each knot about an inch or less apart; and lead the patient by this thread in their nose towards their mouth, and pull it gently until it comes out through their nostril; and many times do so when the children are at school, and it's a simple task for those who want to perform it; then hold the head that emerges from the nostril with one hand, and the other head that emerges from the mouth with the other hand, and distinguish them one after another by our presence. Do this until you know that the knots have corrupted that flesh, then remove the threads, cleanse the wound, and moisten the thread in Egyptian ointment, and place it back in their nose as before; do this for three days or longer, until all the remaining flesh corrodes away; and then use pine sap for several days if it's healthy, and if you need dried medicines, apply them; and this is the method of the instrument to purify the head, which involves distilling oils and medicines into the nostrils:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And make it of silver or copper, resembling an open lamp, like a rod, and guide it in the same way; and if you see fit, make a closed rod, and have your instruments filled to purify the head; and hold both ends of the head when heating oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	of the flesh near the nose
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times a disease is born near the nosehead, which is called "Telul", it grows and becomes large until one can see it; thus, at the beginning you should cut it, remove all bone, then place the fire cautery or hot medicine on it; if one delays cutting it until it's big, beware if it feels hard, changes color, has poor sensation: do not touch with metal as it's an infected abscess, for when one cuts once, it causes great harm to the patient; and if the abscess is due to heat touching, not just changed color, and you see that everything can be cut, let the patient remove and treat the area with drying and restraining substances.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	When the nose has been cut and sewn.
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes. Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les .ij. levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Know that when the solutions of continuation reach into one of these venous conductions, they provide little benefit, in many cases. Therefore, it is necessary that this happen to no one, so long as their wound is fresh and full of blood; then adjust the two lips to a stitch, proceed with treating until it's healed; if the lips are already dry on both sides, you must cauterize all parts of them until they heal, then join the two lips together again, tighten them up, apply dragon's blood powder, and incense. And place the powders over a piece of plaster or another welding plaster, and leave it until it discharges naturally, then treat with ointment until healed.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The method of the stitch involves joining the material: either by needles, as we have said in the stomach stitch; or by thread, which I have previously informed you about.
des apostemes des levres	removal of lesions from lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	In the hands of one who knows, within the wound there is a hard part that resembles grains sometimes, both smaller and larger. So it must be that you return to the mouth of the wound and incise each node, then take them with tweezers and remove them from every part; after this, use the hand following the vitriol cut, until the parts are cleansed; then drain the liquid and cure the hand of dry things until it is healed.
de la char des gencives	from the pulp of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times, a mass arises on the attached gum tissue, which the old ones called "albulus"; it must be that you hold it with forceps, cut it at its root, and leave out the wound or blood. Then place it under the vitriol powder, or other drying and desiccating powders; and if this mass returns after cutting, and many times happens again, then cut it a second time, and cauterize it: if it does not return even after cauterization; these are the forms of instruments to cut.
des sordens	Of cautering with fire, instruct the patient to allow hair growth until long and even; and if they pierce at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	In every instance they are gathered at the chief of the teeth, behind the mouth between the gums, and skin which is ugly and rough; and in each case the black tooth and citrine tooth along with worms exist until corruption reaches the gum, and then the tooth becomes stinky; it is necessary that you place the diseased person's head between your hands, and have their teeth or the scabs visible, until nothing remains; and do this for blackness and greenness, and yellowing and other colors, until they are all removed; if what was extracted was at first reason, it's good; but if not, then start again from the second day to the third, until you have everything removed; know that teeth require various tools of different forms to be extracted, according to how the work demonstrates it, for those who extract teeth outside the teeth have other forms than those who extract between the teeth; and these forms and others should be prepared with you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	When you are treating a tooth for its pain and delay the extraction as much as possible, it should not be done; because this is very rare. It must not happen that one removes too quickly because of this.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant. Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Therefore when the patient is compelled to extract teeth, you must be certain about which tooth hurts. Often during pain from the tooth, you should ascertain if it's a tooth abscess and drain good pus; and in all cases do not depart entirely with the pain until the bad tooth has been extracted, as we have already seen fit for these soldiers; and when you are very certain about the tooth causing pain, it is necessary to sear around the tooth fully through i. spatumile strongly so that the gum remains intact from every side; then move it to your hands or to the fine tongs at each attempt, until they are well disinfected, then firmly secure the tongs; and keep the head of the tooth between your knees with the handle well in place, ensuring it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier. Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	After extracting the tooth straightly without breaking it, and if it doesn't spring back, take none of these tools and gently push inside each part, then move it as you did first. And if the tooth has been pierced and broken off, it is necessary to fill it with cloth at the points where they are; and when extracting finely with tongs, make sure not to break it during extraction; and it must be sharply opened around the gum in order to remove the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere. Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And see that you do not break it or leave a part of it, and warn the patient about the increased pain from the root due to its malice after the first extraction. And take care that you do not act like ignorant soldiers who break it every time out of haste and rashness, and fail to follow what we have told; but they cause such illness once by the opening of this great disease through its roots or the bone they break, as we often want; and when the tooth is extracted, wash the inside with wine or salt water. And if bleeding occurs, which often happens, fill that cavity with vitriol paste; and if that does not work, cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The shapes of the tools you use to pull out teeth should have long points and large handles. They should not bend when you are pulling on them; these are the desired shapes.
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And let them have large parts that do not bend when being pulled, and be made of very sturdy iron, and should have teeth to hold the pieces in place.
de la racine des dens	from the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre .i. jor ou ij., tant que li leus soit amolis, puis i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	When the root remains during pulling, it is necessary to place inside the mouth cotton soaked in butter for one or two days until the gums are softened. Then remove the forceps called "algefri", making the shoulder appear like a doctor's beak; and they should also be made as smooth as a file, this is the desired shape.
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out with all these forceps, it is necessary that you uncover the entire mass right up to the root, and then place an instrument known as 'althali', which is essentially an awl, as depicted here:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And make it so that neither breaks and is large enough that it does not break at all, and if the root jumps out from this, it's good; if this doesn't happen, assist with all instruments you have, as their forms are shown here after:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if assistance is taken from the instrument that has two points, as depicted here:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other tools that are in front according to the size of teeth, and from this tool which seems like large forceps, as depicted here:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And let this tool not be able to break it, and know that very few of the tools are made of metal; and also other tools which are not counted; and the skillful surgeons themselves find their own instrument according to what their work and illness show them, because there are parts of diseases for which old teachings do not provide a tool due to their variety. If they break anything from cartilage or from the other bones, or if they rot, so they seek out the tools that suit him, as I have told you, and help with gestures, which is what this form represents:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And let them be large and well suited to hold the bone so that it doesn't escape but can be held and removed; and then restore the place with medicine suitable for this, and if there is decay in the bone and it is small, if you find all this tool:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the tooth appears not according to its natural form, and its shape is ugly, and especially in maiden women, you should know whether the tooth was born after it or isn't properly placed, and one can neither file nor grind it: then remove the groove; and if it's alongside the tooth, take this tool as shown here, resembling two small beaks, and let it be sharp at its tip.
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the hole is made small and smaller in my hands by its hardness due to tooth, and because you do not move others, and if it becomes apparent that one can shave it off, then I will shave with one piece of file as this forms:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	And it is also like the file used for making needles; and I gently shave in my hands slowly by tooth, so that it doesn't move until it's done; then make it completely flat with no rasp at the end. And if the edge is too sharp causing blisters on the tongue, it's necessary to shave off the roughness as much as possible, so that it doesn't blister the tongue or harm speech.
quant li dent lochent	When the tooth swells
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les .ij. dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a .i. ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper. Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des .ij. dens sains, et des .ij. meus, si com tu vois:	When the tooth in front of the jawbone, or through percussion or impact, and the patients cannot press this upon what they eat that it does not produce feces, then you have cured them with medications restricting it; these are not effective so bind them with a gold thread as silver threads turn green and decay, but gold never changes. And use threads neither too thick nor too thin according to the space between teeth. Should you see the need for joining of teeth, take the thread and a pair of tweezers between two healthy teeth, then insert diseased teeth between the diseased teeth if there are more than one or several, until you can see properly up to the other side's tooth. Then resume the covering until it reaches the part where you inserted it, and pull your hand finely and skillfully, until it does not move. And bind your tie at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape. Then clip off teeth with the thread using tweezers, then join them together, and place them next to a healthy tooth, make sure they do not irritate the tongue; and leave it like this tightly as long as possible, if it comes undone or breaks, bind it with another thread; should it continue in this state for all its time, this is how teeth are joined and the arrangement of two healthy teeth and two diseased ones, as you see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth has shifted, should you set it back to its place, day by day as we have said; and do not interfere with anything that is not safe or endures suffering, and never make the shape of an osine's tooth, and place it in the spot where the defect exists, and bind it as we have said, so it stays there for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	To cover the tie of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder. Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	No once does it come from the glands situated on the tongue or in nature, that we are born with; or by accident due to injury healing; and the procedures consist of working within the mouth towards the ailment, having its head aligned with your healthy position, and lift the tongue; then cut out the nervous cord at length until the tongue is dislodged from its place. And if there is stiffness or swelling and it's due to sudden healing of injuries, then pinch the hook and cut at length that knot; and ensure that the wound doesn't become too deep down center because of blood vessel under it; and when you finish, raise it up in a pinkish-red or slightly swollen state, or in cold water, then place on tongue a piece of linen. And each night, wash this diseased person thoroughly, so that the tongues don't stick together. If bleeding starts occurring, then pour vinegar inside the mouth; and if that doesn't work out, then cauterize it with a slow burning cautery which is good for this purpose; then treat it further until it heals fully.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see that it is of any other color or blackness or hardness such that the patient doesn't feel it without touching, then don't touch it as it's a sore; and if it's fading towards whitishness, and there is moisture, then apply the hook until it gets cleansed and then cleanse from both sides; and if the pus fails to drain through your procedure, then pour vinegar over it until it stops bleeding, then proceed with your task until you exhaust all the means. Then raise it up using cold water and salt, and treat further until it fully heals completely.
des apostemes de la gorge	Extractions from the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les .ij. amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer. Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez. Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	No matter how many times blisters arise inside the throat that are called "godath", and they're correctly named as the two almonds, whenever you treat them as we explained in separation, and if they aren't abscesses, then take caution: If these are small, tender, pus-filled lumps of a reddish color and with a needle-like consistency, do not touch them with metal. And if they are red and have a large root, avoid touching them with metal as well due to the potential for blood discharge; instead leave them until they're healed, then you will remove them, or they would dislodge by themselves; and if they are whitish in color, their roots are slender, then prepare your instrument to fit, but first ensure that these pus lumps have settled down and calmed. Then have the patient sit under the sun with their arms extended, and let their palms face towards health, and guide them to open their mouth while you press their tongue between their hands using all of the tool, in this manner; and use silver or finely made copper as delicate as knives:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	Can't you press the tongue with all this tool? And when you see the pus lump, take the scissor and insert it into the almond, then pull strongly more than you can. Do not remove any threads, then cut using the tool; in this way it appears as a forceful process, that seems like pressing. Once the head is pressed from one place to another, it's very sharp, and made of iron or brass:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you don't have this tool now, take scissors instead; in this way it is formed:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	And make incisions on one side and the other; and when you have performed an incision in one of them, do the same for the other according to the same manner, and after the incision gargle the sick person with hot water, or both cold and warm water, and if there is bleeding during the recovery, then gargle them with water or pieces of cooked cherry tomatoes, or leaves of wild rosemary, and similar things, until they stop bleeding; then complete the treatment as long as the body heals; and let no other abscesses arise in the throat besides the two glands, so perform the same procedure on them accordingly.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir .i. aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi .i. jor ou .ij. Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis .ij. rains par les .ij. pertuis dou neis. Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un .i. oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	And I treated a woman with an abscess that was within her throat, one small in size. The entire throat had been so closely closed by it that she could neither breathe nor eat or drink through the blocked passage, and died after about one day or two due to this condition. The abscess was so far up that it had pushed aside two inches on each side of the neck. I acted quickly, inserting an inch of thread into one and pulled it out, with a large portion of the throat being exposed; then made another incision at the other nostril area, and opened her mouth forcing her tongue down; afterwards inserted the thread in these abscesses and removed part of them, only letting some blood come out. And thus cleared the passage in her throat, began drinking warm water and eventually wine again, not stopping until I continuously cut away from this abscess for a long time; it grew back immediately filling up the space that I had emptied completely, reaching quite large size. Then I covered these areas and treated them with a cautery inside her throat: she remained without growing anymore; I left those places, may God do something good of her afterwards.
de l’uve	Of the eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve». Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li. Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide. Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a .i. des .ij. estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des .ij. amandres. Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des .ij. amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee. Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor. Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague. Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	When the urine comes out of the eye, and it is swollen and long, then it's called "perpendicular"; and if it's distended and round, then it's called "eye". When it’s treated as we have described in the division, but the treatment doesn't work, and you see that the incision from pus has healed and become subtle, then it should be handled; and this one which is round assembled and not long; and it’s red or yellowish or black in color, then it should be avoided with an incision. For there is great risk to the patient. Therefore, when you see it, according to the way I have said, by its size and length, you must make the patient face the sun, and press their tongue onto the tool we mentioned previously; then insert the thimble into the eye, and pull it outwards, and remove it with one or two tools that I described in the incision of the two glands. And it should not be removed too much beyond its natural boundary; because if you remove more, it harms speech and language; and after the incision, use what we have said about the incision of the two glands, and treat until she is healed. And if your patient becomes afraid upon removing this one, then it must be handled with an instrument for cautery. The way to do cautery is by a sharp tool. And let that patient put their head into your healthy area, and then press their tongue onto the tool we said about in the chapter of cautery, and hold it firmly without being too thick or thin; and use the movement of this tool which has its form here:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And have our head with a hair or we place the medicine on it, as if with the movements of a spoon, and put the tool onto all the medicine over the eye; and that patient should lie still on their side, so that saliva and mucus flow from their mouth through the medicine inside, without reaching their throat and the wound; then hold your hand over all the medicine and press it on to the eye for half an hour, as long as you see it working and the effects of the medicine have subsided; and if you notice, take cotton and wrap it around any tool, moisten the cotton with the medicine, and place the tool onto the cotton in the wick above, so that the cotton burns on the eye; and do this often until the cautery is perfect, then let it dry, and rest for four or five days afterwards. And if you need to repeat the medicine cautery, then do so, and after the cautery clean around the eye with gauze soaked in butter, and clean off anything left of the medicine; and rinse with cold water, and gargle until healed.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This cure is safer than incision, or rather the cautery; if it is treated with fumigation using this method, take valerian and sage and oregano and rue and chamomile and spinach and similar herbs, and combine all of them or some of them in one pot, and put them inside, then let it boil; and ensure that the pot is well covered with strong earth, and in the middle of the pot place two sticks according to this method:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut. Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And make it of silver or arsenic, and let one of the shoulder bones be placed in the mouth under the rash until the vapor rises to the eye via the nose, until the eye is dead; after that, repeat often, until the eye dries out. Make sure not to do this at the beginning of pus formation from heat, as many things can happen; and don't perform this treatment when the pus starts decreasing in heat. And if this tool isn't present, take a stick and place an eggshell inside your head so that the mouth under the rash doesn't get too hot; for the eggshell won't allow the vapor to burden the mouth, it is a good combined cure for healing.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times it occurs in the throat bone or spinal area of fish, without any specific thing; so it is good that you remove whatever you can see and press your tongue against the sun with all the tool so that you see something move. And what doesn't reveal itself and remains in the throat should be induced to vomit out the rash until the meat is cooked in the stomach; by chance if it escapes through vomiting; or if the rash ingests a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a root of lettuce, or half a piece of dry bread. And tie this sponge with one thread and then swallow it again. And when she comes to you, if she ascends, and then proceed to vomit. And if what we said did not bring it out, take one tool of snuff according to this shape:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And make the tools curved at the tip so that they can more easily enter the throat, and have the head lifted high above it; and guard not to touch the epiglottis, making sure no part of it moves or pushes any bone inside; and move such that the patient is forced to push the tool down because movement is necessary or if something is obstructing air flow; if they swallow it, or pull it forcefully until all parts are pulled equally out of the tool, as long as force is applied.
de la sansue de la gorge	of the windpipe
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit. Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout .i. petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu. Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine .i. fer chaut, et fai ce sovent. Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor. puis pren plein .i. voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	No treatment of the windpipe has been done, as I have explained in division, through medicine therapy; and if this doesn't help, then look into the throat at the patient's complaint, after pressing their tongue with the tool I've told you about. And when you see the windpipe, pull it back by a little fraction of an uncia or use fine forceps that suit for this task. If this fails, take a thready hair and insert it in the throat at the patient's complaint; then pull until half the length of the hair is inside, and do so often. And if the patient smells water all day, take a full glass of cold water, work their mouth with it, pour it into their throat without swallowing immediately, and move it around frequently; and as soon as the windpipe feels the water, it will expel.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier. Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes .i. pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And if it does not expel as we have said, subfumigate the patient with aloe, using the tool I mentioned in the incision of the eye; do this many times for she will expel without any discomfort. And here's how to perform the fumigation: take one pot that contains charcoal sticks and place it covered with a lid in the middle, with an opening at its bottom where the tool's head is placed; then pour your fumigation, stick the end of the stick inside the patient’s mouth, seal their mouth so no smoke escapes but goes up until reaching the veins; and blood will now expel. If it does not expel, restart the fumigation several times; allow the patient thirst and consume salty things, do not drink water; then eventually she needs to leave forcefully through this method.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the shape of the tool used to expel blood is such that when you can see it, it resembles curved scissors for cutting into the throat; and it has the appearance of a doctor's beak, and it has grinding roughness like a saw, so whatever she takes, she cannot let go. And here is the form:
li chapistres des apostemes	The chapter on abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en .ij. manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor. Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors. car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	No descriptions of discharges are, according to what memory brings forward from one and another in this book, and they vary in perforation and in cutting; and this is done in two ways, one being in its own appearance, and due to the moisture it holds. And the second way is for the bones within the body. because abscesses on the head are different from those on the foundation, and abscesses on the inner flesh are different from those that come into joints, and each has their judgment in action.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures. Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre. Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	And if it's an abscess that shouldn't be pierced, as long as the body is healthy according to its completion; and for those ones which need to be pierced when they are matured, and don't complete their course of healing, such as abscesses beneath joints. Because when abscesses come beneath joints, if left until they are partially decayed in there, perhaps the ligament and nerve of the joint get corrupted, causing a contraction in that limb. Or it's beneath the main body part, and if you delay piercing until it is dead, it will harm the principal limb; or it's beneath the foundation, then pierce it accordingly when it is dead; and it should not be pierced an immature abscess without its digestion completion, except for the one that's beneath the foundation which doesn't rot all through, and stays inside, and produces a fistula; and can't heal properly in large scale.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And you should know the time of piercing the abscess which is dead according to its completion, and this is when the pain has subsided, and the departure of fever, and the reduction of pain and redness, and the movement and sensitivity of the head of the abscess, and other signs; and you should have the piercing positioned above the abscess or as low as it opens, and where it appears; and make the piercing along the length of the body, and if the abscess is at the arms or legs, or joints and nerves and arteries, and all places where there's no fold.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre. Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit. Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui. Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.  Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com .i. drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en .iij. angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	In cases where they bend, according to the same member. And when abscesses are within the fatty tissue, if you wish to move it, wait until digestion is completed and the puncture is confirmed, as we have said previously. For should you puncture it prematurely, the pus would spread throughout the body from the wound, filled with much filth; and might harden the lips or the deeper parts of him. And for any abscesses that are punctured across the broad part of the body, according to what the limb requires. And it is necessary to handle small abscesses with small pricks; and in large ones, large pricks, and many incisions according to the size of the abscess; and for those types where it's required to pierce through the bone, and cover them; when it becomes as thick as one piece of cloth, and has healed, then it is necessary to do so similarly to how you would handle milk blisters: and for those that are split into three angles, and for those whose handling is like the leaf of myrtle, similar to abscesses from angles; and for those where you make a round cut, and other cuts and shapes when they're handled accordingly.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites. Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois. Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Those without a head, such as superficial abscesses, it is necessary to fully pierce them; and when the abscess is large, and has built up a thick wall, if you puncture it, do not drain all the pus immediately, but only some part of it; then cover the abscess until another day, then leave nothing directly over it; perform this multiple times from larger to smaller sizes, until all the pus is out; especially when the patient has weak strength or a woman in her pregnancy, young children, or elderly and decrepit people. For the spirits jump every time with the release of pus, that by chance kills the patient, and you might not notice it. Therefore, treat this chapter with great caution, and when you have punctured your abscess, if there's an opening, check whether the wound from the abscess is small; and if it's a full cut, apply linen or old cotton to it; and for large abscesses, and many wicks are there inside, it is necessary that you tie one in each so they stick together; and if you have cut into the abscess partially through the skin, and tied it internally, then fill it with old cotton or linen wads without moisture, and hold it until the third day; then dress it, and cure with ointment until it heals.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille .i. drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.  Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there's bleeding in your vein work, it is necessary to apply cold and moist cloth, and one piece of cloth, and place them on the wound multiple times. And if the bleeding persists, then it requires control and treatment, and the powders that I have mentioned in this book for your hands, and if it involves iron and the blood is very nervous, it's necessary to put wet cloths and linen soaked in wine and oil; and if it's a wound, and the body is fatty, then it's appropriate to place linens moistened with water and oil, or wine and cold oil until the third day, as we have said; and then remove the abscess and clean and cure it appropriately until it heals.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And it is necessary to know universally in treatments of abscesses: now I have told you how one should proceed before the treatments of abscesses, and here comes the chapter.
des soros	regarding the surgical treatment
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances. Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire. Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout .i. estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient. Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc. Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit. Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez. Et se li apostemes tient .i. nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés. Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	For small abscesses on the head that appear and are like those made by bees, such as a nodule from a cat, there are many similarities. Some of them contain moisture along with pus; others have hard ones that feel stony to the surgeon's touch, and there is no doubt they will cut off an artery if one cuts against them. The process of cutting consists of using any tool called 'entromissoire', which has this form below: whatever it contains, if it contains moisture, one must make a long incision above it. And once the moisture has been drained out, one should scrape off everything without leaving behind the skin that contained that moisture; because it will return immediately if nothing is left behind. Then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment if available; if not, use water and vinegar, and apply this to the wound, leaving it until the next day; and let the night heal whatever is still there. And then resume using the cotton as before, for the second day, and the third day, until you are sure that it does not stay overnight; then treat the wound with ointment as needed until it heals properly. And if an abscess contains a fatty lump, cut along its length and drain out all the pus; scrape off from all sides and apply your entire cure to the cloth where it lies; and if the artery causes contrary action, do what I have instructed you after that. And similarly treat any abscesses that feel stony with both knife and treatment as I have instructed you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc. Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut .i. apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere. En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	And for the operation on stones and moisture, it is lighter because there is little blood. And if in any of these abscesses or head or it has no moisture, and from two of these abscesses that I observed or head from an old woman; and found the abscess as a soft stone, rough and white, and could not be broken; and even if one had pierced none of them, one would have made the incision just as well as on a stone. In other abscesses coming out or head, it was that those that come from the heads of children and the roots of ears, the opening should always stay as tight as possible depending on how far they are within, for the bowel to be able to exit; and treat them accordingly.
des scrophules	Of scrofula
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre. Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes. Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit. en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les .ij. levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	Many times there appear abscesses at the neck, and among lymph nodes, and in angina, and never anywhere else or on the body, they are round and clustered together. Each scrophula is properly contained within its node, like a nut and an abscess from the head, as we have mentioned; and there are many appearances of these scrophulas. Some contain moisture, and others are malignantly disobedient to treatment. In this one that you see with good disposition at the surgeon's touch, and resembling the color of the neck, silent from all sides and is not sensitive under the neck or on the artery or in the conduit, and it is shallow; then you should handle it from above, and scrape off each part, and expose the two lips of the wound to the curette if necessary, as we have said about abscesses from the head; and work slowly and carefully, ensuring that you do not cut the nerve or the vein, nor be too aggressive or trench deeply, so that you do not remove more than what is required.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir. Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde. Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if you cut the vein or artery, and it does not allow for opening, place vitriol broil or any powders that stop blood in the wound, and restrain the wound; and leave it until the abscess is soothed and the wound begins to heal. And when the blood has stopped flowing, return to your task, as long as you fulfill it; then let your skill judge if there are any small pustules left, remove and clean them out. And if in the root of the pustule vein is large, it would not be right for you to cut that pustule from its root, but tie it with a double thick thread, allowing it to fall away on its own; then treat the wound using old cotton dipped in Egyptian ointment, and proceed with the healing.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les .ij. levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule. si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit. Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you remove the entire pustule, it is necessary for you to assemble the two edges of the wound and stitch them now. There should be no remnants of surplus due to the size of the pustule. It's necessary that you take heed in removing its root, drain pus, and stitch it as we have previously described. Those pustules with surplus matter, puncture wherever they open; and do so like we had instructed before, hanging down, then apply dressing and similar things to allow them to heal from the corruption. And when the wound is well cleaned out, proceed with ointment treatment until it's healthy again.
de squinance	"De squinance" in this context refers to treatments or procedures related to diseases or deformities of the neck and head region. This could cover a variety of topics such as injuries, infections, tumors, dislocations, and other medical conditions affecting these areas. Without more context from the specific text you're referring to, it's difficult to provide an exact translation for each line in this term. However, generally speaking, "squinance" implies a focus on neck-related ailments or surgery.
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The old ones spoke and told of the art of cutting the throat; but I never saw anyone do it in our land, and this is written down from their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	For those with squinting vision, it is necessary that the slit of the throat known as "epiglottis" be excised; and one should not attempt this operation by oneself, because all the airways and the windpipe are in these who have phlegm either in their mouth or in their throat or between two bones.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the channel of the windpipe, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to prevent loss from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz .iij. cercles ou .iiij. une petite fendure dou travers, entre les .ij. cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	Therefore, when we wish to cut the epiglottis, we must make a cut in three or four small cuts across it, between the two circles or by the size of the cut's depth, not into the cartilage.
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	And those lungs are suitable for the section of the epiglottis where there is no flesh, and the vessels are long under it.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	And if the master is fearful, it is necessary for him to extend the throat skin to all the inch, then cut through the cheekbone until it reaches the jaw; and avoid the blood vessels, should you see any sign of them, and then shape the syphoid sinus as we have said;
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	and it is demonstrated by the section of the artery that flows through the broken limb, and by the loss of voice;
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	and leave the wound open for a while.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour has passed since one doubts strangulation, gather the two sides of the wound neatly together with care, and seal it entirely save for the cartilage; then administer medicines that cause growth to occur, until it becomes healthy.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasim insists that one should not stop this process until the throat is completely swollen and the patient is pronounced dead, and until all deficiencies are met.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	Therefore, one should cover the epiglottis because the patient can't breathe properly, and they are breathing through the wound. This way, they will be protected from death.
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en .iij. jors ou en .iiij.	And because of this, the old men were commanded to leave the wound open until the disease's mischief passes, and once it has passed, it takes three or four days.
Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	And then they commanded to stitch up the wound and treat it, until it was healed;
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist .i. coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	I saw a maiden take one knife, and she stuck it in her throat, and cut part of the windpipe.
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	and I was called to treat her, and I found her as dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound and found the blood coming from it, indeed, she did not have a cut vein or artery leading there but the veins were flowing through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	I hurriedly dressed and treated the wound until it was healed;
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	and she didn't suffer anymore from her hoarse voice, and came back to herself afterwards.
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I swear that in the surgery of the epiglottis there was no need for it.
de la grosse gorge	From the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	Lumps called 'neck hernia' are referred to, and large lumps of a dark purple color, and they occur frequently in women.
et est selonc .ij. manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	And it occurs according to two ways: naturally, and by accident; or natural doesn't have any disease.
Et li accidens est selonc .ij. manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	And the accidents occur in two ways, one of which resembles fat within us, and the other way resembles an abscess that comes from us through an artery.
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	And there is fear, and it does not mean to make cuts elsewhere than in that which is small, and the proof and search must be done for every introduction:
se tu le trueves ausi com .i. nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	if you find it as small as the tip of your nail, and cannot make any incision in all veins, then cut it, like how one cuts nails, and apply treatment to every part, if there is any point;
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And search thoroughly first, and treat as appropriate until it has healed perfectly.
des nous	after nails
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	Many ways are before us, so I will mention all of them;
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	And it is fitting that I explain the entire difference between what we have and what results.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that issue is characterized by heat and fever until the ebullitions have passed and putrefaction has occurred; thus, then rest ceases from the fever and heat.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient .i. syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	With the new there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and contains one pus, which is its own sack and is according to the color of the body, and begins also like a boil, and becomes large;
et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	And these are according to two appearances, or oily, or moist, and no color is as I have said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	When you begin the treatment for a new case, it is necessary that you first examine and inquire about all the tools which are called 'jointer', according to their shape or the chapter that follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	And the method of probing abscesses in our case is that you remove as much moisture as you find inside the abscess, and twist your fingers little by little until you know that the tools have pierced the pus, then according to the size of the abscess;
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	Then remove the jointer tool, and be careful not to rupture it.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	When moisture is involved, whatever its color, if it makes a cut as I have described for other abscesses;
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	And if after the incision no moisture comes out, know that it is fatty, then cut it crosswise, and take it with tweezers, and gently burn each side of it and remove the coat where it was lying, so you can extract it whole with the help.
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	And if you cannot extract it whole, then remove it piece by piece so nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	For if nothing is left behind, it will recur through many times;
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if it stays a little longer, and the pain is not severe, then use some corrosive wet powders for the wound, restrain the wound, and place things that soothe and heal abscesses around it. And treat with other remedies until it becomes clean.
et se li nous est grans, si cout les .ij. levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	And if it's large, then lift the two edges of the wound, and treat those who are bleeding from it.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	And if the vein is thicker than expected or any other situation that requires urgency, then use the opening of vitriol and let it sit for two or three days, as long as the wound heals, and rest with blood boiling; then return to using what has been applied during the first treatment.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de .iij. manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a .iij. quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et .i. qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de .iij. manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	Here are the forms of the instruments for puncturing, and there are three ways: large, medium, and small; and if you have four squares which are called "albaret," and one which is called "breb", and there are three more forms: large, medium, and small, to encircle the abscesses.
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	And they are also like the needles from which one removes the thorns, and made of citrine amber or iron or silver, yellow ones are valued, and those that are more skilled in black glue serve to encircle the swellings of fistula.
et sont de .iij. manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	And there are three ways: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the width of the defects.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont .ij. corbeures de .iij. manieres ausi;	The forms of the plaques resemble sheep's faces, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and if there are two swellings in this manner on the plaques as well;
et si a oncines qui ont .iij. corbeures, et sont ausi de .iij. manieres; et si a oncines qui ont .ij. corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de .iij. manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	And if there are plaques with two swellings, they also come in these three forms; and if there are plaques with two swellings each, as well as plaques with only one swelling, all of which come in three forms; and all this is necessary according to their location.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	The head of this to whom one makes it sharp, and among these there are who do not cut with force from one side only, of which we burn the skin, because in them one does not cut into the vein or nerve;
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	And of these introducers are the needles placed in gloves, so that the patient does not feel them during the opening of abscesses;
et sont de .iij. manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	And there are three ways: large, small, and medium, as you see;
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	and do not use force in the legs, arms, nipples, and similar areas;
et aucune fois fait on .i. autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	And no other small instrument is made, resembling twigs of chestnuts, according to this form, onto which blood has been applied:
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	And it is placed only once at the sound position of veins and arteries, and never following this large form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	Never do the breasts of some men swell when they begin to become corrupted, until they seem like female breasts;
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne b. jusques a .g.:	And remain ugly and swollen, and if one wishes to treat them, it should be done according to this form of this line b. up to g:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	Then scrape off the fat, and apply medicine to the wound that stimulates growth of flesh. Then join the two edges of the wound for sewing, and treat it until it is healed.
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en .ij. costelz desus, par .ij. semblans fendures;	And if the breasts are hanging down and flattened by their size, like it happens in women, cut them into two halves above, through two similar incisions;
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	So that one is held by the other at the end of each, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line .b. up to the line .g.;
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les .ij. levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then scrape off the skin that is between the two edges, and remove the fat, and apply what we have instructed about sewing and powders, and what is necessary for treatment, until it is healed.
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	And if it is not healed, or the incision has not been completed, because the patient does not want to rest, or due to blood flow obstruction, then you must fill the wound with wet cotton in a corrosive dressing;
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	And let it be until he nibbles it and returns it along with the fat, then treat it until it is healed.
des apostemes des asselles	removal of abscesses from armpits
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	Abscesses that occur in the armpits are ways of hard scrofula or where there have been nodes, and if any contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those who contain moisture need to be cut according to this shape, from line b. up to line .g:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the pus in the abscess is drained, fill the wound with old cotton and let it stay until the next day. Then remove all the cotton and continue applying ointment until healed.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscesses resemble scrophula sores, make incisions as we have said for cuts on scrophula sores, and if the wound is filled with pus, apply a cautery as we have said earlier.
de la routure de l’artere	regarding the rupture of an artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	When the artery is opened, and skin is sewn above it, many times abscesses develop. And similarly, when there's lacerated vein and abscess appears;
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	and if one knows this much that it is due to the artery, then the abscesses are long and precise;
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens .i. estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	and when you feel it with your fingers, if you sense resistance; and when it's due to the vein, there are clear marks appearing;
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	and it's foolish to cover this abscess, and similarly when it's around the joints and muscles and in other areas like neck and many others, and they are very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	It is necessary then to avoid the iron treatment, and that which affects the head should also be avoided. In the case of swelling due to arterial bleeding, one performs this above the skin for as long as needed.
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	Then work on the size of the incision, and beautifully sever the artery from the membranes, until it is exposed.
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en .ij. leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des .ij. arteres qui sont en temples;	Then insert a needle through it, and make a hole up to the other side, and restrain the artery with two threads of the length required, as I have instructed you in extracting the two arteries from the temples;
puis point le leu qui est entre les .ij. liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	Then introduce a tool into the gap between the two threads until blood starts flowing out from where it was stopped, and then release the abscess;
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	Then proceed with the treatment until the patient sweats.
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then treat that area with ointment as long as it is clean.
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir,	and if the abscess is due to the size of the vein, it is necessary that you apply what you can of the pus to all the skin with your hand.
puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait .i. fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	Then insert the needle through the area you hold with your hand, and make it pierce, and let there be two strands of thread, so that you draw it from the other side.
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de .ij. pars as .ij. chiés dou fil;	Then remove the abscess, just as I have told you, or link one end of either piece to each shoulder with a thread;
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout .i. fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en .iiij. leus;	And if you doubt whether the threads will withstand the force, then sew another needle with both ends of each thread all across the entire abscess opening from the first hole, and secure the threads in four turns;
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	Then cut off the abscess as much as the surplus comes out, then cut away the excess neatly and leave what is tied up;
puis met sus .i. drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then place a damp cloth soaked in wine and oil on it, then apply various treatments and ointments until the wound heals.
des apostemes des ners	from the pus of the nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Similarly, just like pus flows in the artery and vein, pus enters the nerves when they are cut, or by too much labor, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est .i. grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	And this happens more often at the shoulders and the arms, and everywhere there are joints, and it's one cause of pus, and its appearance seems like the color of flesh, and can be in various positions with pain;
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	And when one constrains it in form, the patient feels the body's pain, and it is not exactly at all parts of the body, but over the surface.
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction;	And move well in all directions, and does not go forward or backward, neither to the side nor upwards, and that which is in joints should not be covered by metal: perhaps it would lead to constriction;
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And that which is on the head or forehead, makes the skin to thicken.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	If the abscesses are small, then take hold of them with your forceps and cut at their root;
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is large, then suspend it by its edge, and cut, then scrape, afterwards the bone, and sew up the wound with stitches; keep treating until it heals properly.
des grosses boces pendans	Of large boils hanging
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	No occurrence happens in the belly and nowhere else, it's a disease called "fungus" by its appearance, and it has a subtle root, and large lumps; and there are small ones and some of varying sizes;
et je vis .i. home qui en avoit .ij. ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	And I saw two homes where there were two bellies that looked more like fungi than anything else, and there was no difference, they were white, had a small root, and were cut open, and it corroded even with moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un .xviij. onces pesant, et en l’autre .vj. З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	I copied them and found in one eighteen ounces weighing, and in the other five, and the organs in the incision are such that when you look at it, the diseased part is moist, and the color of the fungus is white and moist with a subtle root;
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu. Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	If you encounter a large spot, and have the fire cautery in your presence. For the surgeon experiences many times excessive blood losses, and if it goes beyond your control, then quickly use the cautering instrument;
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent .i. fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse .ij. jors;	And if you see the patient frightened and fearful from the cut made by the iron, then take a well-made lead thread, and tie the knot as we have said, and let it be for two days;
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet,	Then hold it in place, and do not cease to pull on the lead thread until the knot comes out, and there is no effort through it; and if the roots are thick, then be afraid when you feel them especially for the stomach, but you can well remove half of it.
puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	Then apply the cautery so that it doesn't heal improperly; then treat the wound, and make sure you don't remove the wax that is of foreign color and has little sensation and milk secretion.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For this is an abscess, and I will come to the treatment of the sore afterwards.
quant li boude ist fuer	When the buttock burns, it means
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	When the appearance of the abscess comes from a fire-caused wound or tear in the scrotum, and it is on the belly, and there are some testicles affected, just like when other tears occur, or bleeding from veins or arteries as described above, or due to wind issues;
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	And if it is due to the tear in the scrotum and from the discharge of pus, then its appearance resembles that of flesh-colored pus, and it is a minor thing with little pain, and opens up from various exits.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is due to the issue from the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when one presses on its fingers if it returns and then comes back again, and by chance if it is squeezed and expands much at the entrance of the bath and through strong labor.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	And if it is due to moisture, it is a minor issue, and it opens well when you press it with your hand, not constraining; and if it is due to blood, then it will open by these signs, the abscesses are large and hard, and they occur in amounts.
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is due to windiness, it has a specific smell at the toucher, and the veins show that you look to see if their appearance is like blood from an artery, or vein, or windiness.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure. Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	If it is necessary that you allow the treatment. For there exists doubt and fear, as I have said in chapter on abscesses, for the artery and for the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	And if its appearance is on the intestine or in the bladder, it is necessary that you instruct the patient to prick their urine, and have it extended all straight, then pierce it completely around the opening.
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains,	then command them to heal by sweat between your hands,
puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile,	then go inside the wound you've indicated across the whole surface,
puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	Then half of the abscess is above all the large hook;
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	Then bind it around with a strong thread or a firm piece of silk cord, and secure this binding tightly, making the bond complete;
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	Then work so that half of the abscess is stretched over the binding, and place your index finger at its tip, keeping hold of the intestine;
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	If you find it caught by the binding, release it and place the intestine behind the belly.
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	And if you find the boil, take it at the root, and scrape away the excess.
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren .ij. aguilles, et i boute .ij. fors filz, et boute les .ij. aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	And if the artery or vein causes a contrary effect, or if there is bleeding internally, then go back to your work and take two needles, and put two pieces of thread each, and place those two needles in the area where you pierced it, crossing it as you made the puncture;
puis estrain l’aposteme en .iiij. leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	Then extract the pus in four days above the needles, and if you see that it has healed, remove the needles, and let the wound dry until it heals, and discard the dead flesh by itself;
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	Or you should remove it when it becomes tender and healed. Then treat it as necessary, and drain the pus just like we have described;
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And remove the blood or moisture you find, then treat the wound according to what's needed, and stitch up the wound.
dou chancre	and the sore
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have discussed in the division the appearances of gangrene and how to operate with medicine, as well as how to avoid iron treatment. We say that gangrene spreads when cooked meat is involved, and great caution must be exercised during treatment. According to old people, if there's gangrene on skin you can scrape it off like gangrene in breasts or in similar locations; and all of it should be removed at the beginning stage. If it's large and old gangrene, it shouldn't be approached as I've never cured any such case, nor has anyone been cured by me before.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And for operations where it can be removed from the skin or body parts as we have discussed, you should not purge off any black mucus in the diseased area. Then let a surgeon check for obvious fullness, and then cut open that diseased area till there's proper skin exposed to perform surgery. Next, remove all tumors or gangrene, and cut hair everywhere, and bone everywhere without leaving anything behind; and let bleeding continue freely throughout, press well on the wound with your hand or any object, and if it starts to bleed in contradiction of the incision made in artery or vein, then cauterize until the bleeding stops. Then treat it further until it heals.
de ydropisie	Of cautery with fire, command the patient to let the hair grow long and even; and if they prick at their root, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces .ij. semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	We have discussed the symptoms of erysipelas in the previous section and how it is formed, as well as the signs for each symptom and the treatment provided with medicines, and that done by iron: these are only described; and should one use iron against these four conditions? The answer is yes, specifically those named tympanites and yposarche because they can be fatal. So when you're using medicine to treat erysipelas called "eclites" through medication, and the treatment doesn't show improvement, if you notice that the patient's condition is weak or there might be another disease besides erysipelas, such as stomach pain or similar symptoms; then do not apply iron, for it is uncertain. And if you observe that the patient has a very strong coloration, and he only has erysipelas and his age isn't too young nor too old, then one should proceed to treat accordingly by opening the area.
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme: Et soit trenchans de .ij. pars. a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	Lift the patient's right side towards your hands, and have the ministers press the abdomen at the lowest part of the backside as they apply water to it. Then take a pricking lancet in this form: And make two cuts each about .5 inches long at their pointy ends, but not so deep that they could reach up to the intestine when inserted, without being able to bleed;
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude .iij. dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude .iij. dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	Then look to see if the dropsy is pressing towards the intestines: should be that you cut beneath the belly .iij. inches horizontally above the navel; and if the dropsy is due to liver disease, let your cut be on the left of the belly .iij. inches; and if it's due to kidney problems, let it be on the right side, and do not have the patient lie down upon the cut so that excess fluids don't flow into the weak part.
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme: Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz .i. petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, .iij. pertus; et .ij. d’autre part, et .i. d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	Then cut through all the skin with the instrument, and push it inwards, lifting your hand fully between the skin and flesh as much as you would when searing an area of size equivalent to a fingernail or more; then pierce the flesh until the pus comes out at least five inches, which is the level of the water, then force it, and use this instrument of which I have described above: It resembles a thin silver rod, made of tin or lead alloy, and has parts that are .i small parts on one side; and where it exists on one side, it's .iij parts; and .ij parts on the other side, and .i part elsewhere; and cut off the joints as if they were feathers, this is the shape of the incision that the writers describe when cutting the feather.
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	At the top is the amelum, so that when the instrument reaches the water, it begins to push downwards on the instrument; drain then half or one-third of it, for if you remove more than necessary at this time, perhaps the patient dies from the resolution of his spirit due to the weapon's action, or he loses his strength, or approaches death.
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	but according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue denote in the sick person, and their pulse; then take the tool and hold the water, and it is held back now by the cure that stupefies the pertus which is above the syphilitic condition, about which I have spoken, that you puncture according to this manner; then resume using the tool again on another day, if you see the sick person suffering from this, and draw out a small quantity of water.
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue. Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	Do this every day, and refrain from drinking until it does not remain but a little water. And if you doubt about the sick person, and leave much water in them, if the cure of burial or sand is heated, and by some sweat or bath and under the sun, and gets tanned; and drink as prescribed. And let the cure of drying medicines continue until it becomes healthy, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after extracting the water, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	On the operation to close the penis
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu. Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout .i. spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme: puis met ou pertus .i. clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi .iij. jors ou iiij. et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	None of the times that children are born who do not have testicles, or whose testicles are small, or they are not in their place. If it happens to be so that it doesn't pierce through to both sides of a tiny soft spot according to this form: then put one thin metal ring under each testicle and secure them for about three or four days; and when it wants to urinate, remove the rings and let urine out, and then put them back again. And by chance nothing happens because the urine that comes forth doesn't leave the rings closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera. Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	If the testicles are small, if there is a medicine of metal rings of lead, as we have said, should they expand. Those who don't have their testicles in their place are lame, for no one is born with testicles at the head of the penis, so they cannot urinate before lifting up their penis; and they cannot ejaculate because the matter cannot come to the prostate gland, and it's a male disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the method of the opening is that the body lies on its back, and then the head of the penis and the scrotum are placed so they're as wide as a feather's width, so that the testicles lie in the middle, just as it should be; and guard against bleeding that comes out many times, and if this happens, stop the blood with those who stop bleeding, and treat the wound until it is healed.
des pustules de la verge	The eruptions of the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times lumps appear on the penis, and there is an ugly appearance; and among them are both benign and malignant ones; it is necessary that you take these at one ounce each, grind and clean them all, then place Egyptian ointment-soaked cotton on them; then cure with diafinicon ointment until it heals.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere. Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer. Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the lump is malignant, with its color and discharge, it's necessary that you apply a cautery to it. When you have extracted it, and if the lump is within the penis and has part inside the skin and part outside, it's necessary that you remove the lump that is inside first; and when it heals, then cure from the outside. For when you cure them together, there may not be enough assurance that the head of the penis will not be pierced, causing blackness and corruption in the penis and around the anus; it's necessary to remove all that is black and corrupted, then coat with an ointment made of almond peel and sugar, which is prepared from walnut shells and cloves, then cure with other remedies until it heals.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme: Li cauteres si aide as .ij. dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a .i. estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	And if bleeding occurs, you should apply the lunar cautery according to this form: The cauterizations help in two positions together: that is, during bleeding and corruption; and if the head of the penis has become corrupted and removed, it's necessary that you insert a stick of opium into the penis, and let urine pass through. And when the skin becomes dry on the tip of the penis which belongs to those who have not been circumcised, or it occurred due to injury or abscess, then it is necessary that you burn with one tool of hair until all the ligatures are released, and remove the head of the penis from all sides;
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a .i. spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre .ij., et i met .i. subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	And if this is something you wish to discuss with me, then you should burn it at the tip of the penis and foreskin until it becomes red. Then cut properly in between and I, take one fine linen wick that has been dipped in cold water and let it smoke slightly without burning it right away.
de la circoncision	Regarding circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision isn't like other injuries; nonetheless, when we perform this act voluntarily and on children, it's necessary that we do the best job possible and cause the least harm to their health.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the old ones didn't mention circumcision for their children, as they didn't use it in their law, and all we have about it is what we've acquired through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I have wanted the largest part of the masters and surgeons who performed circumcision between one day and two days, and during that time, and for all a novaculum; if it was done correctly because there are two flaps, and by chance if this one is above and the other remains below.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Or they receive the cut, and pain is doubled, and in the shaving where it's one day isn't secured that point of the member; and in the trimming of the nail by chance the tool escapes from the work, and runs out, and many times grow like that which doesn't need trimming and I have wanted.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	From the shaving done during that time throughout the length of the thread I have found the goodness of experience, for the strength cuts just as well above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en .i. tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	For when you press your hand, if cut in halves equally across .i. all stretches are tense; but that the thread be well inserted between the skin; and adopt the manner of the first surgical operation so as to make the child think, if he hears, that you are only tying the thread around the shaft of the penis just like this, and then let it out in all manners that you can.
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz .i. poc a .i. autre liien; et la tien as .ij. dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les .ij. liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	Then make it stand between your hands straight, and keep the strength between your hands or under your feet that the child does not see, nor any of the instruments; then push your hand towards the penis and blow or correct, and pull it up until the head of the penis is inside; then clean it well from the dirt that has accumulated, then tie its opening with a double thread, then tie it under every second at .i. point and another loop; and hold it against the second band to the pouch and the first index finger, and fit between the two loops, then lift your hand quickly and pull the head of the penis.
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre .i. drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then let the bleeding drip slowly and gradually, because it's pus; and put powder on and over the powder .i. layer spread with a yolk of boiled egg tempered in rose water, mixed with olive oil well and fresh, and leave it for another day, and treat it with other treatments until it becomes clean.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The shape of the forces at creation is thus: let there be two heads, they shall face each other and cut each other, and let the heads also be as large as hands equally:
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error of creation occurs when the bones inside escape during incision; therefore, it is necessary that you spread them to your nail, so they produce pus; and cut equally, and if you cannot hold them at your nail, then use tongs, and then cut.
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if it breaches for three days, and the one that is under the penis swells, let him wait until the pus from the wound subsides, then lightly scrape; move as you can, and refrain from touching the part of the penis, which will not harm him.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the wound with powders as we have described in our treatment of powders. If you apply too much to the bone and it goes beyond, it will not cause harm; therefore, treat it as we have said until it is healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	holding back of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	Retention of urine is due to the presence of stones, or frozen blood, or a bladder tumor, or new growths, or similar things, which we have mentioned in the section;
et se li urine n’est desliie, et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	And if the urine is no longer retained, and you notice that retention due to stones in the kidneys or at the neck of the bladder, it is necessary that the patient be on his knees. And have him place his feet under his back, and stretch out his belly from above the part of the back, and restrain the patient so he can't move; then forcefully constrain the neck of the bladder to allow expression of the stones above, because this allows urine to flow freely;
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	And if it does not come out, as we have said, and the patient feels intense pain, it is necessary that you administer extraction with all the instrument which is called "syringe", of which this is the form: and be made of fine silver wire, like a bird's feather; and let its handle be one palm long and half, and be fine at its tip.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren .i. fil double, et lie au chief .i. poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus .i. siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	And the way in which urine is expelled is as follows: take one double thread, and tie it around the head with .i. loop of wool or cotton, then insert the head of the thread into the syringe; remove any excess wool and make sure that the bunched part reaches up to the top of the syringe. Then smear the syringe with oil or butter and aubin from an egg, have the patient sit upright, and apply moisture with olive oil and vinegar to the bladder and penis.
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	Then gently place the syringe in the penis until it reaches the root of the penis. Next, double over the penis towards the mouth (I assume this is a mistake or misinterpretation and should refer to 'mouth' as in the opening for urination). Then position the syringe so that it goes before up to the bladder, and when you feel the urine coming up until the empty thing (meaning the urethra), and this isn't done according to this order because whoever is leading does it incorrectly. Then remove the thread piece by piece from all the wool loop by loop, and the urine follows the wool. After that squeeze out the urine and make sure the urine flow properly.
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And continue with the syringe until the bladder is emptied, and comfort the patient afterwards.
des maladies de la vessie	About diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When burns or blood come to the bladder, or putrefaction is assembled there, and you see waters and medicines distilling, if make everything for the tool called 'clepsis' (an ancient water measure), and its form is:
Elle est close, et si a .iij. pertus: .ij. d’une part, et .i. d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	It is closed and you have three parts: two on one side, and one on the other, just as you see; and the middle one through which the medicine comes out should be such that it numbs well down below without addition, if it can remove moisture, and expel when necessary;
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	And when you see your medicines flowing in the bladder, put the wetter's head near the moisture, and pull as you pull him; if you remove the moisture to the wetter, and then apply strong pressure where you pulled; if the moisture enters there, it will now reach the bladder, so that the patient feels it;
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	And this is the form of the subtle bladder stone, which we cleanse out from the bladder through catheterization: thus:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a .i. sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les .ij. seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe .i. poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	And it is made of silver or lead, and the head is positioned higher; and you insert one inside up to .i. fist's length or until it reaches the urethra; then take a sheep bladder and place it in water as if you were preparing to cleanse out the bladder, then fasten the other end between the two fists using a thick thread double, and heat one end of this water in fire; then insert the stone into the penis, then press your hand on the bladder until all the water has been used up, ensuring the patient feels that the water has reached the bladder;
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai .i. cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute .i. fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble .i. dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And if you do not have a bladder, take a piece of parchment and make one circle, then poke holes evenly around it. Then insert a strong thread through these holes, join the circle as you would join two pieces of wood together, put inside what you see that is liquid, water and moisture, and fasten it in place; do this as you did with the bladder, press with your hand until the water reaches the bladder.
de la piere	Of the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have discussed in the division the methods of stone extraction and combined medicines, and we have explained the difference between stones that pass with urine and all the signs, and on which stone one should operate by size; and within the bladder, and the penis; and I will tell you openly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stone that is in the bladder often occurs in children, and this is a sign that the urinary tract infection jumps like an infection with its subtlety; and you should open the urethra and cleanse the patient's penis several times, and then repair it; and at many of these infections the base is involved; and until the child reaches four years old, treatment for young children is rather light, and it becomes much harder in adults, those who are between youth and age; and it is more straightforward to treat those with large stones than those with small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines. Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	And when we come to treatment, the first thing is to cleanse the patient via urine, in order to drain all the toxins from the intestines. For it obstructs the urinary tract at no time during stone extraction.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche ded ens;	Then hold the patient by their elbows, and lift them up and move backwards until the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, exiting once past its top. Then have them sit between your hands with their arms under their legs, so that the bladder is fully hanging down inside; then you inquire and touch it from there onwards.
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere. Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	If you feel the stone in space, hurry now to cut on the stone. And if it doesn't move throughout with touching, moisten your index finger of your left hand; if the patient is female, or your middle finger, if the patient is young and fully grown; and hold it at its base, inquire and touch it from there onwards; then when you feel it on your finger, take it up to the neck of the bladder; then press with your finger, and push outwards towards where you see to cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And instruct the assistant to press the bladder with their hand, and command them to extend their right hand up to their chest, and with their left hand hold the skin which is between the thighs at the part where the cut will be made; then they should push out the stone cleanly, which has this shape:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	And make the cut between those who are between the kidneys and the foundation, not in the middle but at the side of the left snow; and be straight on the stone, and your hands should be close to or against the foundation, and its size should go through so that it is wide outside and narrow inside, according to the quantity of the stone, not too large.
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	By chance if the press that is at or against the foundation should jump forward without effort; and know that there are parts of the stone with angles and margins: they can be difficult to break through; and if there's a part below it seems like a walnut, round, where its exit is easy.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li .i. estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge .i. poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	Above all, where there are angles and margins, make the cut larger; and if it doesn't jump forward, you must apply pressure using tongs as sharp as a file to force out the stone so that it doesn't escape. Or you might use a delicate curved tool at the tip; and if you can't engineer it like this, widen by one or two narrow pieces of rough material, and if it's hard to disintegrate with them, you may crush it with vitriol.
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors. Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie. Car .ij. choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	And if there are more than one stone, first remove the largest from the bladder's neck, then cut upwards, then force through with the tool, and later the smaller ones should be done if there are any more. And if it is very large, it may need to be fragmented, and make a larger incision. For two things happen to the patient: either they die, or urine starts coming out from where the stones were removed while their legs cannot join; but still try with the tool or the pliers, as long as you remove it piece by piece;
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus .i. drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	And when you have completed your work, apply the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, then bind it, and place one wet cloth in oil and wine, or oil and cold rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess; then set the patient upright at his neck, and do not untie the bandage until three days.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you untie it, wash the area well with oil and water, then apply the dyafinicon ointment and basilico ointment until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	And if abscesses or infections reach the wound and blood congeals in the bladder, and it is due to this retention of urine that we are aware happens when urinating without stopping: hence you must apply your treatment to the wound, remove that blood, because if it remains, it will damage the bladder and corrode it;
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les .ij. cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	Then heal the wound from water and salt and sand, and assist him in all ways that you see fit, until he is well; it's necessary that every time you treat him, you tie his two legs together, and gather the medicines around the area.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure. Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	And if the stone is small and it's located where the penis goes in, and is blocked inside, causing urine not to come out; when you treat this as I have said, cut several times, and allow for some relief from this treatment with each cut. I already know this works like this.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take one iron twig according to this form, and have it with three points stuck into one stake:
puis pren .i. fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge. Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	Then take one thread and tie it around the shaft of the twig so that it cannot come back into the bladder; then stick the iron twig into the shaft gently until it reaches the stone; and twist the iron twig in your hand near the stone little by little, until you can pierce the stone from the other side; if urine starts to flow immediately, then press your hand on the one left behind at the stone inside the twig. If the stone breaks immediately, let the urine flow and prepare for medical care;
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie .i. fil desoz la piere et .i. autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les .ij. liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you can't do this for any reason that prevents it, tie one thread around the stone and another above it, then place the shaft of the twig in between these two threads near the stone, then pull forcefully on the twig, untie the thread, and clean the congealed blood from the wound; and treat until it is healed.
de la piere des femmes	From the stone of women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	It happens that stone occurs in women, and if it happens once, the treatment is difficult, and it's forbidden for three reasons: one reason might be that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second reason is that there won't be any woman who can reveal herself to lookouts, even when she is pure.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a.	And the third way is that perhaps we can't find any woman who truly knows this art of medicine; and the fourth way is that the stone in a woman's body might be more prone to come into contact than a man's stone, which means it requires deeper incision, and there is great fear involved.
Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier .i. caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	And if necessity demands this task, you must seek a skilled physician and find someone to guide you. If you cannot find such a person, trust in a well-known pure consultant; present them with an understanding of the life of women or a woman who knows part of the medical art and instruct her to do as you ask about the investigation of the stone;
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	And carefully observe if the woman is a virgin: then she needs to push her womb or its foundation and seek the stone; and should she find it, make her grasp it from under her womb, and advise her to push her womb or where the malady lies with force and press her left hand onto the bladder in form.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	If she finds it, she should move it gradually from inside the bladder to underneath until she reaches the root of the thigh; then press against the stone at the root of the thigh opposite the middle of the womb, where it is likely located and feels the stone in that area; and not move her hand above or under the stone, and when cutting, make the first cut small.
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains. si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	Then press the stone in the waist; if you feel the stone, increase the wound until the stone can emerge forcefully, and know that there are many types of stones: these being small and large, hard and smooth, long and round, and with grooves. And understand their characteristics to know their exit.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	And if the fire isn't enough, place sulfur in it, and keep it for an hour until the fire extinguishes. Then return to your work, while the stone is still hard, and prepare all the tools I have instructed you about for extracting stones within your craft to assist you in your task;
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if the fire isn't enough, and it's an artery that has been cut, sprinkle the powder on the site and tie it with bandages for several days without repeating this method, and leave the stone alone don't try to remove it, so as not to accidentally kill the patient; then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of blood has calmed down and the limbs have returned to normal, then return to your work, while the stone is still hard.
de hernie carnouse	From fatty hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Watery mucus is nothing else than a gathering of moisture or white pus, which is found in the coat of the kidneys that contains the egg; and it is called "pus," and it is not properly inside the egg's membrane if one thinks it could be another egg; and this refers to the skin of the kidney between the white pus we have mentioned. And this does not contain a hole.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the formation of this mucus is due to weakness that affects the kidneys, and spreads this substance.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	And it never comes from striking the kidneys, and this moisture has many colors: sometimes it becomes yellow like jaundice, or without redness, or black, or watery white, and these occurrences are more frequent.
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, .i. poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And these are the signs to recognize this assembly, because if it is or whiter than mentioned, then the abscesses will be long, that is as long as an egg figure, and they do not open, for there is moisture throughout.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	And if there is moisture in the proper area, then the abscesses will be long with part of an egg, and because of this we think it is another egg;
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and this white whitishness, you will perceive it well; therefore when you know the color of the moisture, you must examine all inside that square area, from which its shape was previously formed.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	So according to what comes after the introduction, judge about what is inside it.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	And when we treat it with iron, the patient should be cleansed as much as our ability and the restoration of their body allow; then apply it above their back, on a spot slightly high, and cover them with wool.
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des .ij. costelz dou keur des coions;	Then sit to their left side, and instruct the minister to sit on their right, extending the rod to one of the two ribs under the navel;
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	Then take the spatula, and cut the skin of the navel through him from long to below the belly button, and make the incision all straight while working on the skin of the navel until you reach white flesh, and gently burn it carefully according to your ability;
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a .i. large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	Then pierce the meat deeply with water to the size of half an inch, and remove all the water, then place your fingers, and position the meat upward; and do not touch the belly button but only the meat. Drill it completely or in pieces by his side carefully, for if you don't drill it properly, it will return the water.
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les .ij. leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the egg jumps to your task, you reset it in its place when you have completed the work of extraction; then assemble the two parts of the keel from the navel area into one seam, then treat it as other wounds until it is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the egg corrupted by another illness, it is necessary that you tie the vessels that are suspended, while wondering about blood flow; then cut everything above the suspension, and extract the egg, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en .ij. parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont .ij. ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	And if the fever is assembled into two parts joined together, you will know that these are two stumps. Proceed to cut the other part in the same way as you did with the first equally, then let the blood drain out and put moistened wool in the wound with rose oil;
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les .ij. coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	And take another wet thread soaked in wine and oil, and place it on the two kidneys, and put folded cloths on top of it, and bind it all up with a bandage according to this shape:
Puis pren .ij. drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les .ij. angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	Then take two cloths, and sew them with torn fabric according to this pattern so that they are stitched together in the gusset of the breeches. The first shoulder is placed on the foundation up to the back, and the others near the area of the elbow; the other two shoulders above the two corners, and all should be gathered together by constriction in the loop of the braces;
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes .i. cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	And then the rod of the cautery is treated like iron size once it has been medicated with oil, and you take a delicate fire cautery tool and scrape off the skin of the kidneys, and heat it as we have described so that the white liquid contained in water is revealed;
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	If you use this fire cautery according to its form, then make an incision at the bone like it says, and apply it with this fine-grained cautery:
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	And apply the heat in all possible ways until you are thoroughly done; and make sure the fire does not touch the egg; know that this work is more beneficial; and when preserving blood flow, be careful not to cut open the veins, and ensure the cuts are made precisely.
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And if anything goes against you, or if pus comes out or there's a disruption of blood or something else, treat the thing that goes against you as instructed in what was previously said.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai,	And if the patient is afraid and cannot wait for this work due to its horror, then provide a puncturing treatment as I have instructed you, and know that once you are well assured by the explanations we have given that the watery branch is there,
si fai seoir le malaide sus .i. siege leveit; puis perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	Sit the patient upright on one seat; then puncture the abscess in the area below at all the pus-filled spot wide, and place the incision along the length of the body; and make the openings large enough so that any liquid can flow out completely.
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	Then place cotton on top of the area, and secure it in place, allowing the removal of the water. Cure until the wound has healed completely.
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge .i. poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés .vj. mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And if the white cloth does not allow water to escape from the wound's mouth, you should pour it with a feather or the tool used for treating water in dropsy patients, as shown beforehand; and make an incision of about half a palm around the wound, and know that the water will return, and gather together after approximately seven months or a little longer. And once it is gathered again like before, then those days will pass with the affliction of the patient.
de l’aposteme des coions	Of the pus in the genital area
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	Know that in this part of the anatomy there are many fears, because I think it's better to leave it as is;
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	and I will tell you about the work and appearances of pus.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	So I say that many abscesses come from or near the skin, and indeed in the genital area; and this is due to various causes.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	This is to know about excess acidity and fever which spreads among those who are weak or through beating;
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	and the color of the abscess matches the color of the flesh; and there is no pain, it's an abscess that causes grief;
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	and by chance there is a hard and bony abscess with an off-color; it doesn't come from a vein or swelling of the artery.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	When it's due to blockage of an artery, if you can recognize by the formation of an abscess when you press on your fingers;
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	and you should not touch it at all.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois,	That which is due to swelling of the vein can be recognized by its position during the palpation with your fingers,
et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	and one can very well measure this in relation to this structure, and on other bones;
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	And it is that you should hold the heart of the liver, then place the egg above, and pull the white string from top to bottom, and release all hitches of the egg in every direction.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	If the egg is already bound with these strings, then you should pull the egg and the heart out accordingly.
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	And if it is towards the white or inside the vessels, then you should release all the strings, and take out the heart roundly.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birthplace of the child is behind or in front, then you should remove the entire heart and take out the egg as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your tasks are completed, if you apply the wounded area with wet wool in oil rose and wine, then continue other treatments until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	regarding the discharge of testicles
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a .i. borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions,	This is about an abscess around one and a half inches in size, covered by an envelopment resembling a half-yard, with the swelling of the testicles,
et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	and the patient experiences severe pain when it moves;
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant,	And the treatment for this illness is also quite meticulous like the one just described,
et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	Yet we shall tell you about its work according to what the old ones did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois,	It is necessary that you make the patient sit on a raised seat, then put the testicles up using a sling under your hands,
a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	Take all the parts near to the penis, and guide the surgeon's hand, and spread them out neatly.
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert,	Then cut deeply with the knife across the vessels, as long as they are exposed.
et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	and then burn from each side, just like we have said in the extraction of arteries which are in the temples;
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait .i. fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	then put an awl where there is one with a double thread, and tie it to the first bone where the pin came out, and tie it straight away to the other end.
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	then cut straight through in the middle, according to the length of the body, and remove the corrupted humors;
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	Then treat the wound like the others or by bandaging it up, so that no blood flows when any of the intestines are being sewn back in.
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	because this does not bring any harm, and if all the blood vessels are involved, then you should drain out all the intestines from all the blood vessels.
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	so that the patient does not lose its contents due to cutting of the vessels, and they dry out and cannot be revived.
de la routure dou syfac	from the rupture of the uterus
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	Events of this rash are due to the section that comes from bleeding or stretching on the abdomen in the area of the glands, because the intestines descend through that breach into one of the kidneys;
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces .ij. manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	And this rupture is from bleeding or stretching, and these two ways of animal cause arise: from impact, or jump, or roar, or lifting a loaded pack, and by similar matters.
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	And the signs when it is from stretching at bleeding are that they happen little by little over a long time, and do not come suddenly.
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	And the abscesses are equal until around the waist, because bleeding accelerates the intestines.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the symptoms are when it's about internal bleeding, she brings on a sudden sharp pain at the beginning, and various abscesses appear, near the skin, and this is due to the discharge of the intestine and the body outside the site of bleeding.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And the glands often descend with the intestine, and are retained within, causing great suffering to the patient when pressed, even if they're close by.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these iron treatments for fear, it's necessary to avoid them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	And the way of this treatment is that you command or instruct the patient to guide or direct their intestine into the wound with their hand from within, if it can be inserted.
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	Then surround his neck with your hands and lift up his legs;
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	then stretch him out above, and cut all the skin around the genital area as long as necessary;
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	then cut across the belly's width according to your skill in opening wounds, and do it so that he can pass through;
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	then scrape the scrotum until all the white testicle is uncovered from all sides;
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac,	Then place your thumb index in the one that marks the heart, in the one between the white yolk which is under the egg skin, and between the second yolk.
et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	And remove the one that is behind the egg, and between the second yolk; then move to the right hand inside the cavity of the ovaries, and place the white yolk above your left hand, and lift the egg towards all the yolks towards the waist.
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	And instruct the assistant to extend the egg upwards, and free the one that is behind the connection point.
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	And check with your thumbs if there is any wrapped intestine or hard white yolk, and if you find nothing, remove it from the belly upwards.
puis pren une aguille ou il ait .i. gros fil fait de .x. filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait .iiij. filz;	Then take a needle with a thread of .i. thickness made from .x. threads, and cut it behind the testicles where the skin is thin; after this operation, then remove the testicles that appear through the threads, as many as there are .iiij. threads;
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de .ij. pars;	Then join them one on top of the other in a manner of a cross, and tie the testicles together, as we said it's underneath the skin of the testicles with a strong thread of .ij. parts;
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de .ij. pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	Then wrap the testicles with threads, and tie them tightly in two parts so that none of the seeds that they carry can enter into it, preventing an abscess from forming.
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc .ij. dois de celui, et aprés ces .ij. liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	And make the stitch directly across the first long line of two inches in length from this. After these two lines leave a space equal to one-third of this length below on the right side of the knee's crease, which is about an inch wide;
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	And after everything else according to the roundness that he wore; then cut in the area where the skin of the buttocks is, as long as it can be done without damage and bruising, just like we said before.
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	Then apply moist wool in oil, and place it on the wounds, and bind it with the stitch that we have mentioned.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And afterwards, cauterize the white fold as we have said after incision, due to concern about blood escape.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	For this happens many times, and let the bandage on until it bleeds from him; and if he delays in bleeding, then be raised with hot water, and place upon him what we have said, until he bleeds.
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	then treat the wound with other remedies, until it heals perfectly.
de hernie carnouse	of fatty hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this branch, I never see anyone who dares to do the iron treatment.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	And the old ones said it is done like a branch that is assembled in a vine, in such a way that you bind the vessels, after cutting them lightly over the arteries;
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then proceed with me, and treat the abscess of him who works, until the vessels bleed; and treat it in the way that we have said, until he is well.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	No breach occurs in anger, as we have said, and open the limbs; and do not let any of the intestines come out at all, and if they do come out a little, it's okay, and fix them every hour;
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	And yet if it stays too long at this point, then suspect a wound or pus formation, as the intestines descend;
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	And this happens through the widening due to pus which is in the joints, just like what we have said, because it's extended, then it gets softened and swelled up the limbs and opens;
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	And the treatment is done using cauterization, as we have previously mentioned; and there are no times when it's treated with iron in this way:
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de .iij. dois;	And indeed, when the patient lies prone on their back between your hands, then grasp the place of the inflamed wound across as wide as two fists;
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	And then remove the fat that is under the skin where it follows, take the edge and place it into the exposed area of the fat.
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les .ij. leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	And press it forward to the belly side, then sew the two visible edges of the fat onto the surface of the skin near the fat, and stitch both of them.
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	Then remove the skin of the fat, do not cover it with the fat or extend the egg or any other substance, as I have told you about in the treatment of removing bile from the intestines;
puis le cure par la cure des plaies. Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Then he heals by treating wounds. And when you cut the children (infants), if you cleanse and treat the wound, until it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The syphon (a surgical tool) must be constrained and has no visible mark in the incision, and the cautery is heated at this location, closer to the recovery.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	from softening of the skin around the anus
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the skin around the anus becomes soft in some men, because what's inside has become softened and can be seen; it is necessary when you want to treat it that you make the patient feel relieved on their back, then cut away the softened skin from the natural skin. Next, join the two buttocks at a seam, and if desired, stitch the excess of the softened skin with three or four stitches firmly. Then cut between the seams, and treat this wound as any other until it heals, and remove the stitches when it's healed, and let it heal completely.
dou chastrement	Of discipline
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes. Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc .ij. manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.  En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.  Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a .i. cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Know that chastremens are proscribed in our law, and because of this, I would prefer not to discuss them in this book; they are necessary only for two reasons: one is that you must be able to respond when asked about the application of chastremens and how to treat afterwards; and the other is because we often have need to use chastremens on animals to assist us, such as sheep and goats and cattle and others. I say then that chastremens are executed according to two methods: either through attraction or by making a cut.
des hermofrodites	Of Hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc .ij. manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les .ij. coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.  Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et .ij. coions.  Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	Hermaphroditism occurs in two ways: one way is that between the two openings are open similarly to a woman's figure, or it has hair, and sometimes contains urine. And the other manner is in women, with one on the wrist resembling a penis and two openings.  And the treatment for this involves tying all the connected parts together, treating them like any other wounds; in the second way, for men whose urine jumps through the skin of their openings, there's no need to treat it.
de la tentigene	from the cheek area
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure. Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee». Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Tentigene is a connected part on the natural body, so long as it's too ugly to see; and some women have it as large as a hand, and this needs treatment. It is necessary that you color the excess of tentigene with your fingers or nail clippers, and remove it lightly; do not go too far in cutting, lest blood flow, then treat it again until it heals; and there's another kind that emerges from the mouth of the marriage bed, and the penis, and by chance jumps out, resembling a cow, hence they called this old ailment "cow disease". It must be treated as we have described for tentigene, and treated until healed.
de erratique	Of cautery by fire command to the sickman to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile. Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait. S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as .ij. leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes .ij. dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les .ij. leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder. Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte. Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.  Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez. Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	Erratic is if the nature of the woman is not discovered or understood, or if certain parts are small; it can be due to her natural state at birth or as an accident caused by illness that has come upon her. It could also be due to being stuck together by a union, or by an obstruction, either fine or coarse, and is performed under the heart, in the ribs, in the back, or anywhere else; and you should understand how it occurs during conception, childbirth, or by chance leading to flower-bearing; understanding this comes from observing the symptoms. If the injuries are close and obvious, they can be felt with your fingers or on your side. If it's an obstruction caused by a finer substance, and if they are close to the two lungs, hurry them like this: place your two fingertips together, and have the woman lie on her back, spreading her legs; then form the two lungs until they cover the finer substance and overlie the injuries; then take the wool, oil it, and place it on the area, having the woman rest every day, so that she can't bond. And if this obstruction is hard and coarse, you should use a stick resembling an ivy leaf under the skin. If these injuries are from birth, lift them with your thumb and index finger; and apply stoppers to bleeding substances such as wormwood, dragon's blood, incense, mixed in abundance with eggs; then place a large piece of poplar bark so that the wound cannot bond; and do this for a long time, then cover it with a linen tent; then continue other treatments until healing. And when there is birth from the womb, if you have to apply according to this manner, where there are abscesses in the womb, they must not be touched by fire.
des emorroides	Regarding piles (hemorrhoids).
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation. Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer. Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer. Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai .i. emplaustre sus son dos. Et se il estainche, c’est boin. Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.  Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a .i. chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Cutting wounds are incisions in veins which require skillful execution and care, especially when they have aged leading to a condition called thrombosis. We've discussed these in detail during our division of sections on them, their symptoms and signs; now we will talk about those suitable for treatment. I state that the cutting wounds and thrombosis become evident when they are inside the uterus, not by touch, but through iron cure if needed. The ones which can be felt near the mouth of the uterus are what you can treat. Thus, it must be that one puts the woman in a cold house; then, set the thrombus on forceps, and extract with the roots of the uterus, afterwards sprinkle with medicine to restrict blood flow such as acacia, dragon's blood, and incense among similar things; next, place her feet in cold water for an hour, then put her into icy cold water. If blood excretions continue, you should make her rest in a decoction made from sumac, peel of pomegranate rinds, galls and other similar things; afterwards prepare corn flour with honey and garlic and make two poultices on her back. And if it stops bleeding, that is good. If this does not happen, apply suction cups to her back and nipples without using iron tools; then take wool and mix it with sap of plantain or from elderberry in aged wine, and let that burn onto the body.
des apostemes de la marris	The contents of the uterus
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division. Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.  Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege, et ait .ij. petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument. Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés .ij. jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.  Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	Various types of abscess arise in the uterus, such as gangrene, puerperal abscess, herpes, cystitis and fistulas, piles and hemorrhoids, and other diseases I've discussed during our division. Therefore, it's necessary for me to explain here about the self-healing process that takes place inside the uterus. If you have knowledge about iron work, observe whether the abscess is inflamed at the beginning of its development or not, full of heat and fever; if it turns red, you can see this change occur.
de l’enfantement	During childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment. Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	Craft is first in the dance when she knows the form of natural childbirth, and these signs appear when you see a woman rush to deliver, and desire to smell it: then the child急于 to come forth; know that this birth follows its natural form, and occurs through his head, and the second stage with him; and when you see these signs, it is necessary to gently press her belly, so that the child comes forth quickly; for when it descends from his head, the second stage comes with him, and his excesses are cleansed by good delivery; any other way of birth does not occur naturally. For it occurs only on its feet, and comes forcefully through the body or the shoulder, and hands, or it comes to her belly, or stomach, and is turned unexpectedly from his neck, and by other evil forms; there must be wisdom and subtlety in this for those who dance, and beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the forms on how they should assist.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	When the child comes from his head by natural exit, and the woman is in severe labor, and her strength is weak, then make her sit on a stool, or women hold her; and let her drink out of what is cooked from fenugreek, and then have the midwife place between her fingers the small spatula described below:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.Et se les .ij. mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus .i. siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And cut the second one, and scrape until the moisture inside is gone; and pull out the womb of the woman as long as the fetus descends; if it doesn't descend, you should give a castor oil enema to the woman with fenugreek seed oil; then have her drink and snort camphor, hold her mouth and nose for an hour: if the child comes out now. And if the two hands come out forcefully, you must gently pull them little by little; and if they can't enter, put the woman on a stool, and lift her feet up high; then take off the stool from the ground, cut underneath the woman to prevent urination during childbirth; and if her hands can't enter, and the child dies, then grab her hands with the knife placed here before, extract the baby, and pull equally.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piez	from the delivery of the child on its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	When the child comes down on its feet, it's necessary to lift it up.
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	and then turn a little bit by little bit, until they are even;
puis preigne .i. des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	then take one of the joints and extend it a little bit by little bit.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	Can't he jump up to his thighs, if commanded, and let himself be exhorted with consideration;
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	if he could jump, may God will it.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it is not as we have said, if you gently turn it bit by bit, until it is according to the natural figure.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	And then it should be done lightly.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons dit, si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en .i. mortier;	And if it does not come out as we said, take a mixture of honey and saffron oil, and gum resin, and melted gum, and grind all in one mortar;
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement,	and apply this ointment inside the woman's body and outwardly as well.
puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	then make her lie in cold water until under the ribs;
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai .i. coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	and when she is moistened throughout, give her one spoonful of myrrh, and put it in, and leave it for an hour;
puis la fai seoir sus .i. siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	then make her sit on a stool, then have her sneeze and hold her mouth and nose, and gently press her abdomen, for the fetus is jumping now.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	from the issue of the child at its knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	When a fetus comes in this form, if one puts their hands gently and gradually;
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor .i. lit;	then support it at its neck, and let its buttocks hang down below, and stand by on the bed;
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	and fold its hands gently and gradually, then hold its hands near the belly, and lift up its knees until she is ready for delivery below;
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	and if the fetus jumps, take its feet and push forcefully, then move its head upwards on the belly, then thrust your hands;
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	And let the child grow slowly; instruct the woman to bear the pain until the child is born.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	from the birth of the child which comes with one hand wide open
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	It's necessary to engineer a way to bring back the hand:
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	If one cannot bring it back, then lift the woman and walk her around;
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus .i. lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	If she cannot walk, make her lie on a bed, and lift her legs into position;
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	then follow the massage that I have described;
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus .i. siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	and if she does not give birth, make her sit on a chair, then try to bring back the hand;
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	and guide the baby according to its natural position, and make her sneeze, and instruct her to push until the child comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	From the birth of the child on its neck, and it spreads its hands, and its face turned towards the back of its mother's.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	It is necessary that you scratch his hand, then turn it little by little, and gently stroke it;
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	And when they are even, place them on the natural muscle movement of the arm and oil, just as we have said, then you should command that it moves little by little;
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus .i. siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	And once you have done this, make her sit on a chair and command that she pray; and make her sneeze.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	In this same manner for all the second part
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	When it comes to handling it in this way for all the second part, if the second part reaches up to your finger's nail, as long as the moisture is drained;
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	And if it extends up to its face and neck, when you cut through the throat, ensure that it is not held back, and let the child die;
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	Then pull out the child inside, as long as you place it correctly and according to what is necessary, command the woman not to try again once:
adonques si istra legierement.	Therefore, if you treat it lightly.
de l’issue des gemelz	from the issues of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes three or even four; this is not an uncommon thing, it just happens.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	Two are exceptional things, and do not live long, if they occur at all.
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	I know these, they are multiplied, and are removed by the fire that devises them, which is bound to the blood;
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	And let them also come out naturally like all of us below, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	And if they come out painfully, if the treatment is as we have said, and let the delicate parts take care of it, and do what she does quickly and gently.
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And do so as it benefits for health.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou .iiij. ou .v. ou .vj. ou .vij., ou plusors jusc’a .xv., et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious,	They are made in marriage once or twice, three times, four times, five times, six times, seven times, eight times, and so on up to fifteen times, and they are all formed like a child by the measurement of their stature.
et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	and it is necessary that the boy knows all this, for perhaps such a thing has happened to him;
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	If done according to what is necessary.
de l’enfant mort	Of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	When you treat the woman who has lost her dead child or is miscarried, as I have explained in the division, and if it does not come out, and you are forced to operate by hands;
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	It is necessary that you know if the woman has good health and did not have any accidents or fear of death;
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	It is necessary for the woman to lie on her back, and have her shoulders turned towards the head, and the legs lifted;
et li ministre la teigne de .ij. pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	and the minister applies a hot ironrod of two parts, or that she be bound to the bed so that it does not descend with the birth of the child;
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	then rub the wife's mouth with moist olive oil and almond extract mixed with fennel seeds and flaxseed; then smear her hands with these oils and spices;
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere .i. leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu,	then support the wife lightly, then let her lie for an hour until she can bear to hold herself up,
et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	and take care so the child is properly prepared before it descends onto its head;
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez,	if the hair is stuck in its eyes or around its neck or mouth or on its palate or under the chin or at the throat or near the sides,
et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	and if it descends onto bones, it should be poked or gripped and its middle ribs should be targeted;
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	and it is fitting for you to hold the hair with your right hand and place the bend between the fingers of your left hand, and he should apply force gently with all his hand, and insert the hair into none of those places that we have mentioned until it reaches the hollow part;
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	And this is the shape of the shinbone:
puis fiche encontre .i. autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	then match up another shinbone, or the third if you need to, so that the extractions are equal;
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	and then make sure they move equally on both sides, so the bones can fit together properly, and ensure that the shinbones have their teeth to hold in place as this is how it should look:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	And if there remains a part of it, and covers some of his fingers with it, and place them in that part, and drag the other part.
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if there's no remaining part, place this incision or higher up on the body, and do this until everything comes out completely.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement,	And if one hand comes before the other, and it cannot be brought back due to being restrained,
si covient que tu envoloupes sus .i. drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	And you should cover with a piece of cloth as large as two arms until it comes out completely;
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as .ij. piés.	Then apply the treatment at the connection of the foot or at the cut, and similarly you should do on the other hand, and for two feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee,	And if the head of the child is large and it is compressed at the exit, or if it has an overly sharp assembly,
si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	then you must press the spiked sack between your fingers, and make the head and extract the sharp one;
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	or you will have it with the instrument called 'almidach', from which its form comes with the instruments or chapter after this one;
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	and in this way make the child's head naturally large.
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles,	and then extract the bones with force using tongs,
et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	and if the joint pops and it is held by force, if it breaks, as long as there's moisture or worse inside it;
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	and if it can't come out, cut it piece by piece according to what you can.
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	and if it is swollen in the abdomen or around the ribs, it must be that you pierce it as long as there's moisture flowing.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the child is on its feet, there's a slight pull, and the connection to the mouth of the umbilical cord is also slight.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a .i. drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	And if it's in the belly or the breast, you should extract it at about one-and-a-half to two folds wrapped around your hand;
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	and keep the belly or the breast moist until all moisture is gone.
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure,	And if another bone is broken and the head of the shoulder stays in place,
si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	if you need to burn her hand at the palm with a hot iron,
puis i boute .i. oncine ou ij., et le trai fuer;	then I apply the hot metal for one, or three times, and force it;
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier,	and if the mouth of the wound is constricted by an abscess that came there, then it should not be cleaned out,
ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	instead, it is necessary to apply wet and greasy substances;
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	And he applies plastering, and then uses it in water that is softening and moistening.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	And if the child is on its side, you can place it evenly, if you apply what we have said in the case of live infants;
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if one cannot do so, let him treat it piece by piece, and leave nothing of the remainder.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	And when you have done this, apply what we have said about treating abscesses that come in the middle;
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And when bleeding occurs, then it is placed in water for restriction, and other treatments are administered to him.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman who had borne an offspring that was dead, and then another one on him, and he revived the other.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, an abscess came in his belly, and it swelled so much that he opened up, and began to have severe pain.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was summoned for the treatment, and I thought for a long time, and could not accommodate the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I place under a strong attraction, and out comes one bone, and after some days another.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was greatly amazed, for this stomach has no bone.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em miglior point;	I sought to heal the wound, and with my hands I found bones, until the woman was in better condition;
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	And caress the woman long and thus, and thereby obtain a little blood from her.
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	And I have only recorded this chapter for when a master finds an unfamiliar thing, so that he may know how to provide aid.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to bring the shoulder back to its place.
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	Next comes the method of the pressure, which is described in the books; and at two turns for each of the four limbs.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	Always, let the horns be more subtle than a reed's, and made of ebony or boxwood;
et soit li bouche dou fust .i. doi de large, et li marge des arbres .i. doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	and let the mouth of the furnace be two inches wide, and the edge of the trees should be one inch, and in length half a palm;
et enmi les .ij. liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	and in between the two beams, let there be two joints of this same furnace, which should be firmly joined on both sides, about half a palm or slightly more in length;
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les .ij. cornes.	and these two joints are fastened into the opening of the furnace so that when one turns the two horns, they can open.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	Another form, with greater subtlety and lightness, may be made of ebony or boxwood, according to the resemblance of the forceps;
et ait as .ij. chiés .ij. ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et .ij. dois de large;	and has four prongs, as you see, as long as one palm and two fingers wide;
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor .i. lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes,	and when you see the cervix opening to its entirety on all the instrument, make the woman lie down on one bed, with her feet hanging and her legs spread open,
puis boute les .ij. ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	then insert the two prongs together into the cervix, and hold the handle of the instrument under her buttocks;
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Then use your hand on all the instrument, just like you did with the equal forceps, according to the amount that you see opening the mouth of the furnace, until the coal does what it wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	All the instruments are fully mounted and multiplied in semblance; and when you have them arranged, then your work is faster, and your movements higher according to their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	Do not hesitate with the instrument until you have arranged it, for its necessity is not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	When the second stage of labor is being retained during birth, it's necessary that you instruct the patient to hold back her urine, and then have her breathe through the nose with the aid of exhalation. Place your hands on her mouth and nose afterwards;
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	And if it jumps over this, it goes well.
Se ceu non, si prent .i. pot, et fai .i. pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	If not, take one pot and make one plug or cover, then put in herbs that can open the mouth of the marrow, such as calamus, rue, anise, chamomile, citrus leaves and mint;
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris,	All these herbs, or any of them, should be cooked or steeped in water on the fire; then put a reed or plug from inside the pot, and place another piece at the mouth of the marrow,
et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	And let the steam go inside the marrow until its vapors start to come out; then make it sneeze as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If it jumps the second knee quickly.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature,	And if it remains after this treatment, and is not strong, so instruct the patient to moisten her left hand with poppy oil or rosemary ointment, and then use the bottle in its natural state,
et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	And when she finds the second one; and once she has found it, if she catches and extends it slowly and straight, so that the husband does not feel during extraction;
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	But it must be moved gently to the right and to the left, and then pull; if it will come out and relieve.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	And if the mouth of the patient is bleeding from marosis, as we have said, the treatment involves coughing therapy and herb fumigation;
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	and if it does not follow all that we have said, then be careful not to touch the wound unnecessarily;
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	but it is necessary that the person at the mouth of the wound should be tied to the woman's thigh, then apply ointment from the four remedies enemas.
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	if it heals and there's no smell; but still, if an unpleasant smell reaches the stomach and head and irritates the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	Then it is necessary to use suitable fumigations for this: none of the old have proven effective fumigation with watercress and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the tool used to fume the woman during the retention of flowers and the afterbirth is this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	And it resembles a cane in appearance, and one places its subtle head into the fire, and its ends wide above the flame.
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And let there be fumigations over the coals, and the fumigation until it is exhausted, and then start another one.
de percier lou fondement	of piercing the base
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	Many infants are born who do not have their base pierced, but rather their understanding is stupefied by a subtle sickness.
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	So it is necessary for the child to pierce that sickness according to its nature, and do not pierce her with sharp metal tools, and guard the incision so that she does not touch it;
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then apply a wetted linen in wine and oil, then the application of the ointment until he is well.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt it will not resurface, then place or insert a tallow stick and leave it in for several days, and remove it when the child wishes to go indoors.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And it is important that this sudden occurrence of wound or abscess rupture does not happen; if you need to handle this suddenly, then follow the treatment we have mentioned about the tallow stick.
de la fistule dou fondement	from the fistula near the foundation
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des .ij. parties,	Fistulas coming from near the foundation are congealed and grow larger than those that come from further down or within the space of two parts.
si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe,	If there is a fistula or more than one; and when this lump is old, it may operate, and often produces moisture that appears white or thin.
et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	And these fistulas are always present; and they can be identified when there is discharge or gustation during the patient's release, and by chance in their movement towards one side.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if there are fistulas that penetrate up to the bladder, and up to half of the penis; and they reach up to the ankle joint, and up to the root of the testicles.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	And thus one can recognize a persistent fistula at its origin, and not persistent:
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And it is that you bend your little finger or base, and insert a subtle needle of spider or iron into the fistula when there is no curvature.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou .i. poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	And if it has curvature, if you insert a subtle tentacle, or .i. horse hair, until you feel the tentacle or hair at your index finger;
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	and if you do not feel it, and there is no full evacuation nor suction nor worm, as we have said:
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	you'll know that she isn't puncturing; so hasten to cure.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula extends up to the bladder or up to where urine is conducted, if it causes urination and cannot be sealed by medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	And if it penetrates up to the joint of the leg, there is a vein coming up to its head;
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	If there is no twisting and the pain is contained internally, then it can be considered as being in a state of inflammation, and it does not respond to medicine or binding with a salve;
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	And for these internal fistulas, there is no effective treatment other than labor and the vain efforts of those who interfere.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit,	In cases neither Persian nor ancient, there's hope for healing through iron, as I've experienced.
et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	And when the patient lies with their back under your hands; and you lift their legs up to their hips, and incline their hips towards their stomach;
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	Then apply a spider's leg, or a toad if there are twists, until you know where the remedy comes from.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice,	If the patient feels it under the foundation, then you should press your index finger there,
se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	You then sense that the tool has pierced it; and if revealed you feel between your fingers or flesh, then know that it is a long way in.
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If there's no disturbance, one cannot heal it.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	One can still hope to treat many others, but such occurrences are few;
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	And when helping someone, if you warm the delicate cautery according to the size of the cyst, as was previously said;
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu .ij. fois ou .iij., tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	And heat it completely in the fistula until it emerges from the base; and perform this twice or three times, until you know that these burnt spots resemble a bird's feather.
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	And then heat the wet wicks with butter until that burnt spot comes out, then apply ointment to stick and fuse it.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien. Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	If it is done correctly, that's fine. Otherwise, it cannot be properly cured;
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	And if the attempt is made inside, and it doesn't pierce until the proper foundation or base, and you have an ample covering of tissue or wax between your hand and the tent, and you can see the hole where the covering meets clean;
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	If you start with removing the contents of the abscess, then place a wick inside before setting it alight, and afterwards apply the cautery until it reaches the top of the wick.
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	Then release the pus, and drain it; subsequently remove those charred parts that look like a bird's feather, ensuring none remain.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the wound doesn't heal, and cuts you instead of flesh, then apply a fire or an ointment to it.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble .ij. bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	For fire cautery combines two things: these are to know, the burning of those joined parts, and the bleeding off of blood and the drying out of moisture;
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	Then when treating wet limbs with greases or ground substances, as long as the limb's oil flows, and smoke escapes from the fire;
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	Then treat the wound with fast-setting sooty applications, and use dry medicines.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, if it heals properly and does not recur.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes just up to the full depth of the wound bed, and is far from the body, you should fill it with your own finger or its depth, and check this.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre .ij. est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des .iii. manieres:	If you feel the urge and there's between two it's mesh or fat or muscle, or it is almost piercing, should only have left a path of faith and hope, through administering one of three ways:
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	or you cauterize it as we have said, or you operate until the bottom, or if you can withstand the urge then place a stitch and use a cure as first;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	and don't go too far in the operation, that you don't cut through the foundation and let the evacuations come out involuntarily;
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	then suture it, as we have said;
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	If by chance it's well, or you remove that covering and cleanse it since it has been peeled from beneath the foundation, or through trial or with another instrument aimed at it;
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	then cut away that flesh which is in the wound as much as you can;
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	then endeavor to heal the wound and keep open the incision in the lower part of the foundation: if it is easier for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus,	And always make incisions in this manner: and when you open the tent in the incision, and it is on or near the base beneath the skin above,
si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	if you take a tent piercing through the head like this:
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And attach one and a half twined threads, and insert the tent into the entire length of the thread in the duct until it reaches the head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	If it is straight down from the edge towards the foundation inside, then extract the thread from that one, as you would bend your finger or foundation;
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les .ij. chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse .i. jor ou .ij.;	and pull the head of the thread, and join the two heads together, and tie one to the other, and let it hang one or two inches;
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	And hold it no time, until the threads have woven these cords that are between two, and stick together;
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	Then treat the wound until it is healed and clean.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not burst, make it burst in all possible ways that you can, as long as it is not too far apart.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not suitable to sew it up when the wound is too deep and then treat it as we have said, until it heals.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	The shape of the spike form which we make the fistula is much and of one kind, being cut;
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	And on another side not, for that which we should not do as well as which we should not refrain from doing, as you see here:
des emorroydes	From the arrows.
Emorrydes sont selonc ij. manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc,	Wounds occur in two ways: or they are within the tissue, like bits of tar, and if there are small and large ones, and internally they cause blood loss,
et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor,	And if there is one or more of them, they are removed from the base and to the root of the head; but those that are removed have little moisture,
et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	and in addition or a bit of yellow water or a bit of blood, and they have the color of flesh.
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	And the treatment for those who have them within the base, you instruct the patient to spread it outward through chambers as long as the foundations give forth and the threads become visible.
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	If you are in hurry, then pinch it with tweezers or hold it with your nail, then remove it from its roots.
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a .i. drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	And if they can't hold their nails because of the moisture, then take them at one point of the nail, or on cotton, or with a piece of leather;
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	and pull them out with your fingers, then press and sprinkle some hot powders that are used for the cautery on them;
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, puis les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	or you cauterize them as it is said or in the chapter of cautery, then treat them with other treatments until they heal.
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	and if the foundations cannot come out, then cauterize the patient with a caustic that burns and is harsh to wash what is in or around the foundation, so that it might come out freely;
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	The patient's body fails to heal, and if their blood vessels are strong at their base, so is the treatment light;
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	And when you take them with your nail or forceps, and cut them, then treat them just as we have said, while they are clean, and fear the incision by metal.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren .i. fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les .ij. chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille,	It is necessary that you suture in this manner: take a single twisted thread and insert it into a needle, then pull the thread from above and make the needle pierce through from the other side, and twist the two ends of the thread around the needle.
et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse .i. por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	And if it's wide enough; and tighten the thread properly, then knot the thread, and remove the needle, and do so with all others, and leave one for removing excess blood;
puis met sus le fondement .i. drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	Then place on the foundation .1. greasy cloth in oil rose or in wadding, and place on the foundation, and instruct the patient to rest;
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then leave him until he has cooled down, and when they have settled, if you treat with ointment and other treatments, until he is healed.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	this means "by drying out or the ground" in modern English. The sentence seems to be part of instructions on how to dry something or set it on a foundation.
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times, there was the drying effect of earth in the intestines, and by the body's natural condition, and when the illness is old and medicine no longer works.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	If it is necessary for you to reset at the tip of a spur or at your nail above the skin, which does not allow it to get wet;
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	then treat it until it becomes firm just as it should;
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	and if it cannot become firm, then start the scraping again with more strength than before, until it heals and becomes scraped;
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat it until it is healed.
dou fremit	When the fire cautery instructs the patient to let their hairs grow long and even; if they prick at their base, hold steady until they fully grow.
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	Antelopes are small, fleeting forms before the body, and they go many ways.
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	And whenever the vein hardens, and one feels it as a death tremor, and it is sensed throughout the body, and more in the hands than elsewhere.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	And the treatment involves taking a stick made from a goose feather or a strong vulture feather, and placing that stick on the tremor until the purple circles eliminate the tremor completely.
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	Then turn your hand to all the cane until you grasp it completely by its quiver and put it in place, and root out the quiver from its source.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see this, do as with an arrow or iron in the shape shown, and make it both slender from beneath and piercing above:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	nor allow it to pierce, as you will hold with both hands and press firmly. And if you see this, cauterize the quiver, just like it was demonstrated in the chapter on cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	of the shape of the bladder
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	No single time is there use of silver or lead needles, or melted spiders; and no time are these small and large tools made, according to their intended use.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Therefore, when it comes to treating infants and those who are weak and in pain, they need small ones.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The shape of the small and large needles is made as follows, or when binding the abdomen according to this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez .ij. pertus, et en l’autre .i.;	and there should be an opening so that the abdomen can be bound in this manner, as you see, and the head is pierced within; and have one side with two points, and on the other side one point.
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus,	And for the belly, place the medications from a beast's bladder or parchment, and pierce it entirely through many small holes,
et ait entre chescun pertus .i. doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus .i. fil fort de fil crut tort en .x. ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	And place exactly one inch of space between each hole, then insert a strong thread made from woven linen fiber into these holes, either ten inches long or to the edge of the belly, and sew up the belly as you would stitch a goat.
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	And once the medicine is inside, seal it with a strong thread in front of the tool, then proceed to embalm. This forms the shape of a circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	And ensure the medicine is neither too hot nor too cold, smear the embalming area with oil or yolk of egg ointment, or something similar, then apply it gently;
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses .ij. mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit,	Then the surgeon directs his two hands together, until both are fully stretched out, then removes the gallbladder, and lifts up the patient's legs to the chest.
et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And if the medicine is seen to come out, let it escape as much as possible; and if he sleeps through a whole night, that's when you'll see more significant improvement.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you administer it during a condition of belly obstruction, and the medicine begins to come out quickly, then continue until it's relieved.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por .i. enfant;	And if there is bleeding from the anus or its base, or an abscess, then use a cathartic as subtle as for one child;
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And this is the form of a subtle lump under which the skin may be constricted:
des plaies	of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have spoken about the treatment of wounds in our previous sections; now we will discuss the treatments for hands and medicine according to their development.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are various depending on how they were made, and where they were made on the body, and for what reason they were made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	The things through which wounds are made are by dint of stone, and size of sword and knife, or spear or staff or axe, or similar things;
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	or those that are made according to the bones of the body, such as a wound that hits the neck, or the head, or the chest, or the abdomen, or the liver, and similar members;
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	and I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and start with wounds of the simple head, because the memory will come to its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans,	I say that when a simple wound comes or affects the head, and if no bone is broken, take care whether it's caused by stone or similar things, and the skin remains somewhat torn and the wound is large,
et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	And if you slightly doubt the abscess: if there is a slight amount of bleeding from the wound immediately after the operation on the cephalic part, then treat it as healthy in that area. Otherwise, treat the opposite side of the affected part instead.
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	And let the patients be full of wine and rich meats.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	And if they do not want to be treated, then reduce their food intake, and do not give them wine nor meat.
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	And over the wound, if abscesses are there, place a moistened cotton in oil rose water only, or in restorative wine.
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	And if there is no abscess, place it on the wound, if it's fresh with all its blood, and isn't disturbed by the air, powder, that I will mention later;
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it has been burnt, place some remedies on it, as long as it remains intact.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large like that of a sword cut and similar injuries, and the edges cannot be brought together with stitches, then bring them together by suture, as I will explain for wounds of the abdomen, through sewing.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir,	If the wound exposes the bone and is deep, retaining only a little, if you cut it; then treat the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh instead of skin.
et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	And instruct the patient to consume large meats, such as testicles and cooked wheat, as well as chickens and similar items.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	And if you find or smell decayed flesh, and it does not reach the bone, then cut out everything decaying, remove the pus, then treat;
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	And if it has an artery in the wound or vein, which cannot be stopped by medicine, then cut out the artery, and if you find it dislocated, tie it with a thread;
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if this doesn't help at all, then apply the cautery.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, the treatment is light: and you should apply this powder that heals in such a way that the heat of fire brings it to completion.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon .ij. parties; chalz vive .iij. parties, et le poudre subtilment,	And the method of the powder is as follows: take one part of incense; blood from a dragon .ii parts; living charcoal .iii parts, and finely powdered,
et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	And apply the wound with it, and press firmly until it dries well and joins with all its blood;
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And bind it properly, leaving it without letting it loosen, if it doesn't swell; for the medicine is not removed until it heals.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And always this is done with the charcoal alone, when one does not have the incense nor the blood of dragon, but when the art has healed the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	And if the art (healing) has healed the wound, in that case, do not add this powder either.
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	but apply some easily digestible ointments, or oat flour made with water and honey, until the wound discharges pus;
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then continue other treatments until it heals properly.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	And if bone breakage comes with the wound, and it is small, then treat it with fine needles;
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	and I will tell you about the breaks in the head later.
de la plaie dou col	from the wound around the neck.
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	This injury occurs in or around the neck; if it is simple, there should be no distinction between this and that around the head, but if a nerve in the neck or an artery has been cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	If it's in the nose, if there is no other remedy than to allow treatment, and not to put any restraining thing, because it harms the nose and makes it recede;
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	and do not place anything cold on the wound, because the nature of bones is cold, and the circulation of veins is with the brain, which is the highest part of members;
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce,	but use warm medicine instead, such as rose water mixed with sweet oil, and the cabbage leaves also washed in sweet water,
et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	and other earth medicines in this manner, and moist applications.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, then sew it with bends, until it heals properly.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	And if the wounds are deep and there's hair and full of blood, then puncture or even lower down.
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	And if the artery is cut, and bleeding ensues, then uncover it, and order, and apply the cautery as needed;
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va,	And if the throat ligament is cut, or the cartilage, or the duct through which the food passes, guard them by keeping them in place;
si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	If you apply the knife on the base of the throat, and don't touch the throat but reset it according to its natural shape;
et puis l’estrain avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then set the protrusion, and let it alone for some days, then treat with dry poultices until it heals;
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	and if there is an impression in the bone due to the wound, treat accordingly.
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse,	and if there are bone fragments, you should remove them if possible, and leave those that you cannot remove until the wound heals.
et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	And let it be relieved and healed by this measure;
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	and if the wound is fresh, apply the powder I have mentioned.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone in the wound and it has a fistula, treat it as described in my chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	from the wound of a spear or a knife
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	If it's a spearhead or knife wound and the injury is deep, if you observe that wind can escape from the wound without causing pain to the patient: then know that the wound is fatal.
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont,	And if it is not deep, and all the blood flows freely from it, if you don't apply powder to it at first hour or bind it with a cloth due to bleeding, then know that the wound will heal.
et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	And heal in the heart, let the patient rest;
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie .ij. fois le jor;	but apply an attractive ointment, and bind it twice a day;
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor,	And if you don't have ointment, put old cotton into the wound to absorb the moisture.
et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie .iij. jors, ou .iiij., ou plusors;	Make the patient rest on the wound for 3 days, or 4, or more;
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’es traingnemens d’alainne;	If no convulsions occur, nor severe heart tremors, nor uncontrolled movements;
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	And when you see the good signs, if you realize that the wound is saved or healed.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Treat with other remedies as well until it is healed;
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	And if it cannot heal or work properly, know that there will be a fistula; treat it accordingly.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	And if the wound is from a sword or knife incision, and it's simple or worse, or on the back, treat according to what the one in front of you would do;
s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	And if it's large, stitch it up; and if it's small, use powder; and if it's deep in the bone or with fragments inside, clean the wound and remove any foreign objects;
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	And if they are not drained, let the wound fester, favoring ease of extractions;
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And concerning other wounds and other limbs, our judgments are as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	From the protrusion of the belly
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	The protrusions of the belly are large, medium-sized, and small;
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	From a major wound there escapes once or twice the intestines, or from the entrails of the intestines, causing their intrusion by this means.
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans,	And sewing is more difficult, and no time is worse than with a small wound compared to a large one,
por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	because when we put the intestines back in, if we don't do it gradually;
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes,	since the intestines swell up as soon as they feel cold, so they cannot be put back all at once;
et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres .ij.	And because of this, it's necessary to examine the incision, for in this way one moves the intestines to their place that are others.
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc .iiij. manieres:	Know that the rupture of the belly occurs according to four ways:
les .ij. costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre,	the two common stitches occur at the abdominal seam,
et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et .ij. autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	and the other stitch for wounds in the body and two other specific stitches are common to other injuries;
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	And yet they are more accurate with the sewing on of the belly, and I shall say each one separately and explain them.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer,	I say that when the wound is small, and nothing from the intestine sticks out,
et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des .ij. manieres:	and if it's a matter of securing things, this can be done through one of two ways:
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit,	or because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said,
ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	because the intestines are swollen due to cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	And when he is cold, warm him in this manner:
moillie une esponge ou .i. mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement,	moisten a sponge or let one part of a cloth soak in water only,
ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique,	or you cook in water with pepper and cypress needles,
et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	And let the intestine rise as long as the pus is drained;
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And once this has been done with the wine, it becomes restorative and helps to reduce swelling.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites,	And when you see that the swelling is departing, moisten the intestine with water or broth that has been cooked and seasoned.
car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	for thereby the entry accepts very little of it;
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	And if it cannot enter, they make a little cut on the wound with the tool from which one extracts the blood clots;
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille,	And the first treatment is to moisten the area that has been wounded.
que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	which we should not cut without great necessity, nor if it is unnecessary;
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	and this is the tool to split it with:
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	if you cut inside the bend and not outside, and see this shape:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer,	And when the wound is enlarged and the intestines jump out,
si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre,	if you place it back according to its natural shape in its proper location,
se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	then do so if possible, for this is beneficial.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre,	When the wound is broad, and it's located on the lower part of the belly,
si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos,	It is necessary for you to heal the patient on their back,
et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	and place their legs higher than their head;
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre,	and if it's located on the lower part of the belly,
si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz,	Place the head and buttocks higher than the belly area,
et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des .ij. parties	and similarly if there is a rupture from the abdomen in one of those two parts,
si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	and make sure that the part that has been cut is higher than the other;
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	and thus, it should be treated in accordance with what I've said about large and medium wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet,	For small wounds, use what you have prepared for them,
puis aies entre tes mains .i. ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main,	then hold between your hands .i. surgeons who sear the entire wound with their hand,
et assemble les levres;	and bring the edges together;
et c’est la maniere commune de costures,	and this is the common way of stitching,
et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie,	And you take one needle or more, depending on the size of the wound's width,
puis laisse des le chief de la plaie .i. doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait .i. boin fil fort;	then leave about from the edge of the wound, approximately one inch, and insert a needle or where there is good strong thread;
et perce les .ij. chiés dou cuir avec les .ij. chiés dou siphac,	and pierce both skin edges with both thread ends,
qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie,	which is inside the skin, as long as you pierce that part of the wound,
et assemble les .ij. chief dou siphac les .iiij. ensamble;	And gather the two principal parts of the siphon along with three more together;
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de .ij. pars,	Then stretch with a doubled thread around one needle for two threads,
puis assemble les .ij. chiés de la plaie avenanment,	Then gather the two edges of the wound together,
et puis laisse .i. doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	and then leave one finger's width, and stitch with another needle;
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille,	then with the thread like you did with the first needle,
et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles,	and keep doing this according to what you know about needles,
tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	until the entire wound is held in place;
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses,	and use needles that are both subtle and large,
car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	For the sharp needles cut all the flesh, and the too large ones cannot enter well:
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	because they must be smaller:;
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir,	and it is not good to have the needles sticking too far out of the flesh and skin,;
k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	so that they do not tear and widen the wound before the stitches are made;
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir,	And then remove the pins from the joints, so they do not irritate the patient while sleeping,
et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir,	and place tents or cloths over the joints of the needles to keep them in position,
et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	and leave them until the wound has healed;
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies,	and this method of suturing with needles is more suitable for small wounds,
car il i soffist une aguille ou .ij.	for there is a pricking sensation from one to two pins.
Li seconde costure si est commune,	The second stitch if it is common,
et est que tu assemble les .ij. chiés dou cuir et les .ij. chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait .i. fort fil moien;	and it consists in assembling two pieces of leather and two pieces of silk, then attaching them to a needle with one strong thread in the middle;
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz .iiij. ensamble,	and when you have pierced all four of these pieces together,
si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	If you re-enter the needle at the part where you started, in the way one sews with thread;
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	and leave a space between each stitch as large as a minor do;
ceste costure sevent li home,	these stitches create the fabric,
et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre,	and I sew up a wound where one had hands or stomach,
qui estoit navrez d’un coutel,	that was unskilled with a knife,
et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant,	and had the wound more than a palm's breadth,
et issoit des intestines bien .ij. palmes de grant,	and contained intestines well two palms' breadth,
et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	and the wound was located in the middle of the belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit .xxiiij. houres fuer,	I brought back his intestines as long as it had been xxiv hours since.
et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a .xv. jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	And the wound was sewn up for fifteen days, and I treated him, and he recovered.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	And when they thought he would die, it was a miracle;
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en .i. leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	and I did not treat him with ointment either, for I was in one place where no such thing could be found, nor any medicine;
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel .ij. fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And apply a piece of old cloth over the wound three times a day, and wash it with honey water until it healed.
Or vos dirai les .ij. propres manieres de cousture:	Or I will tell you the two proper methods for sewing:
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	Take the needle, and from the outside part go until inside;
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille,	when it has pierced straight through to the heart, leave the head of the needle or place the needle where you have stitched;
et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	And make another puncture from inside the part up to here.
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz,	And as for understanding this seam, you stitch it in the same way as the tailor sews fur,
et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	And let the thread hang once from one side, and then take it up again from the other, until the seam is fully completed.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement,	The second method of sewing, as Galen properly stated,
si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les .ij. parties ensamble naturelment,	if done like what some do, gathering together the two parts naturally,
et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	and press one of the ends of the bone against the other end, in such manner:
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement,	stitch a needle or the tip of a small knife near the shoulder joint, and pierce only that side.
et laisse les .ij. chiés dou syfac;	and let both ends of the bone touch;
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens,	Then turn the needle, and make it pierce from the outer part down to that within.
as .ij. chiés dou syfac;	as two shoulders of a bear;
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en .ij. autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	then pierce each from the outer part down to that within, in two other shoulders of a deer that are on the opposite side;
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	and this is the way to sew and it is the most common method.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent,	Galen said this word, and no one testifies it,
c’on doit coudre le ventre a .ij. aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	One must stitch the belly with two needles, or where there is thread in each;
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	and one should insert one needle from one side and the other from the other, in the manner of those who stitch bullet wounds;
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre,	and know that when the tear is inside the belly,
si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	if it is the stitch is more severe than among others of its belly's wounds.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	The judgement on the wound if is like the judgement of other wounds:
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee,	and it's that when you find the fresh wound full of its blood, just as the art has made it,
si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char,	if it returns to within the intestine, and the wound; then apply the stimulating powder.
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	and if the burn has spread, put on no ointment whatsoever until the wound heals;
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	and sew the thread, and stitch the skin, and tie the bandage;
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then treat the wound as usual, until it heals completely;
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel,	And if you do not have medicine, place it, as soon as it begins to bleed, old cotton.
et le remue .ij. fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	And stir it twice a day until it is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	For you need no other medicine in various preparations when the wounds are simple;
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz,	And if you doubt that the wound will lead to a systemic infection among principal limbs,
si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset,	If you need to moisten with light wool in oil of gently heated heat, or in oil rose,
et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	and place it inside the joints, and under the armpits;
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient,	and if there is pain or gangrene in the bowels, and this happens repeatedly,
si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	if you use black wine enemas, and similarly if the gangrene reaches up to the intestine;
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	And insert it within, and know that when it's large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small ones.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez,	The intestine which is called "juvenile" cannot be healed when it is injured,
et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	And this is due to the positioning of the veins in them, and due to the subtlety of all the body, and the approach of their nature towards nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	And if a boil jumps from the wound, then it should be treated in the same way as an intestine while it is fresh;
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne,	And if it is old and turned towards or black, then you must tie the part that is black, so that no blood flows from it.
car il i a voinnes et arteres;	for there are veins and arteries;
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien,	then cut what is between the ligament,
et met les .ij. chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	and place both shoulders under part of the over the wound up to beyond it for facilitating the extraction when the ribs are in motion, and the wound is closed.
de la routure dou boueil	of the rupture of the boil
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite,	When the intestines are ruptured, and the wound is small,
si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes,	If one can restore it in any way,
por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	because I have seen that a nobleman's or belly was pierced by a lance;
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac,	And the wound was located on the right side of the stomach,
et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	And it became a sinus and turned into a passage for discharge, with both digestion issues and flatulence arising;
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	I administered treatment according to what I could do, and didn't stop refining until it was healed, and bound the wounds.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	And when I saw them bound, I doubted that the patient might have pain in their belly;
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	And there was no harm, but remained in better conditions, eating and drinking;
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	And it was said by some experimenters that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it should be treated in this manner:
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie,	take large testicles, and then gather the edges of the wound together,
et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les .ij. levres,	and when the testicles have opened their mouth, place them on the two edges,
si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	if she forces her mouth up;
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier,	and then he holds the head in place so it cannot be released,
puis met .i. autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	then applies another pressure in this manner as before, until the wound is completely treated;
et cout la plaie.	and finishes the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide,	Those who are so consumed by the intestines, and cause no harm to the patient,
et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste,	and one can bind the intestine with a fine thread that has been cut from an animal's intestine,
en teil maniere:	in this manner:
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez,	take this piece of intestines' thread, so that it be from a sheep that is fully digested,
et puis lie au chief de cest fil .i. fil de lin subtil tort,	And then to the head of this thread .i., a fine linen thread twisted,
puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	then knot the thread in the needle and sew it through the intestine, and reset it at the opening;
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	and this way of suturing stitches should only follow the path of hope and expectation;
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	and if the wound is large and broad, especially when it is in one of the large intestines, even without injury or sickness, let there be delicacy.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	regarding a fistula, or if it exists
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule»,	Know that every wound or abscess, when it matures, is universally called "fistula",
et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	and similarly when it is covered and begins to heal.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor,	And a fistula is according to the true nature of the hard, yellowed mass where no pain is felt,
et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	And also as hairy as a bird's feathers;
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	And not once clear and smooth, and another time thick and rough;
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	Not always little, and other times sufficient;
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char,	and I have spoken about the classification of wounds; that every wound that is not healed, and there is no flesh,
ce n’est fuers que par une des .viiij. causes:	It is only through one of the eight causes:
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	This is to say, due to the weakness or obstruction in blood flow or wounds;
ou por sa malice;	Or because of its inherent wickedness;
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	or due to the presence of hard flesh within and on the lips that prevents new tissue from forming.
ou il i a trop de bowe;	In this place there is too much blood;
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	or the veins are swollen, and the substance is of bad quality;
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	or the remedy is not good in the treatment;
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	or because it resembles a plague;
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	Because of its property in the area being late, digestion is slow, and recovery is also delayed, and escapes naturally;
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	There are veins or bones:
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	and I have shown all these causes, and the signs, and the treatments with medicines in this section.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	So, it is necessary for me to inform you about the treatment of an abscess which is performed by manual work.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	Know that a fistula occurs in all limbs of the body;
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners,	because there are fistulas that come from large veins, and arteries, and nerves,
ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes,	or at the stomach, or in the intestines, or in the bladder, or in any of the ribs,
ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	or in the spine of the back, or in any joint of the hands or feet;
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	And indeed when it comes to acquiring the property of the main limb, and recognizing their characteristics.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	And all the fistulas that are this way require healing, and there is nothing else but labor, and ignorance;
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure,	and if there is no fistula that does not end up at the one I have said, and you have taken care of the treatment,
et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	and you will know it, if you take an araneus or iron tent, if the fistula is straight, then touch it;
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc,	And if the fistula is twisted, then one seeks with a fine needle of thread,
car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	for the knots do fold and move within the twists;
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes,	and if the fistula is at awkward angles and you cannot find it well by trying with guesses,
si la clisterize par l’un des pertus,	if you insert the catheter through one of those awkward angles,
car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	for moisture can travel from one part to another, and cleanse;
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont,	then inquire carefully according to your ability, that you may know if there is bone or nerve, and feel it all around;
et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	and ask the patient about their pain when you press your hand on them, and where they feel it;
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine,	and once you know exactly where it is, and if it's far from a joint, or a nerve, or an artery or vein,
ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit,	In any of those limbs which I have told you about, if one follows as I have told you,
et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	and for the extraction of bones and decayed organs that are within;
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee,	and then the treatment until it is healed,
et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues,	and if the fistula is well dug straight through, you should dig out as far as possible, just as much as you can.
puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule,	Then I mix wet cloths with medicinal water, and immerse them up to the tip of the pus sack.
tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	As long as the medicine dissolves the excess that has remained at the bottom;
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And then I cover it with clean bandages until it is healed.
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit,	If it hasn't healed through this method, then apply the cautery as we have explained,
et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, then he treats it.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	If a vein or nerve is compressed or affects the main limbs, as we have said;
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee,	And if the bone is exposed, and there's corruption and decay, then heal it until all the decay is removed,
puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then treat it with various medicines until it becomes healthy;
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant,	And if it isn't healed, and you guide it back as before,
saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	You should know that you are not quite there just until the mark:
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons,	if you uncover and desire it, even when you're at the bottom,
et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	and remove all the decay, then restore its place;
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	And if he is thus healthy, this is well.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	But if not, know that the corruption is too much in perfection, that you cannot bring it forward;
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	if there is no other way except to let it be done by nature;
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles,	and if there's a little corrupt bone and you can remove it with tongs,
si l’estrai a .i. estrument covenauble a ceu,	If you extract with an instrument suitable for this,
et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	and if there are many bones, treat them all, do not leave even one;
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour,	and if moisture opposes this and causes fear or hesitation,
si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	if it is necessary to cut through moisture and flesh, and free the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture,	And if you cannot remove them within an hour, then place something to combat putrefaction on the wound.
et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os,	and let it be until the bones are rotten inside the flesh,
et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	then from then on, they will have lighter the bones;
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse,	and if it's a large bone, like in the leg or thigh,
si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee,	if you only release the corruption until all the blackness is removed,
puis restoure la plaie;	then heal the wound;
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	and if there's a large part of corruption and it reaches up to the flesh of the bone;
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	if it suits, treat and cover up to the area of corruption, and then heal until it is joined together;
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint .i. home en sa jambe,	And I will tell you of a case involving a fistula that occurred in one's leg.
si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	So that you may take it as an example and gain help in your work.
Il fut .i. jovencelz entor .xxx. ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors,	There was a young person of around thirty years old who experienced pain in their leg due to an internal cause within the body.
tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	And as long as the contents reached the leg, it was plagued by a large abscess, and there was no external reason for opening it;
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri,	yet they would expose their faces so much that abscesses were opened,
et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	and they would corrode some materials, and became a fistula, and much was lost that all complained of pain and the moisture of the body;
et maint mire i mirent cure entor .ij. ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains,	and many patients were treated for over two years, and there was no expert in the art of surgery.
tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit,	as long as I was called upon, and saw his leg and the remedies used to treat him,
et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	And that which grows through the narrow passages with great force;
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	And became red on the cheeks like the color of youth, and had a yellowish tint.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus,	I set up a tent in one of these narrow passages, and then searched all the passages,
et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	and found that some came against each other from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os,	I hurriedly acted, and cut on one of the protrusions until I uncovered a part of the bone,
et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	and found it decayed and perforated, and the corruption was reaching to the interior of the bone;
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	I was the one that appeared from the decayed part of the bone, and I thought there was no other decay, only what I had taken out;
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	and began to heal the wound with medication for a long time, but could not stitch it together;
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant,	And then I began again, and exposed the bone as before,
et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	and found the continuous decay in the bone, and the screw, and then removed it, and bent to焊接 its place;
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole,	but I could not do that as long as I copied the shape of a palm of the bone, and it was set to its full size,
puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment,	then I would treat it with medicine; and it healed and was joined quickly,
et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir,	And it could not be resumed for lack of strength from the patient, who cannot endure,
et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	and because of my fear of death that I have for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement,	For during blood loss was common, but it was completely healed,
et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	And in the place of the bone there formed a hard flesh, and it was well arranged and had no harm or opposite from all to all, neither inside nor outside.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	And if any bone is broken anywhere in the body, it ought to be treated thus:
pren .i. liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert,	take hold of it, and press against the end of the bone that is exposed,
et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	and command him to extend it upwards;
et met .i. autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os,	and put another one of thicker thread compared to the first one, and tie it around the tissue that is inside the bone,
et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz,	And if there's pus in the head, so you extract the corrupted flesh at once,
et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	And uncover the flesh on the limb where you see sinew, that the sinew not injure the flesh;
et met .i. tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	And place one stick or a board over the bone to cover the putrefied flesh;
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And it should be done as far as one can see and sense the decay, and do it again if necessary.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie,	And if the bone is corrupted, and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part,
si descuevre la char toute; puis met .i. tison desoz,	then uncover all the flesh; then put one piece of charcoal there,
et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption .i. poc, si com nos avons dit;	and then make the sore extend from one part to another along the corruption, and let the ointment be long as the length of the corruption, just like we have said;
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	and if the corruption is at the joint, then correct the corrupted joint, and let the bone be on the other side;
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des .ij. jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	And if corruption has spread through both of these joints, there's no other way to fix it besides surgery;
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose,	And if corruption is in the thumb or forefinger of the hand, or in the heel bone of the foot, such a thing must be done quite forcefully;
mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	However, you should inquire about this corrosion and how it has affected you;
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	And cleanse it in all ways that you can, but do not let the vein or nerve hinder you;
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous,	And know that the surgeon and surgeons who work with these bones are many, according to the position of the bones and their appearance,
et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	and their size and fineness, and their grandness and smallness, and their hardness;
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	and because of this, it is necessary to equip oneself with each kind of work's tool.
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art,	And know that the work will show you the instrument you will need, according to understanding of this art,
et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	And the testimony of the methods of diseases;
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	if you consider the tool that you need according to what is suitable.
dou feu	with fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	The shoulder joint gets dislocated either from within, or due to heat;
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie,	And when you have healed that corruption through the treatment of the medicines, and they do not benefit at all,
si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient,	Then it is necessary to cover that limb up to its joint where the corruption comes from,
si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	so that the disease does not escape through death or by malice, which is greater than the fault of the limb;
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu,	and if you see these signs, then the limb turns black, as though it has been burned by fire.
et porrist aprés la noiror, puis va celle corrosions de membre em membre,	And after the night, then comes this process of corroding limb by limb,
et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper,	and takes over the entire body; if you hurry with it,
et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans,	and if it's due to the strike of some venomous beasts, such as sea scorpions and snakes, etc.
se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	if it's at the head of two fingers, if you do so, and do not give it space to come up to the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	And if it comes up to the wrist, if you stop at the joint, so that the disease does not extend up to the elbow;
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors,	And if it reaches the arm, if surgery is delayed; and if the treatment passes the point of surgical intervention, then many die.
et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	And its value can only be determined by the strength of its potency.
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	And do so as follows when the disease reaches or affects a part: if it reaches the first joint, if surgery is performed after another joint;
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	And if she comes or a piece, if cut all the piece;
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	And if she goes up in the leg, if cut at the knee joint;
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	And if she comes above the knee, there's no other way than to make the patient die by killing the limb.
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz,	The method of fixing or securing a member is that you bind it above and below,
et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont,	And extend one surgeon to the lower ligament, and another surgeon to the upper ligament above.
et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les .ij. liiens a .i. spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	And you open the flesh that is between the two ligaments up to one spatium wide, until the bone is exposed;
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part .i. drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain,	Then cut or slice the skin, and place a piece of linen from each side, so that the healthy limb is not touched by the injured one,
et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	And tell the patient to observe any other injury and abscesses as well.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment,	And when blood comes forth as you work, if it is necessary to cauterize, quickly do so on the affected area.
ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie,	or you put some restricting powders on it; then return to your medication until its task is completed,
puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then bind the injured limb with a reliable bandage, and treat it until it heals properly;
et je te conterai k’il avint a .i. home en som piet:	and I will tell you what happened at one man's house in my book:
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu,	He had a black mark that seemed to be like an ember of fire,
et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	And this burn appeared first on his buttock and the inner thigh, until it spread across the entire thigh;
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	And when the patient saw the burn, they immediately covered their thighs, and became healthy;
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi,	And for several days after that, the burn returned on his hand, and it came to me,
et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	And I set forth things pertaining to rebounding after purging the body, and cannot cease from corrosion.
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	And it is that I should pass my hand over it, but I do not wish to have hope for rebounding the matter;
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist,	I also doubted whether if I cut off his hand, he would die.
car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre,	because the power of the medicine was weak; and he completely lost hope, and returned to his home,
et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	And if they raise their hand, and are well.
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	and I have only included this for when one needs to do something else, in case it is necessary.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	No abscess ever comes to the inner flesh, and stays so long as to cause a large collection of pus;
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	And then spreads and perforates, and the pus jumps out, and settles in his veins, just like vessels.
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com .i. drapelz deliiez,	And the skin above is as delicate as one linen sheet,
et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain»,	and does not extend up to the bone or to the nerve, and such illnesses are called "blind" or "unknown",
et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	and is not called "fistula";
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	but if it extends so far that it reaches the bone all the way through, then it is called "fistula";
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	And the skin so is that you need to peel it all over, and similarly when it's delicate, like a piece of fabric;
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	and doesn't swell up due to its decay.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont,	And if you've noticed that the skin is heating up and there's no decay,
et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	and if the skin is full of flesh, then it requires a colostomy:
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor,	Examine if your breasts are large, and the body bearing them has a stinky smell,
adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	Then use an Egyptian enema medicine which is prepared here:
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en .i. vassel au feu,	Take arsenic, oil, and litharge, equally, and cook them in a single vessel on the fire,
tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	until the medicine becomes red, and thicken as much as honey;
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel,	and then use this according to your need, and apply it both in water and in honey,
et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	and administer enemas to the stomach, and hold the rectum steady;
et laisse la medicine ens par .ij. houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	leave the medicine in for two hours, then remove it by squeezing;
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	do this number of times, until the stomach is empty and free of pus.
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres,	And never made to be lanced with water from ashes,
quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus,	When this medicine is not present, and you take vine wood ash and pour water over it,
puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	Then drain it, and administer as a suppository until you know that the intestines are well mixed;
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres,	And if the patient cannot tolerate this, neither this Egyptian medicine nor water from ash.
si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	If you use a catheter of water and honey or has a little bit of stearate;
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver,	Or you will catheterize with honey and mixed wine where the honey has properties to purify and clean.
et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	and the wine causes the soundness to increase;
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez,	and when you have done this and made sure that the lungs are well purified,
si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li,	if the colic (pain) caused by what causes birth within them,
et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	and you should apply a plaster of a healing ointment and oil rose,
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	or you will give an enema of certain medicines and ointments, about which I have discussed their properties or written on the use of ointments;
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer,	and if they are too small under the breast, and the anus does not allow it to enter,
si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein,	If it is widened by a piece of iron, and then an application of Egyptian ointment is made,
ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	or basilic ointment, as long as it is widened;
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement .i. leu ou li clistere puisse entrer,	and if the wound is too wide, stitch it up so that only a thumb or the elbow can enter;
et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	and if the opening of the bow wound is above, let the cut be higher than the elbow.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	For when the bow is full, I do not allow it to be drawn;
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues,	and if you cannot cover the breast under it as you see,
si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est,	if you arrange yourself in such a way that the bow reaches as low as possible to where you are.
car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char	for when the bow is full, I do not allow it to be drawn;
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues,	And if you cannot cover the breast area as you see,
si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	so do it in such a manner that the bone slides smoothly downward, and leave nothing of the bone;
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sein,	and take consolidating medicines to place inside the breast area,
et estent sus .i. drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sein;	and there should be one layer of linen covering the entire breast area;
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein .i. poc plus large dou premier,	Then direct the application of the force to that area of the breast. That is, push with a hand slightly larger than the first one.
pues estent oignement souef sus .i. autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus,	Then apply another poultice oil on .i., another cloth according to the size of the force.
et le met sus le pertus dou sein por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	And place it over the breast where the pain is, to alleviate the stomach ache, and do not remove the large cloth except after several days once;
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe,	And that which is on the breast, often needs to be removed for the relief of the stomach.
et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	And know what flows from the womb, whether it's venom or pus or enough, or digested, or undigested;
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non,	and take care if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not,
et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sein,	and when your medicine has spread in this manner and you see the nature that jumps onto the breast lesion,
si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	then know that the breast is now inflamed, and approach with health;
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie,	And then dislocate it in the morning, or on the third day, and when you dislocate the wound,
si chainge .i. autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	if change one part of the dressing, and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if after many days the breasts discharge an undigested substance, know that the breasts are not healing properly.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit,	And if subtle poisons linger for a long time, do not despair of recovery,
car li santez aproche. Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	For health is approaching. For there are men who delay healing of their wounds with too much alcohol, and of those who do the opposite;
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	and if a person has undigested food sitting in their stomach for many days, know that their stomach does not heal itself;
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut,	and if the lungs are sluggish and distant, then adjust medicinal preparations of dried wet substances and dry with virtue;
si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	such as transparent ointment, because it contains a large part of vitriol, and this is the last remedy;
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	Take some soft butter, mix it with rose oil, and season it with old wine of equal strength;
puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez,	then cook it and use it; and do the same thing by making cooked honey richer.
quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens,	when soft butter medicine is not present,
ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	or you take myrrh and aloes and incense, and grind them together, and add the powder to the honey when it has been heated;
et puis en glue .i. drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe,	And then with a glue of one piece of cloth, it is extended over the breast, and every time an administrator or an alchemist administers,
et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	And roots of heavenly lilies, which are also like flour from thyme and centauries;
et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	And in using simples or compounds: grind them, make a powder, and place it on the honey I have said, and use it;
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure,	And if treatment lasts long and is not cured by this remedy,
adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	Thus know that corruption enters from all sides, and makes an impact within the bone, or in hard parts, or in ligaments;
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	if dealing with the treatment of a fistula, as we have said earlier.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the abscess under the nail
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main,	Panarice is a type of abscess that forms under the nail of the hand,
ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	In the case of bone pain, or if it happens to grow elsewhere;
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient .i. aposteme chaus,	And when it grows old, and if no care is taken, then it leads to an abscess formation.
et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	Then blood flows out continuously as long as it reaches the root of the nail, and by chance it might reach all of it;
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	And corrosion goes up to the bone as long as there is stinking pain, and the shoulder joint is broad, and the color is disturbed.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie,	When you treat him as we have said in the division, and the treatment doesn't benefit.
si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle,	So it's necessary for you to remove all the excess that has remained of the nail,
puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	Then apply a cautery to the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	The cautery is very helpful when the bone is healthy, and the nail is healthy;
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece,	If the angle presses against the flesh, and begins to poke, and irritates it,
si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char,	Then you should place the force under the angle that points toward the flesh,
et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement,	and hold the knife upright, and cut that flesh finely and gently,
et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	and apply on top of the cut part of the flesh hot and corrosive medicines to remove everything;
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the treatment of ointments until there is health.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	And if the corrosion is in the bone, you must remove it and treat forcefully because as much of the infected bone there is, it cannot heal;
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en .i. des nous si com il est devant dit,	and if you see that the knee is corrupted, you must remove it in one piece just as was explained before,
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then treat until health returns;
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	And if it is broken, and set back, and he feels great pain, then you must heal him first;
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus,	then trim the nail at the cuticle by cutting across it.
et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	and ensure that your cut does not go beyond the flesh under the nail, as this would cause too much pain to the patient;
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	And if it happens, then apply something soothing.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	The pain originated from the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus,	You must adjust what is born in the hands of some people by chance and thick-skinned,
et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle,	And sometimes it has a bone or it lacks one, and often it has a nail,
et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	And none of them are born at the root of the joint, or the birth is in no part of our hands.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet,	Those who are born without a nose do not have one,
et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	And those who are born with a joint of the knee, by chance they move;
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	The size of the one who is robust is so light, in such manner:
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	Cut it at its root from a broad spoonful.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	Those born at the root of the joint have trouble to cure: if you hold on to copper.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os,	In the one who is born or should be at the end of it, it is necessary that you first fix the cartilage up to the bone.
puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then fix the bone with a suitable softness for this, and treat it until it is well healed.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The fusions that occur at the joints are due to birth, or by the welding of wounds, or by the action of fire, or by similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	If it is necessary that you take care of this healing, so that it must be repaired according to its natural forms;
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	then place between two wet tents or cloths in oil rose, so they do not weld together.
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	or you should put between two pieces of fine paste, until the joints are welded, as it should be.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	Welding occurs at none of his joints with the palm, if you take care of this welding just like it should be.
Des vils	Of cautery by fire, command the sick to let their hairs grow long and even; and if they pierce at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	Vessels are large, enveloped veins full of surplus melancholic matter that come from multiple body parts;
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	And more occurs in legs of those who walk and work and carry things, than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	It follows therefore that you must administer one time a bloodletting procedure, and then heal it using basilica.
Li cure de fer si est selonc .ij. manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	The iron treatment follows two methods: the first involves cutting the wound and allowing black blood to flow;
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	And the other method is that you open the vein and allow it to be forced entirely.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez,	The operation follows this manner: immerse the first leg in very hot water for quite some time, until the large vein becomes slender.
puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	Then hold the leg of the patient from above the knee down to the part below the knee.
puis cope la voinne en .i. leu, ou en .ij. ou en .iij., d’une taille large,	Next cut the vein either at one level, or at two levels, or at three levels, with a width that is sizable.
puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	Then lift and drain the black blood towards your hand, from one end to the other, until as much blood comes out as the medical properties of the blood can bear;
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	And then tie it up, and command that he soak the bandage in red meat juice that darkens it.
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	And restart the evacuation and cleaning when the veins are full, and harm the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil,	The methods of treatment are as follows: lift the leg from the patient, if there is hair;
puis le met ou bain, et li. arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	Then place it in water (a hot bath), and lift the leg from a hot water bath until it turns red, and the veins swell;
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	And if you don't have a bath, heat it over the fire, and then apply heat to the leg along its entire length from the knee down, or in the part below at the ankle;
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	Then open the skin with the knife, and sear each vein from every side until one can see it when touched;
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	and you see it red and black, and when it enters or seems like a white string in the skin as well;
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier,	then hold the cautery over it until above the skin, and then place it on the knife gently.
puis le cope en .i. autre leu ensus iij. dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere,	then hold it for one more inch above three inches, and then sear the skin over the vein until you can see it;
puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	Then lift the lever, just like you did before, and move to another hook, just like you moved to the first one.
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet,	Then use a different size, or several if needed, then lift it and adjust to the base of the foot,
puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	Then pull and lift until you reach the second size; then stretch from size to size, as long as all her strength comes out, then adjust.
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil fort double,	And if you cannot pull and lift it, insert an awl with both ends of thick strong thread,
et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz .i. rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	And you press it and pull it, and squeeze out one inch, and turn your hand from side to side until something comes out;
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	And make sure it doesn't swell up, for if it swells up, then you can neither draw nor lift it, and this causes harm to the patient;
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completely drawn it out, put moistened wool in vinegar and oil over the wound; and continue to treat until it is healed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit,	And if the face is twisted and bent inwardly together, and it is not straight, as we have said,
si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	If it is necessary for you to cut forcefully, but do not cover it; and treat it as we have said earlier.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	The shape of the iron tool used for drilling is curved, and does not cut but merely pierces, so as not to puncture the vein;
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	And it has thick curvature because if it were too slender, it would pierce the vein, but made it thick as we have said, and this is its shape:
De la voinne civile	From the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	This vein is found on legs, at warm spots where no plants or trees grow, and in soil without moisture.
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir,	And it might be found elsewhere than on the legs, and this happens due to corruption that comes from under the skin,
si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	Just as if it were coming within the body like snakes and worms, penetrating between skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation,	And if you see the signs of the beginning of this vein, if there is a very large inflammation in the leg,
puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	Then change your limbs, and begin the vein to start flowing outwards, as if a root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a .ij. З., et la noe,	When the shoulder is open, it is necessary that you wrap around a piece of leather of three and a half to four spans until you have bound it.
et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	and let the leather hang down by the leg, and every time it wears away at the end, you should wrap around the leather again and tie it.
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	and if it is too long, cut off a part of it and wrap the remainder again, but do not cut at its root until it has all been used.
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	For if you handle it, it enters into the flesh, and brings about pus and putrefaction or disease, and a bad illness;
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	Because of that kind of thing, it should be treated little by little until the end, and not leave anything or remain with it;
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de .v. paumes de lonc, ou de .x.,	and at no time when this vein is treated for more than 2 palms long, or for more than 10 inches,
et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de .x. paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute .i. rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons,	and an hour came to me who bore this vein for 10 palms long, and when you handle it, if it yields one or two drops or pus, then pierce until you reach the source,
si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	If everything comes out; and let the substance that's inside be emptied, and administer remedies against putrefaction for several days, then treat it as with abscesses, thereafter taking care of it accordingly.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet,	And never on this vein apply cold hands, and similarly when the foot opens at the joint or foot,
et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	and there is much loss, and where it causes coldness; then treat it accordingly as we have instructed before.
Des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	Worms that are born between the skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués,	This disease is called in our land "calf disease", because it often affects cows,
et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant,	and a small worm is born between flesh and bone, it travels throughout the body rising and falling,
et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	and you can feel it throughout the body starting from member to member, until it reaches the skin where it went, and there it breaks out;
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	It is afflicted with corruption from some fluids, if they come towards worms, snakes, maggots and roundworms or in the abdomen;
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil,	And there is doubt about his illness, because when it travels through the body, and it ascends to the head, and comes to the eye,
par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	By chance it enters, and destroys the eye; this happens many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	When you see him being treated and drained, one cannot but think that as he goes:
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement,	Therefore, you should bind it above and below with a strong tie very tightly,
puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves,	then cut upwards and pull it out, and if there is a fracture in the bone, and you don't find it,
si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	if you apply the heat cautery over it, until it heals;
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	and the greater damages that it causes, if they flow to the eye, as we have said;
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	And if you see it coming or its head near the eye, then hold fast with one hand to the corner of his mouth, then lift up and pull forcefully;
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries,	And it is necessary to use the gland for purging diseases from body fluids due to bad humors.
et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	And if there's worry about meat causing putrefaction.
De la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	Of the pain that comes from wind disturbance
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres,	This disease is called in our land "vakirir", and it is a pain that comes to any limbs,
et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	and spreads from limb to limb; and I have seen what I told you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	I was summoned to attend an afflicted woman, and she showed me her arms, and I saw a small swelling in the arm vein;
et .i. poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule,	and just one or two days later, it rose up as high as to the shoulder,
plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	Sooner than any other thing, as quick as freshly cut silver when it is taken from its source;
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule,	The pain leaves the shoulder and gets stuck in the shoulder;
et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	And then a bit later, it spread throughout the body, until it reached the other arm.
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	Then I realized that it was tearing inside the body, just as I saw it.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I marveled greatly how she moved from limb to limb in this manner, for I had never seen such an illness conducted like this before.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre,	Still, I have seen many that would cause pain in their limbs to move elsewhere,
mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	but I had never witnessed this before, as I see it in the case of a woman;
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes,	and I wondered that this was due to the fact that her belly was swollen and her veins were exposed,
et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	And because of this, there appears that constrained wind;
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	and does not appear according to this reason among those who are delicious and have moist bodies and veins that respond.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit,	And when you see the treatment of this disease, and if the patient feels pain, if it opens in the way that we have said,
si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	If it opens upwards and downwards quickly, then treat until that constrained wind at the body escapes;
et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz,	And apply a cautery to it; and if you cannot see it with your eyes,
si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	if you treat those who suffer from wind debility, like stinky pills, pills made of viper venom, and similar others.
Des saiettes	From arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows are diverse, depending on their appearances and the locations where they pierce the body.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	The variety of them is such that there are those with large points, and small ones, and those with hair, and those joined.
et de celles qui ont .ij. angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	and those with two angles, and those with tongues, and those where there are pieces;
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc .ij. manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit,	and the one who defecates in no member, yet does so according to two ways: or within the main member itself,
si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	like the brain, heart, liver, stomach, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar organs.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	When she gives birth then in no part of these limbs, and the sign of death that I will tell you later, becomes evident:
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	If you have to remove this arrow, for death comes afterwards in various conditions;
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	And when that bad sign does not become evident and the arrow is not fully out, remove it, and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil,	The sign of the skull when the arrow hits and pierces the bone, and jumps out from where it was in the head,
est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	when there is blindness and numbness and swelling of the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasms and confusion of thought, and vomiting of bile;
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	and sometimes affects the nostrils or ears; and sometimes there is loss of speech and voice.
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	a white swelling at the wound resembling a boil, and also a burn like that from hot iron.
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	and if you see this sign, continue with the treatment, and remove the arrow if it is not there already.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	The sign of the arrow when it pierces or hits the heart, is that it's close to the left breast, and also feels like it is stuck in something hard, not empty;
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	And by chance the arrow can also stop like a pulse, and brings black blood, and causes coldness and cold sweat, and fainting:
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	Therefore, without doubt, know that death is near.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of an arrow that never leaves its wound is that without any foam spilling from the wound, and the throat swells up, and the patient's face turns a different color, and they sigh loudly with cold chills.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrow stops within the thigh's cover, it hits the small bones; and causes great pain and intense agony and sighing; and all body parts from the shoulders move.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrow stops in the stomach or intestine, by chance if it breaks out of the wound, there's no undigested flesh.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrow stops in the belly or abdomen, and it jumps out of the wound not through the intestines, there's no hope for treatment, nor is there any hope for extracting the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if the arrow stops in the bladder and causes urination to occur, and leaks out, causing great pain to the patient: you know that the wound is fatal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other body parts, such as the limbs and neck and throat and shoulder and shoulder blade and back spine and ribs and arms and legs, and similar seeming limbs, are safe according to various dispositions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in the nerves or arteries and it's not poisonous, like what I will tell you, this happened to me because of what you were doing.
Il avint a .i. home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	It happened to one and a half homes that an arrow hit or pierced the lung at its base near the nose:
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	I tried it, and I pulled it out from the other side through the fat of the ear, and there was no serious injury.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz,	And take out an arrow, when it falls into the oil grease near the paper over the eye.
et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust,	And the arrow had returned, and one could only touch its tip towards the shaft.
et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout .i. fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And the arrow was large as an Ottoman bow, weighing just one fine feather without ears; the hunt was safe, and no ill accidents befell it.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	And take out an arrow from the throat to a Christian, and this is the Arab arrow with ears:
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	I was grooming their eyebrows, and trimming them as long as I was doing it, and it pleased the Christians.
Et traï une saiette a .i. home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	And pulled out an arrow at one's inch, whether from their back or belly, and I thought they were going to die;
et puis qu’il ot passez .xxx. jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	and then after thirty days, if it did not change its position;
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	I cut into the arrow, and I aimed it, and pulled it out, and there was no bad incident.
Et si vis .i. home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	And if you find one arrow which has fallen or been shot through, and there is a wound joined up at that spot;
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez,	and wait until the arrow remains inside it, and do not disturb its natural positions,
ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	nor does it cause harm in any of its natural works.
Et vis .i. autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	And observe another person, who has an arrow through their face and the wound is sealed;
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And let it endure like this to suffer great pain; and few other symptoms.
Et traï une saiette a .i. home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz,	And pull out an arrow from the king's right arm for one and a half days during the service of the princes, as it was stuck in his left arm.
et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue	and had slightly weakened on the right side; and the arrow was completely inserted.
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue .iij. jors. Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I was called to treat it after three days when it happened. I found the wound very tight.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	I tried very hard to do this but felt nothing;
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	and there was pain and discomfort in his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette	I thought it might be from the tip of the arrow.
Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	I placed an adhesive and digestive plaster on his head because the ears were not swollen;
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	And I saw the head of the arrow.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens,	I applied the poultice to the wound for days, and quickly resolved the injury, then allowed the patient to rest for a long time.
tant qu’il sentit la saiette .i. jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	Until he felt the arrow within his nose; and he told me this.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte,	I applied corrosive mercury medicine to the wound for days, until it opened up completely,
et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	And try it, and feel the tip of the arrow which was moving towards the shoulder;
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	then adjust it in the opening of the wound through this medicinal method, until the head of the arrow appeared visibly to me;
et trespassa bien li termines entor .iiij. mois,	and pierced deeply into the inner parts for a period of four months,
et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	then I opened the wound so that my pincers could reach inside, and applied treatment from both sides, but couldn't remove it;
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris .i. jor as tenailles bien faites,	Therefore do not stop refining and devising ways for the tools, until I took one whole day using well-made forceps,
selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	Following what its form comes to the end of this chapter, until I treat it, and will restore the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	And the judges decide that the cartilage at the nose cannot be restored:
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	So I treated it accordingly, and healed the wound, and was completely cured of the patient's ailments.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes,	And I told you about the quality of extracting some arrows,
si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	so that when you apply your method to what I don't say, because books cannot encompass everything;
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant,	but the wise masters compare well on a small matter, and on that which is immediate and lacking;
trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	find nine works, and the new instrument, for the expulsion of things that happen in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc .ij. manieres:	I say that arrows do not exist within the limbs where they are embedded, according to two ways:
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	or by their length where they enter, or from another side;
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	And the one that jumps when it is at its length as it enters, this is an arrow entering into their flesh, and jumps without fail ever since.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	And if it doesn't jump now, let her grow until the wound is properly healed from the inside out, and await the healing of the outside;
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	And similarly if it's stuck in the bone, and cannot come out, if she leaves her like that for a few days, and removes her each day;
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout .i. foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And then it jumps, and if it doesn't jump, she punctures through to the very center of the bone with a fine needle, until the inside of her elbow is widened, and then removes her.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil,	And if the arrow is stuck in the bone at the head, and goes up to one of the brain chambers,
et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors,	and all the incidents that I have mentioned appear to the patient: if she does not remove it immediately, but leaves it until its wound is equalized after a few days,
car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	For if the arrow reaches just to the joint, this is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac,	And if the arrow only penetrates through the bone and does not reach up to the joint,
et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	and stays with no harm happening for some days without any bad incident, if the treatment has been done well.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is thus embedded and cannot come out like that, if you apply the arrows internally, as I have told you; then treat the wound until it heals properly.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	And if the arrow is returned inside the body so it cannot be seen, one should seek it throughout the entire body;
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	and if you feel it, try to guide it with any suitable instrument;
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette,	and if you cannot by the constriction of the wound, and due to the depth of the arrow,
et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	and if there is no bone, nerve, or vein, then make an incision as long as the wound becomes large;
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient,	and pull out the arrow if you can, and if it has heads on the shaft she holds,
si oste la char qui est ens fichie de .ij. pars au mues que tu pues,	if the bone is embedded by two parts at the depth that you can reach,
et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	and then break or bend the ears of the arrow, as long as you can pull it out;
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	do this carefully so that you do not break the arrow, making its extraction more difficult.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot do it in one go, till your arm is numb from the effort, then move on, because the extraction requires endurance.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	And if the blood flow causes you to deviate, then apply what we have instructed about treatment in this chapter of our text;
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril,	and be cautious about cutting near the nerve and the vein, and make your movements so as to extract the arrow without risk.
ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens,	quickly or cautiously, firmly or gently; and guide the patient according to their form before the arrow fell.
car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	For this is the greatest aid one can give, and if you cannot manage it yourself, then follow what the sign shown to you instructs.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	The arrow that comes from another side, or if it reveals any matter of concern, or if the skin is swollen in a spot where you can see or feel it distinctly:
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	Cut there up, as long as the forceps can take hold, and then grasp: if the arrow jumps now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is held in the bone, twist your hand round as long as she enters the bone, and enlarge the bone, then pull her out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	And if it cannot come out, leave it still, and then continue the extraction until it comes out forcefully.
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	and if there is an arrow in him and he pulls at its shaft, hold onto it throughout its length;
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre .i. estrument cheveit,	and if he has defecated, and you see it being administered with force, then administer one tool for hair removal;
si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer,	so that the tip of the arrow enters into the hair of the tool; and then apply strength.
et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute .i. estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	And if the arrow is embedded, then I use one or two pointed instruments to enter it, in order to ease the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues,	And if the arrow is struck, then you should cut all the surrounding flesh or where the wound begins, if you can,
puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	Then treat the wound as it should be treated.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	And if the arrow hits or pierces or in the belly or bladder or ribs and is close, then you should cover it up if you can, and if you do;
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	And beware not to cut the vein and the nerve, and then extract it, and then suture the wound; this is a skillful task.
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And continue with the treatment until it heals.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the tongs used for extracting arrows resemble a bird's beak, and here is the form:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And they are made in sizes: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel,	The form of the root of hair is also like the feathers of a bird,
por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	because of shooting at the tip of the arrow, as this is its form:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	the shape of the tongs for shooting and retrieving is like this:
des voinnes dou cors communes	from the veins of common horns
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont .xxxi., de coi il a ou chef xvi.,	From veins from which we cleanse ourselves are thirty-one, of which there is a head of sixteen.
c’est a savoir: .ij. batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	This means:
et les .ij. arteres qui sont en .ij. temples apparans;	And the two arteries that are in the two temples, visible;
et .ij. voines que sont en .ij. larmiers des .ij. eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	And two veins that are in the sockets of the two eyes, which are called 'aspirers';
et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	And the vein that is within the forehead; and the vein that is at the head under the nose;
et les .ij. guindeges qui sont ou col;	and the two jugulars which are in the neck;
et les .ij. voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	and the two veins that are on the lips above the mouth, and these are the veins that are called 'aeugheirich';
et .ij. voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	and the two veins that are around the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont .v. en chescun bras:	The veins which we commonly treat are five in each arm:
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	One is the cephalic vein, and it runs along the left side of the chest, and they call this "the head's vein";
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique,	And the middle one is called "fast", and it is composed of the cephalic and the basilic veins,;
et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit,	And they call this "the heart's vein"; and the basilic is either on the right side of the chest or on the left,;
et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile,	And they call this medical condition "the wound of the belly", and it is located on the flank,
et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	and that which can be cured, which becomes visibly open on the side.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a .ij. rains;	And the salve well is the vein located between the thumb and the index finger, and it extends for two inches;
et en la jambe et ou piet sont .iij. voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit,	and in the leg and where the feet are located there are three veins: one is below the knee on the left side of the body,
et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	And it is the second joint, which is at the ankle on the right side; and there is a vein that is called 'Nesse', that is in the ankle of the other side.
et en l’autre jambe sont .iij. voinnes desoz celles.	And in the other leg are three veins beneath those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	The health of the veins that are behind the ears helps with the cataracts and migraines;
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide,	And the qualities of the healer, as I have told you, and that you find relief in helping yourself.
et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis,	And rub the area where the veins are with a rough cloth; then pinch the patient's neck at the base of their head.
tant que les .ij. voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en .ij. leus dependens dou chief:	Until the two veins can be seen behind the ears in two dependent locations near the head:
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	Place your hands thereon, and where you feel the pulse under your hand, if you wish to proceed;
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont,	Then take the scalpel and make an incision through the vein as close to the bone, then lift your hand all the way up to the vein above.
et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien .ij. dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	And cut and stretch the skin and the vein well through two inches, and let blood flow out as long as you see;
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	then hold and bind it until it heals.
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	and I have already spoken of the incision and the cautery or in the first book.
Li sainie des .ij. arteres que sont en .ij. temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene,	The health of the two arteries that are in the temples is akin to an old ailment,
et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	And indeed, and ointment used for eye care, and in the case of feverish tears from the eyes;
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	And that quality which a physician should be is as I say:
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les .ij. voinnes aperent apertement;	And they pull their throat until the two veins appear clearly;
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	and feel the pulse all across your chest, and then touch it to see if it beats evenly.
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz,	Then lift the knife above the vein near your thumb tip, and hold the lancet downwards,
et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en .ij. autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	and lift the vein upwards, and press it, just like you did in .ij. other veins, and let the blood flow according to your need;
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	then release the needle, place your thumb on the vein for an hour, then put cotton over it.
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	and form the wound after that, and let it heal until it is well; and we have spoken about this in relation to its treatment and extraction, or at the beginning of this book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	The treatment of a vein on the forehead is equally valuable to the treatment of the frontal sinus in old diseases, and for migraines, and for flushes;
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	And its quality is that the illnesses twist their necks by being squeezed, until the vein appears;
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	Then take the instrument called a 'digester', whose shape is as follows:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	And place the tip on the vein, and press with your hand or another tool, allowing blood to flow out according to the amount you see;
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	Then release the patient's neck, and secure the vein until it is sound and without any trace of the operation.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	Always, it is not suitable for the flames to be too intense; and the healing is from side-to-side, because the bone is close, and accidentally breaks the flames when it becomes subtle.
Li sainie des .ij. voines que sont en .ij. larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	The healing of the two veins that are in the two eyelids helps with the eyes, and for the nose, and for the cheek, and around the eye socket in the eye, and for diseases of the face;
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	And the quality of their healing is such that the patient tightens its neck by twisting through any kind of connection, as before;
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	Then heal it, and make the healing passage through the skin, slightly longer than the length of the flame somewhat wide, for there is nothing rotten.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flames are subtle, by chance should they break; then make correspondence with the blood, as much as you need to, and then bind onto cotton, and bind it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice,	The healing of the vein near the nose is valued for fever, and sudden recovery, and diseases of the face,
si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	likewise for migraines and redness that comes to the face, and likewise when it is old;
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre,	And the quality of health is such that the sick person narrows their throat, then strains their nose with your left hand.
et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les .ij. narines,	and take the fine long flame, and place it inside the lip in the space that is between the two nostrils,
car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	for the vein doesn't open properly yet, and the blood will now start to flow;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	and don't go too deep there, and let the blood flow gently according to your need, then leave it overnight, for she is restored very quickly;
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	and this is how it forms with fire:
Li sainie des .ij. guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	The health of the two inguinal glands assists in the tightening of the artery and the beginning of mixture disease, and for many illnesses, and in gangrene, corrosion, and herpes, as well as inflammations;
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	And the quality of health is such that the patient restricts its neck on both sides, as we have said;
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus .i. siege,	And let the masters be above the head of the patient, and the patients lie on one side for half a bed-length.
puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	Then open the vein long enough slightly more than its width, then guide blood moderately, or as much as is necessary;
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement,	Then make another incision in the other vein, then release the constriction, and press moderately on the veins.
que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	so that the patient doesn't suffocate; and leave it until morning, so that the wound heals.
De la sainie des leivres	On the treatment of wounds
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The treatment of veins above the lips helps in closing them in the mouth, and it deals with gum decay, cracks in the lips, nosebleeds, and tooth pain.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	And the quality of this treatment is to have the patient stand in front of you, and hold his neck as I have described;
puis torne la levre, et regarde as .ij. voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre,	then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one is on the right lip and the other is on the left,
et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	And their identification is by their being black, and by the fact that within them there are thin, small veins:
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance,	Thus treat both of them, and if you do not recognize them, be in doubt,
si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des .ij. voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	If you take the largest one from each side, and do exactly the same with the two veins above and below, for it is the same method.
De la sainie desoz la lengue	From the cure of the throat
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	The healing of veins situated near the tongue requires assistance after the healing of the cephalic area, and this is done through constriction of the throat. This also deals with ailments of the eyeball, and diseases of the mouth;
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	And the qualities of the surgeon are such that the patient's body should be exposed to sunlight while it is in their hands. Then they raise the tongue and look below each side where there may be a black vein:
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	Thus ensuring both sides are healthy, but not too far forward either, because they are close to the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc .ij. manieres:	The veins of the arm that we commonly treat are treated according to two ways:
ou em poignant a tout .i. flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	If they prick at all one large flame brand or an olive stick so fine like a knife blade, and it is called 'anevil'.
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	And they are wide yet subtle according to the width and constriction of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The shape of the fire brand Mirtin is greatly renowned, and it is quite wide as you can see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	It is necessary to open the large veins filled with visible abundant blood, and containing much blood and turbidity;
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And this is the shape of olive oil flame:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	And it's more subtle and pointed, and it's for purifying the delicate veins, or having subtle yellow blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	The purification of the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases that are around the throat, and in the neck, and in the stomach, and in the abdomen;
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	And it is for the doctor to purify carefully, and to be aware of the artery that is around.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	And if it severs an artery, and blood begins to flow out, should this occur, you must stop the bleeding, as I have said;
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	and it should not be held in the flame, but cut like a young animal would.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	And if the basilica does not open clearly, you should extract it and change to another one;
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement;	Or if you do not want any bone from him, or you cut through his body with the arm's vein: it opens clearly;
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And the application of heat before it, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	And if you know where the pulse is, it should be like this: you must stretch out the arm, touching the spot until you find the pulse;
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	then mark the location for cutting, and then tie the arm down, and apply heat to the vein beforehand.
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And beware not to cut into the artery when you see the site inflamed, for that is the artery: listen there instead.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	And if you see it sticking out as high as a child's urine, and the veins are red and subtle, know that this is a vein from an artery:
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	Hurry then, place your finger for some time, then stabilize your finger until the vein stops bleeding, as has often happened;
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	Fix his arm and leave it like this, do not move the patient's limbs; and be careful, do not move him until he is healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the vein doesn't stop bleeding and you need to, and the medicine isn't available, if you find an artery that's open, do so because it can help the bleeding stop; and make sure the vein stops.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	And take a piece of walnut shell, cut it, and take one half and bind it well up to the other side;
se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	If there is no bleeding, that's fine; if not, clean it up, as we have said, with powders that stop blood flow;
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	And the bandages should not be too tight for the small size of the wound and the strength of the arm's connection.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz,	The healing of the vein in the middle is assisted by measures that help control blood flow from above and below it.
por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	because it is made up of the basilica and the cephalic part, as we have said;
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf,	and it is important for the surgeon to be aware of the nerve that runs beneath, and if he does not go too far forward, and should find the nerve,
et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	and it inflates and damages health, and by chance cannot heal;
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in any of them due to its subtlety, then you should heal the wounded with alcohol beforehand; and listen to the nerve through your skill.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is a vein between the two hands, cut it long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	The treatment for a headache, when blood flows from the head, and helps with eye problems;
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	And it is necessary to use a remedy in the oil flame or in the mint flame, for this is the safest of all veins, because there is neither nerve nor artery nearby.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	In short, it's necessary to choose the lightest weight possible and not to worry if one needs to do it first time, and then repeat;
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	And by chance swellings occur in some men at their first appearance, but they cause no pain.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of health is according to your thought.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit,	The first thing you need to know about being a surgeon is that surgery is conducted solely for the purpose of preserving health,
et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	and to avoid future diseases;
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des .iij. voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	And let healing take place at one of the three veins that are cut: these are to be known as the scalp vein, the facial vein, and the basilic vein;
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	And let healing occur at the beginning of prayers while kneeling, and in autumn and after winter following meals, when the signs of fullness appear;
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés .ij. houres ou .iij. dou jor.	And let healing begin on the first or third day, after two hours or one and a half days.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	The healing for illnesses does not have a determined time, but only when the need is of the day or necessity, at all hours and in all situations;
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a .xiiij. ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	And it is not good to heal children until they are twelve years old, nor a woman who carries child for less than one quarter of the months until seven weeks.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	Neither should they heal the elderly who have passed sixty years.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier,	And when someone wishes to be healed, in whatever manner that may be, it is necessary for him to cleanse the intestines with a gentle cathartic.
s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	If he has kept some bile back, so that the vessels drain the excess putrefactions harmful to the main members;
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	Not even one who is too full of meat, or drunk, shall be cured until they are strong and not anemic.
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	And when the healer deals with colic pain, vomiting, abdominal distension, frequent urination in women, and labor, work, watching over patients, and bearing, as well as what quickly diminishes the virtue, or by something from the weapon or injury;
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	Then refine the body's fluids, if it is heavy due to food and drinks and medications, if you have the means;
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc,	Then in or through a bath, if no defense occurs, to refine the blood,
et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	And heal from the artery near the inner thigh, as we have said;
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	and protect yourself that day of work, and of pain, and of excess, and similar things.
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras .ij. fois ou .iij.,	and be bound and anointed, and let the ointment be higher than where it is applied, and rub the arm twice or three times.
puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	then stretch half of the bandage upwards, for if it is too tight or too loose, it cannot properly heal the wound;
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	And then rub the area with hands, until the veins swell, and one feels them;
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier,	Then moisten the flame of a small piece of old oil, then place your left finger on that vein under the shoulder a bit where you intend to cauterize;
que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	So that the vein does not burn and rupture at being touched.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit,	For there are veins that behave like strings when they're cauterized, and some have such high winds flowing through them,
si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	if indeed when placed over the flame, it retreats to the flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus one belongs to these.
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	and if it opens the vein, the wound is too narrow, for in this case one should be aware of these matters regarding the surgeons.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein opens for the first time, it's good; but if not, you can try again near the original spot or suddenly, provided that the limb is not swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse .i. jor ou .ij., et ne liier mie le bras:	And if the limb is swollen and the patient feels pain, you should leave it alone for one or two days, and do not bind the arm:
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	By chance it may bring about the evacuation of pus; do not immerse or bathe, then restart the cleansing if it suits.
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	and if the vessel is small, or the artery is too subtle and you doubt whether any blood comes out as much as you see, so pierce that vessel itself straight down to all the flame.
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	and then press on it a little faster, so that the limb swells; for this happens often when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	If you see the limb swelling, do not restart the cleansing and instead place a little of the olive oil on it; because it alleviates the body from the blood and heals that part where the oil is.
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	And thus administer the oil in each healthy part that you heal for stopping the flow of blood;
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	And similarly apply the mustard and wax when you place it on the head; if the oil is too thick, it will be sparingly applied.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite,	And if a large abscess comes about, which often happens, even when it's not healed before because at that time the opening of the vein is small,
si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	and if you hurry, soak an sponge in hot water and a little salt and place it on the head for one hour;
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	And it must be that you do this after the release of blood from the vein, and if it stays in place for any days without turning black or green, so long as it doesn't harm it;
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if you see fit, place on anything of Aloes or of Myrrh dissolved into a Calamus juice, a signifier, or something similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	Many times an abscess and its appearance were seen at the healing of the basilica: therefore place your hand there, and if you find the area soft upon pressing with your hand, then it is that bad appearance.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, do not apply anything from what we have said, for by chance it might cut into the artery; but make one plastered bandage to stiffen the area, then treat with another remedy until it heals.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treat each person with blood according to the amount of their virtue and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	But if the blood is black, let it flow until it turns red; and if you see that it's large, let it flow until it becomes thin. And if it's too hot, let it cool.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	And for the one who is full and empty, needing blood extraction, you should make him have a larger incision, and let the flames be wide;
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	And for the one who is weak, do the opposite, and let him be well taken care of little and often, and you should take care of him by cutting across instead of straight.
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And this method of healing saves from bleeding and nerve constriction, and it is better than the healing which lasts long but not wide.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc .iij. fois ou .iiij.	And for the one whose body needs healing, you must give them juice from ground apples with oil; if they are hot, treat them three or four times by bleeding.
Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And if they have a cold constitution, they should take the oily food before healing in syrup made from apple juice, or in an aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, with a well-scented syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil,	And if they feel ill during healing, after the bleeding has stopped, it is good for them to inhale a broth of flesh and a subtle-scented syrup,
et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And apply the other things we have discussed in the division or chapter on syncope, for the evacuation of veins.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if they wish to bleed their arm, and then rest again, should this be necessary, when it has been weakened by much bleeding, it should be bled little by little, according to the strength of its power continuously.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And if someone wishes to bleed their arm after the first bleeding, and they have strong health, they should be bled seven hours after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And if someone wishes to undergo bleeding on another part of their body, they should be bled on the second day or the third day at the latest.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	For there is much blood within the body that has already been heated, and this causes fever; if one must draw a large amount, and widen the constriction until it breaks in the middle.
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson,	Since you have treated all the health conditions, and when it's time for surgery, place your hand on his heart as he recovers, so that death does not occur instead of recovery.
et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	And this happens many times when the doctors are careless;
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	And it should not happen when you see blood flowing out of the arm, and blood is expelled a second time, and if the constriction is closed, you should press strongly;
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	If he is constrained, make him extend his arm quickly, for this would be ill.
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer,	but let him until he heals the second time; or you touch it with the tip of the flame, as long as the thing frozen by the cold comes out from the vein.
et met sus .i. poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	and place half a spoonful of salt boiled in water, and press it gently.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is swollen, leave it alone and don't squeeze it, until the abscess is relieved.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if needing to bleed again for blood, if the health is in that place itself, or in another vein, or on the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein exists in the arm just like the one by the head because it is made up similarly.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	And the method of bleeding involves having the patient soak their hand in hot water, until the veins turn red;
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	Then partially tie it up, so that you can see the vein clearly, then bleed now through it, neither wide nor long;
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	And if the cuts are wide, and if they're very close to the joint of the hand, and if one can't come out without them, then put the hand in hot water, and let the blood run in the water, as long as you have enough.
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	And if it's frostbite, don't reset the hand in hot water either, because you put it more at risk than with frost.
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the healing of this vein is safer than any other veins, as there are no arteries or nerves involved.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	The healing for the salvation of the right hand is valuable against all liver diseases, and this is how it's done:
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	Lift your hand, and hold it in hot water, until you see blood coming from the vein, if you can observe it;
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	And if the artery is cut diagonally, and if you hold it completely in all directions, so that no harm ensues;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char,	and do not cut too close to the nerve either, for the nerves are very near to all the flesh,
et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	And then immerse the hand in hot water, since it has been frozen in the wound, and cannot escape.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated the blood as much as is required of you, place on the vein where and with a needle to solder quickly, and thus do for each rain.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The health of the left hand is to the disease of the mouse, and do everything as I have told you regarding the right.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors,	The health of the spirit is equal to all diseases that occur in the body,
si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	Like diseases of the liver, and retention of blossoms, and disease of the kidneys, and old ailments of arms and legs, and similar illnesses.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere,	And the quality of its health is such that patients are treated with hot water, and rubbed onto the veins until they flow,
et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	and above the joint of the foot; and when the veins are at the ankle, and above the foot they go to many kidneys;
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	Heal then with something broad and dry, or at the ankle, where it suits.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you heal on the bone, beware of the nerves that are nearby, and heal in a similar way as when cutting; let the flames remain there.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if it cannot come out without causing harm, then put the bone in water and ensure that the vein is well emptied.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	And if it heals for the first time, then try a second application slightly above once more because the body is salty;
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	Do not doubt a nerve as we have said, and similarly perform surgery on the other leg equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The veins of the sciatic nerve are at the ankle joint on the side, and its health corresponds to hip pain, when it's due to internal bleeding.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville .iiij. dois en tordant,	And the quality of its health is that the muscles expand or contract, and they tense up above the ankle by three inches through twisting,
car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	because otherwise the vein doesn't open; and if it does open, you should treat it in every way possible, and crosswise;
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And you must move it when you feel for it, because your fingers are inside, and they respond very much to manual handling.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	And if you cannot find it, check for any sign of the body that opens or behind the knee, and toward the small toe, and be careful of the nerves;
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And make sure the blood flows as you see fit, then release the knot, and place cotton over it and apply pressure; now she is healed.
Des sainies de ventouse	Cures using suction cups
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Blasping devices are made from horns, or spiders, or snakes; and bloodletting is performed in two ways: either by piercing to draw blood, or without piercing.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	And this kind of bloodletting which involves piercing is done in two ways: either immediately hot (with the wound still bleeding freely), or without heat.
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en .xiiij. leus dou cors,	Bloodletting performed by piercing and extracting blood is carried out during the first twelve days of menstruation,
de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col;	One is totally at the head level; and the other is in or near the neck.
et .ij. autres en .ij. costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	And two others on two sides of the neck; and the suction cup under the chin;
et li ventouse des .ij. espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies;	And the suction cup on both shoulders; and the suction cup above the elbows;
et les ventouses emmi les .ij. bras; et les ventouses des .ij. jambes;	And the suction cups on both arms; and the suction cups on both legs;
et les ventouses des .ij. chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char,	And the suction cup on both ankles; and the bloodletting does not aim for blood, but rather for small veins that are scattered in the flesh,
et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	And because of this, one does not weaken oneself, as one does in surgery to veins;
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And it should not be administered, nor with any fire or sense of heat, in any illness that comes from congestion, until all the body is emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	And if by necessity of diseases we must use suction, or due to habits, then we administer it each hour at the beginning of her period, or at the end, and throughout and in every time;
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	because there are those who, when they need to use suction, become pregnant first.
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	And for those who experience swelling and redness on their face, and head, and neck, and the eyes take hold.
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	And for those who notice a drop of blood in their mouth, and have swollen tongues, and they cough up blood;
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And if there are such cases where they perceive, see through the nose blood and ashes and things resembling death.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we observe these signs, especially during the first month, we instruct people to take some air after three hours of fasting each day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	The treatment of the neck assists in relieving headaches... and it involves the eyes, and it should not be after the removal of everything from within the body.
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique,	And this suction therapy is part of the treatment for the head.
et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	It should not be used by those with a cold constitution or who have undergone purging, for it causes much harm in such cases.
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	Nor should this be done by someone who uses the veil or has cold diseases of the head.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And the one who often seeks cleanliness, becomes forgetful, and because of this, it is necessary to place the suction cup a bit further down due to the element of forgetfulness.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis,	Lung suction is situated at the location of the neck and head and in the area of the cleanliness and basilica. Therefore, it suits it to narrow the bottom passage.
et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	And in the incision of the channel of the womb, and always, and in repair;
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	And it is better to hold it a little more loosely, for if she holds too tightly, it may cause dislocation or stomach and heart issues.
Li ventosations as .ij. costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens,	The breathing affects the two ribs near the collarbone causing head pains, eye and toothache, and in strangles, and there is pain at the roots of teeth.
et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	And it is in the place of the surgery of the basilica; and you must instruct the surgeon to press his hand during the operation, not to touch the artery, and not to let any blood escape.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	The breathing around the chin leads to mouth diseases, and gum decay, and similar illnesses that occur in the mouth; and this is part of the surgeries of the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The breathing around the shoulders leads to illness caused by heat and congestion.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des .iij. voinnes dou bras,	The ventilation of the lungs is as valuable as three veins of the arm,
car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	for it evacuates blood from these large veins;
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	and commands the soldier not to bleed too much in the wound, for the arm is bare of flesh and there lies skin over veins and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The suction cup that is placed on the back is as effective for bleeding off pus from the base, and diseases around it, so it's necessary to have the suction cup large, and made of iron, which needs to be well treated; and by chance, if it were thin, it would break; and I make large wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The suction cups on the legs are applied straightforwardly because they draw blood from throughout the body, and alleviate old pains in the kidneys, liver, bladder, and stomach; and help heal boils; and they are located at the two shins and the two ankles, and altogether weaken the body after long use, and cause weakness in various conditions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The method of applying the suction cup is as follows: you should apply it first while empty and keep it suctions consistently, applying it quickly, moving it evenly, without stopping this action until you see the skin turning red and inflamed. Then remove it, and replace the suction cups, taking care to notice the body's position because there are some with thick flesh and clear pores: it is proper to pierce once only in each area, and create large wounds, a little deeper; and suck gently.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the lesion is large, it is proper to pierce twice: the first time to thin out the large blood vessels.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the vein is very thick, then it should be pricked three times; and when we wish to drain only a little blood gradually, then we need to prick only once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement,	And if we wish for some blood, then we often start again; and if the vein is full, then we pierce deeply, and the ends are such that the veins are pierced suddenly.
et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	And for those who have thick and hard skin, with tightly knit pores, you should grease the elbows with suction cups where a stimulating and dissolving agent is applied:
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	if it's in the form of violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or pumpkin seed oil;
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if it's in water, from a place of onion, or lily, or chamomile, or any similar thing.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the excess is large and cold, take oil of arnica, or balsam, or juniper oil, and similar things.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile,	And if the condition requires strengthening flesh and large pores, there is no need to apply any oil,
mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	But it is suitable to wash after suction with pink water or cold water, or water of the rose, or water of a cucumber, or water from a porcelain dish, or any similar thing.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And whoever has much moisture, if they rise from rest, or from water of myrtle, and from sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	And whoever has large excesses rises from old wine, or water of soc, or decoction of aneth or chamomile, or other similar things.
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou .ij.; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion,	and it is not suitable for a physician to use suction cups before or during the bath, but rather after the bath an hour or two; and one should not sleep afterwards either.
et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	and it is necessary for him to know when he should be suctioned and when he has been suctioned.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	And take care of him who is being cured and is choleric, and if his body is too hot and inflamed;
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	It's necessary for him to eat cold things, such as apples, endive, and lettuce salads, and similar items;
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And he should consume small meats, and meat of castrated animals, and moist meat.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	And for those with cold constitutions, he should consume honey syrup and a moderate amount of fragrant wine that is between old and new. He should eat small portions, small meats, and young birds like pigeons.
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	And on the day he gets suctioned, if he must drink more than eat;
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	It is necessary to give some men no thyme or muscat before suctioning, or after, to strengthen the main limbs;
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And season the meat, but it is not good that those who are feverish drink it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz,	The suction cups that are placed to avoid causing harm are those placed on the liver, and on the kidneys, and in gout, and on the stomach and bowels and the thighs, for this limb does not suffer from being hurt on veins,
et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre,	And this is done merely to draw blood from member to member,
si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus lou ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	just as we place them on the nipples when the child is born; to remove the viscosity in the body, just as we apply suction cups on the belly and on the buttocks to reduce the size of the limbs;
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	and soothes pain when there is an obstruction or stone, to remove it by its attractive power as if, or evacuate the stone from its place;
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue,	and in this way she does so when placed on the liver and kidneys when there is retained viscosity.
et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede,	And these suction cups are administered empty only to suck; and never are they administered together with fire, and sometimes they are filled with water.
si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	If it's for diseases of the spleen, and in such a manner that we fill the suction cup with hot water, or with water where herbs are cooked that are useful for this.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The shape of the suction cup administered with fire is as follows:
Et ait .ij. dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu .i. petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille,	And it has two inches and half the length of a palm on each side, and at its center there is an incision that resembles one quarter of an inch, as to pierce a needle in such manner,
et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	And if it's from an animal, let it boil so that it doesn't hurt the patient when applying it to the limb;
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise,	And have in the middle a rod across of an earthworm or iron, for putting a candle in possession.
et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	And let them be both large and small according to the illnesses and the age of those who take them;
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	because the suction cups for children are different from those of the elderly, and those for thin people are different from those for fat ones.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	And thus one must put this suction cup onto the limb:
empren la chandoile de cire ou .i. linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse,	Take the wax candle or one line of it, and place it inside the suction cup through the penis which is inside the suction cup,
si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	so that the heat remains at the bottom of the suction cup rather than burning the skin;
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	and then place it on the limb, and you should do so at the location that we have mentioned, so that when needed, if the steam goes up, remove the suction cup;
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And trace the incision like before, and repeat it often, if you need to.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	In the suction cup treatment for pleurisy disease, during all stages of illness, there should be neither a lack nor an excess, and it is administered only when it is filled with water, and placed on the body solely.
et c’est li forme:	And this is its form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	Thrushes are not treated with suction cups in limbs where it's impossible to place suction cups due to their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar areas;
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	And on their naked skin from burns, like those of a bull or calf, and others similar;
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	And this is about water baths: when you find veins that are clean in calm water without infection, take them;
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	and put them in warm water until they become accustomed and have nothing in their abdomens.
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	and then cleanse the wound and use suction cups, then rub the limb until it turns red, and place the veins on it;
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	And when they are full, and itch, if it is possible to apply a suction cup, then do so, for this works very well.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	If not, raise the arm with ease and water, quite well, and then incision;
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille .i. drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	And if the arm is raised too soon after the course of the veins, cool it down with one and a half draps of linen in cold water, and place them on it, until the vein turns red;
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	And if there are multiple veins, place on it powdered vitriol or gall and similar substances until the vein turns red;
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	You place half of peeled beans inside the body, and leave them until they dry in the body, then it will now stop bleeding.
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	And if you need more work, take others without fail.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse,	And if the veins do not want to be taken again, rub with fresh blood or you put a needle inside until blood comes out.
et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	Then place them and soon as they feel the blood, let them dry;
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And when you see that they are bleeding, apply a mixture of aloes and flour or sifted ash to the wound; it will heal now.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book on fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it deals with the restoration and healing of fractures.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	Know this, dear child, that the leaves of this chapter are filled with matters not found in any of the old books, nor did they ever read a letter from them;
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	And because of this reason, the knowledge has been withdrawn from our land, for I have never found any good in it;
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	And I know nothing of it, for through the knowledge of ancient books, which I have studied so much that I have dealt with the knowledge there, and through experimentation, and by habit from my life;
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces .ij. chapistres ci devant.	And I have described in this chapter what is contained, and summarized it at the end, and shown clearly the forms of the instruments that are used, as I did in the previous two chapters.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	Therefore, it is necessary for us to outline the essence of this book in its introduction and prologue, and highlight the chapters where wise minds apply their intellect. We should adhere to truth, so that those who have been taught can understand and learn this noble art, and teach it to others as well.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	I say that when fractures or dislocations or twists occur in any part of the body, if it is necessary to quickly heal the patient on both sides and parts, without anything obstructing your path, like weakness from illness, or children, or elderly people;
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	Or if the treatment is too vigorous or too cold; and make fresh hot jugs, that means hot baths, and fat ointments and goat cheese, and do not drink wine, nor consume any fatty foods. And do not fill up with meat that fills the blood veins until you have doubt of a warm abscess or spreading material in the limb. If the patient responds well to their initial treatment as they used it before.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary to nourish the patient with foods that cause heavy digestion or are viscous, such as cooked wheat in water, and onions, and leeks, and peas, and cow liver, and eggs, and fresh fish, and heavy wine, and similar items.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For at any time of loosening they are moved more quickly and quicker is the breakage.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	And know that bones broken in old and weak people do not heal or join well according to their nature due to the withering of limbs, nor also those that are too soft, such as the bones of small children;
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet .i. gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	but rather apply a cure by fixing the broken bone to its original position, that is through the use of large splints which allow the limb to be joined together, just as it was before; and do not rush its work, for in this situation nourish with large meats, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that fractures are varied in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the breakage of the head is different from the breakage of the foot, or of the leg, and I will tell you all manners of breaking in this chapter.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there are breaks that go to the elbow, and others through prodding, such as the size of a feather for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if it's a broken bone with an injury, or a break resulting in a small crack.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	And each way has its own tool and proper instrument for restoration, according to what memory brings to mind;
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	It is known as the breaking of the bone by those whose legs are twisted, and opens well outward, and its pain feels upon pressing with the hand;
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	And when there is no twisting or sensitivity in the joints, and patients do not feel much pain, if there's no breaking of bones;
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	But it can well have twisting, or a crack, or a small break.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	If it doesn't suit you to move it with your hand, but apply the remedies that follow, and then gently strain it now.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les .ij. parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	And know that the breaking that occurred in the arm, and which are the two parts separated, now they should be placed level with each other, so that abscesses reach to the veins;
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	and if the pus is thick and comes out, if he leaves no day, until the abscess subsides;
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	then put it level with the movement you can do gently and wisely, know that restoring it is easier than in those where there are fragments. Then tighten it, as you will see later on this procedure.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de .ij. pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a .ij. cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	And if in the bone there are broken pieces, if it is divided into two parts, whether they are hands or feet, or by your hand if it's a small limb, or at two strings, or at one string and by your hand;
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	and position the limb according to its natural shape, so when the parts of the injured member are relieved, you realign them through all your efforts by moving them as far as you can, and ensure that in your work, no harm or pain befalls the patient.
et ajoste bien les .ij. chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	and properly adjust both ends of the bones according to the best shapes.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And feel well with your hand if you think it's not quite right: if it feels good to the touch, and don't strain it too much, don't press like those who bring about abscess drainage and muscle tension in the body as we have many times wanted.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	And when the limbs are in place, restrain the patient well so they don't move them, whether awake or asleep, while turning or in any other manner.
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And ensure that the limb is so secure that no pain is felt.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	For when no pain is felt, it is not properly placed, and you should put it in a suitable position so that no pain is felt;
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	and see to it that it be set straightly, lest any twist or curve remain when it has been restored;
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	And the quality of the member broken will be according to what I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that limbs broken vary in size and extent, and in shape.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	For there are smaller limbs, such as arms and legs and alike; it is necessary to envelop them with soft and subtle linen cloths;
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	And for those that are larger, such as buttocks and thighs: it is necessary to envelop them with a wide and hard bandage, because the wide bands wrap around the entire large limb, and restrict it equally from all sides, so there is no twist;
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, .iij. tours ou iiij. selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	Then place light bandages around it, three or four times or two depending on the member, and press your hand a little throughout the bandage, then go above the breakage and restrict less, so that the breakage can move slightly away from the breakage;
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren .i. autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	And soften that ligament a little bit by a little bit, until you grasp a large part of the healthy side, then take another ligament, and return back and forth on the broken limb;
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	Then go to the part near the breakage, and gently tighten it, neither too hard nor too soft, as we have said in our first instruction above;
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus .i. bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	Then place between the heated linen or cloths, until it is perfectly even, then tie everything with one bandage and afterwards put your well made pins on top, if there's no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	And if there is swelling or an abscess, then place something soothing over it, that removes the swelling, and leaves it like this for a few days;
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	Then hold onto your stars, and let them be half the width of a standard reed, or made from the shafts used for making sticks, or from the stems of palm trees, and shape them like this:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	but it is necessary that the stars placed on the break be a little bigger and wider than the others;
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	and let them be as long as is needed for limbs of smallness or greatness;
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	then hold them on the stars in the same way you did at the first trial, then tie above it an addition string, just like at the first trial on the breakage;
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	The more narrow it is hereafter, sooner; hence one should have a thread medium in size, neither too thick nor too thin, and made of soft linen.
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	For if the thread is thick, as with works that bind linens to wooden frames with twisted linen cords, and this is a great mistake, because the binding cannot be uniform if it is too fine, and it does not suit for there to be less than half a do of space between each nail.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patients are sore from the nails of the stakes after the tightening at their healthy parts, then put patches of linen or shoddy wool on them, so they do not blister.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is inflamed and the joints are broken, I will describe the treatment below.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it is not right to constrain all limbs broken on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés .v. jors ou .vij., ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	For when the limbs are large, it is not recommended to bind them with splints for more than 5 days or 7, or longer depending on the duration of each healing process occurring.
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	And here is the method of the old plastering to restore fractures, dislocations, and twists: take flour that stands on the walls of a mill, mix it with plenty of eggs, and prepare this concoction not too dry nor too thick, and use it, which is the common way of applying restoring plaster in various configurations, and equally for women and small children, as neither is too hot nor too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another method for the plastering that restores fractures and dislocations: take three parts of saffron, nine parts of cardamom, eight parts of rue, and one part of asafetida and gum Arabic, in a ratio of .x.3; add myrrh and aloes in the amount of .v.3; mix seven parts of vinegar with this concoction; if the mixture is warm, use this plaster, for it has good composition and heals broken bones quickly, and is beneficial to many people.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .viiij. З.; acaice vi. З.; bolic armenic .x. З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another method for plastering in case of twisting: take mugwort and valerian, each 3 grams; myrrh and aloes, each 8 grams; acacia, 6 grams; boric acid from Armenia, 10 grams, grind well, mix with water or enough egg white, then apply.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu. Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	Another method for dressing fractures and removing bone pieces, easing pain arising therefrom, and the use of bone cutting and bruising: take new wool, and cook its grease in oil, then place it on the affected area. These dressings do not heal completely but are better for soothing abscesses and properly treating bone pains.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another method for dressing broken bones that heals them: take dried fig leaves and land beech leaves, grind them together, and make a plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme. Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Another method for plastering during the restoration of bone fracture and to promote the healing of the abscess. Take root of vervain, chamomile, flowers of violettes, flour of borage, from each one part; and grind it all together, mix with wine, and if the limb is heated, mix with wet coriander water or just plain water, and use it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre. Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Another method for plastering more forcefully than the first one when an abscess is being restored in a limb. Take roots of vervain and flaxseed, balm, melilot, and wormwood, and flowers of violet and chamomile, from each take one part; grind it all together, mix with salt water or sweet water, or with wine depending on the heat of the limb and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	In his book, Hippocrates states that to restore strength in a fractured limb one should apply a salve made of beeswax and oil, and nothing else more. He says it should be between two layers neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems to Galen that we should place upon the broken limb for restoration, things slightly moistened but somewhat warm, such as mirr (mastic), aloe, incense and similar things, just as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another method for dressing injuries and pain: take the fat and feathers from cooked sheep or goose carcasses, or bird feathers, and ground coriander seeds equally with them. Grind all these ingredients together to create a poultice which you apply to the wound.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors	Then after a short while, be sure that the patient does not feel any pain and that there is no movement in their bone at its location. If it was not dislocated by hand movements.
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	And if pain starts at the site, or itching appears, if there's no rest or swelling, then you must act quickly, and reposition it, then apply the poultice; take a light cloth and a wet sponge from the sea, immerse them in water, and hold over his head until the itching stops and the pain is alleviated.
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	Then allow the limb to rest for an hour, then place it on dry wool, moistened with water or rose oil, and tie it up with a bandage until you are sure of removing any pus.
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And allow the inflammation to settle on the limb, and alleviate the pain, then resume the gentle treatment, a bit of plaster, and do not exert force as before; continue with subtlety until it is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you notice that pus and redness, pain and swelling are subsiding, indicating the injury has healed throughout, then you need plaster and bandaging; start again as you did initially.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés .iij. jors ou .iiij. ou .v. ou .vij.; et aucune fois le laisse .xx. jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	And if nothing of what we have discussed happens to the limb, or it does not relax until after three days, four days, five days, seven days; and each time let it rest for twenty days according to observation, as long as the healing process continues, approaching the realignment of the bone.
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	Therefore, maintain the restraint longer than before, and let his meat grow bigger, as I said earlier. And if you see that his body dries out more than it should, know that no remedies can come from this situation;
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	Let the hot water cure him whenever you reset his shoulder, and do this every third day, and gently clean a bit of the wound;
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	Through this work, cut out the dislocations from the limb, and hasten what foolish remedies cause, that deform the limb brutally: this is bad, and such operations are useless, and I see no other solution than to leave it alone and operate properly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	Through various methods of breaking up
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	Many ways of breaks exist, and various shapes, and their causes are designated;
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	For there are breaks caused by the impact of a sword, and injuries to the neck that involve breaking all the bone up to the joint socket at the base of the skull, as with an axe or cudgel; because of this, such types of breakage are called "axehurts".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	Or when the sword penetrates the bone from above without passing through, this type of breakage is called "absolute"; and both large and small wounds result from these two kinds of breaks.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is sequential impact, or crack in the bone, or injury from stone, or impact on stone, or other similar occurrences.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a break that approaches until it reaches the tissue beneath the bone, or above the bone, and this wound can be large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	And if there is a wound penetrating the bone as thin as a hair, and this crack is small, and due to this it is called that "hairline" fracture;
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if the wound is made either by hitting with a stone or falling or any similar thing that causes the bone fragment to go inward, and makes the limb bend as blacksmiths do when they are working on pots; it enters the stone inside.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	And this happens more in those who have wet bones below such as in an adult's thigh bone;
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And occurs through all these ways of breaking where small fragments are lost as with these; and I will discuss them in their own right.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And let us know all the ways of breakages through the diminishment above them, and the examination at stakes, and by the corrupt flesh which is upon.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The appearance of hair can be recognized when one has exposed the bone and rubs it inside, revealing the black breakage.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In treating breakage, beware of adverse effects due to malaise, and if you do not encounter any bad side effects such as vomiting bile, loss of consciousness, stretching, pallor, fever ague, and other symptoms appearing in various conditions, it cannot be cured without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see an alarming mishap, and you hope for salvation, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when winter comes first to you, and if it is winter, then it's necessary to remove the bone before the fourteenth day of the month that you can.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is spring, then you should hurry to remove the bone before the seventh day, in such a way that the pus around the bone is rotten, and accidents occur as we have said.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues,	And if the bone break reaches up to the membrane covering the brain, it is necessary that you split the broken part like this: and when you take hold of the head from the affected side, and expose on the bone in all manners that you can, and more according to the appearance of the wound as much as you can.
et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	And if the flow of blood comes to reveal the bone, or when an abscess ruptures, you use what is necessary, and it is that you fill the wound with wet bandages soaked in rose oil;
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc .ij. manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And let the wound rest until the abscess is calmed and there's no more pain from bleeding; then begin working towards the bone to remove it. This task can be done in two ways as described in this chapter: one way is that you cut precisely at the front, which forms:
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then make another cut larger than the first one.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second method is that you have various sizes of knives, some narrow and others wide, and they should be pointed, and made of hard iron; and you use them lightly in your work so as not to injure the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is too hard, you should drill it internally, so as to apply cuts with awls without going through the soft tissue beyond the bone, and there must be a margin or a circle of about one inch above the point that does not allow the point to go beyond the bone; and you need more than one, so that each goes into its place of the thickness of the bone, so that you have awls for all sides; and this is the shape of the three types of awl cuts.
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The quality for drilling through the bone is to place an awl on the bone and twist with your fingers until you know that the bone is pierced. Then remove the awl a little further, and do this all around, then cut out the space between the fractures of the bone, and do it as finely and gently as possible, while still using light force, as we have said, either by hand or any tool you have such as tweezers; make sure not to touch the brain or the spinal cord.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout .i. autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	And when you have pierced and treated the bone, it is fitting that you retain the preparation left from the bone to all half inches. However, it must be sturdier and more delicate than another incisor;
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a .i. des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	and if there remains no little bones or any scales, then gently remove them with tools of a half-inch size; then treat the wound with the gauze and remedies that we have discussed.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And another way of treatment is this, as Galien stated, which is more sparing; and it uses a strong knife, and that is his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first to uncover a part of the bone where the fracture opens and moves. So when you have uncovered that part, place underneath the tip of this ophthalmic incisor, as described here:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en .ij. costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	And do not cut from one side alone, and have the part divided into two ribs, so that when you are cutting it faces the bone; then with a small hammer from above, so you strike lightly across the entire bone, and be well cautious of the cloth which is nearby;
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	If it pushes against the bone, do so lightly, because you can feel the bone cause harm and fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the bone break does not pierce until the cloth and only cuts through from above, with small pieces remaining, then after that roughness, use a fine razor to remove the scales. You must have various quantities of this tool in order to administer the most suitable treatment for each location according to the manual and the appearance of the break.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you stand before great razors, and after finer ones, and do not stop doing this until it is well done.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In every other hair cutting and delicate breakage, you must adjust your actions according to their direction; this is something that cannot be done by someone who has devoted their study to this craft.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes .i. drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	And if it is exposed during surgery, it should be that you take .1 drachm of linen, according to the size of the wound, and mix it with rose oil, and place it on the wound;
puis pren .i. autre drapeil doublé en .ij. ou en .iij., et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus .i. autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	Then take another piece of cloth, doubled either two or three times, and soak it in wine and rose oil, then place it on the first layer; do this as lightly as you can, without burdening the syfac, then apply a layer of lint over it, but don't pull it tightly enough that it only touches the wound.
et le laisse ensi .i. jor ou .ij., tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	And let them be like that for one or two days, until the abscesses have subsided, then release them and apply medicine if it is roots of basil, flour of yew, incense powder, and arisole, and similar things; and make a powder from these things, place it on the wound, and administer antiseptic medicines immediately without causing any irritation.
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	And see to it that the wound is cleaned immediately, do not leave any ointment behind, nor allow it to assemble in the brain fabric. For when something assembles over the web of the mind, it causes harm and leads to great distress; because when you place a biting thing on the head, it gets irritated from above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Take care then, so that no harmful events occur to the patient as we have said, in case there is doubt without doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et .iij. parties d’oile roset et en glue .i. drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	And if death does not come from what medicine we have placed upon it, assuming this has the necessary effect, then you should take one part of honey, and three parts of rosegum oil and one drachm of glue, and place this mixture on the face;
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then continue with treatments as needed until it is healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Know that neither of the two parts above the nose are broken, or only one if necessary, as these consist of two bones; and the one below is cartilaginous, it does not break, nor will it allow bending or twisting once healed.
Et se l’une des .ij. parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	And if one of the two parts is broken, you should press your little finger or tip under the nose and make an equal break inside to your second finger, and at the nostril opening outwardly, until the nose revives according to its natural shape;
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And do this gently, and beware that the patient does not feel pain through your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is above the nose part and cannot reach to its place at the head, then it is necessary that you make it equal to the tip of a stick somewhat thick.
Et se li brisure est de .ij. pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	And if the break is in two parts, then remake the treatment, and hasten to restore it on the first day, if you can;
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	But if not, after the seventh or eighth day when the abscess has calmed down, then apply a poultice of linen to the nose tip, if the break is in one part.
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	When you pull one to another on the other side, if breaking occurs; and make sure they are as large as they fill the cavities in the nose.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor. Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	And they say that one should moisten the tents with butter and change each day. I don't think it's correct, but rather they should be moistened in the preparation of egg yolk mixed with powder from grinding; then let the tent remain until the bone is hard and the cartilage is hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And every time you pull out the original or nose feathers in place of the tents, and if it's one egg with an inner layer of skin, and keeps the wound intact, and lets the air pass through; do as you see fit.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if abscesses come to the nose in the same way as you are doing it, then put a poultice or wet cotton in oil mixed with it, or in one corner of a spoonful of snail juice.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	And if abscesses do not come out, you should apply plaster to the surface, made of ash powder and incense powder. Mix it with yolk oil, then place light wadding on top and don't bind it too tightly;
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	And if the bone fracture is small and broken into many pieces, when you can use suitable tools for this task, then cut along the crack, and clean out the fragments of soft tissue, and stitch them together, as with plasters and ointments that are suitable for this purpose;
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there is no wound within the bone, then you can clean it out and put on cloths soaked in vinegar, as long as it is sound.
de la routure de la mandibule	Of the rupture of the jawbone
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jawbone is broken externally, and there's no wound outwardly, only the fracture is external. It isn't broken into two halves completely; rather it breaks internally as well, which can be discerned lightly.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	It is necessary, should the break occur in the right part of the jawbone, to press your index finger into the mouth at the site where the patient is suffering; and if the break occurs in the left mandibular part, you must use your index finger from the right hand, press gently on the break internally, and then proceed with the operation by making an incision externally with the other hand.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if there is a break in both parts of the jawbone, it must be treated with extension of half parts, until they are equal.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if tooth movements occur, or rupture, then hold them with a thread of gold, silver or silk. Then place wax on the broken jaw, and place two pieces of cloth on top; and place one large pad well made under this cloth piece, or a leather piece equal to it in length and width according to the jaw size, and tie it on as much as you can. Command the patient to rest, and have light meals.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	And if you notice that the figure changes, then reposition it on the third day and thereafter put back into place whatever has shifted; apply plaster to this area, mix powdered chalk with abundant egg or sesame flour after removing the wax; cover the plaster with fine wool, and when the plaster hardens and the patient's position does not change anymore, let them be like that until they are healed; many times it is healed in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if pus-filled ulcers come about, then apply what we have repeatedly instructed.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a fracture combined with a wound together, reward nothing of the bone has been removed; so much skill in extracting tools needed for this task is required.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, widen it with fire according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all these pieces and there is nothing left, if the wound is wide, place one plaster over it suitable for this purpose to promote healing until it heals.
de la forcele	with strength
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The force breaks many times before reaching the shoulder, and each break occurs in three ways: it may break completely and be separated into two parts, leaving fragments that are easier to restore; or there might be a break accompanied by an injury.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And in the cases where there is a break accompanied by an injury, if you have two helpers, so that one marks the shoulder where the force breaks; and the other extends their hand towards the affected part. Then align the break with your fingers, ensuring the shape matches how it should be, without any appearance or movement of the break.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you need to extend further, place a round sponge of cloth or wool under the shoulder and side, with its size according to your needs; stretch out and lift the force (meaning pressure), while restraining the sponge in your hand so that you can align the break correctly, as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot draw the head from the strength's force behind it, because it comes forward, then the patient must lie with their head resting on their pillow, and place one of the shoulder's cushions under both shoulders. Have the attendants press the shoulder downwards until the bone of the strength rises.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then strike the break with your fingers, and if you find fragments, it is necessary to cut there; and pull gently on the pieces. If the bone cannot join at all pressures, then use one of the incisors that you have; but place this instrument against the strength, to guide this surgery:
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait .ij. chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	and make it resemble a spoon, and do not use it in the wrong place, and be as wide as it needs to be, according to the size of the bone and the scale of the work; and have two holes, as you see fit, and one should be wide and the other narrow, as they are the lines of the wound that you made when treating the bones.
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	And when you are assured of the removal of the abscess, if you suture the wound, and if the rupture is small, or if you doubt about the removal of the abscess, if you cover the wound with bandages and tents according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And when the abscesses are drained, if it is moist, soak bandages in oil rose and in sweat and wine, and place them on top.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	The abrasion of the bone, when it is affected by wounds and surgery, involves placing on the bone a plaster made from grinding powder and yolk of egg, and you place light bandages on top. And if necessary, put an eggshell underneath.
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met .i. drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de .iij. dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	Then take a very large bandage about the size of your palm in width, then place two double bandages on top of the bandages and plaster. Then take an elongated strip, around seven inches wide and long, wrap it around that bandage so that the end hangs down like the tail of the bandage.
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	And place the instrument on the wound, and turn the bandage around the neck, and under the healthy armpit, and under the diseased one; and manipulate each part separately. And when you see that the cure is taking effect, and you clearly see that the tool doesn't move above the broken bone, then reward each day's effort, and when it heals completely, then he should be restrained;
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort .i. petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a .xx. jors;	Let the disease heal on its back, and put him to bed with a small pillow under the armpit to raise his shoulder higher; this will alleviate the pain caused by the broken force, or you tie his arm around the neck, and don't let it move for fear of harmful accidents lasting up to twenty days;
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en .xxviij. jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	Then reapply the plaster if you see it needs to be done, and tighten him up but leave him like that until he is restored; and she/he will be fully restored at most in twenty-six days, and sooner for some individuals.
de la brisure de l’espaule	From the breaking of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus .i. drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en .xx. jors ou en xxv,  Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	Sometimes the shoulder breaks or splits at its end or in the middle, and it might be dislocated by just touching it; if you handle it according to the shape of the break and reset it following its natural form, in all possible ways. Then apply with a powder from the mill mixed with plenty of eggs, light compresses, and place two cloths on top; then place a broad and subtle strip, slightly wider than the shoulder, so that there are no movements around any part of the shoulder. Cover this area with linseed oil wadding evenly; and then tighten everything in one large band firmly, so that the strip doesn't move from its place. Watch the progress each day; whenever it starts to heal, tighten again and make sure the strip is still in place where it should be, keeping the patient's side comfortable. The shoulder will be healed after 20 or 25 days. And when this number of days has been completed, reset it, being assured that it's secure, because what settles is not a bone that can move lightly.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a bone fragment is ahead and not at the corner, then do it above, and the wound will open again. Then, follow what we have said about treating bleeding abscesses.
de la brisure dou pis	of the breaking of the foot
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer. Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	The foot is sometimes broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; it breaks more often at the end. And when it's broken in the middle, it gets tilted downwards, causing great pain for the patient, lack of control, and they might suddenly vomit blood, and the movement opens up within the broken bone, and one can clearly feel this sensation.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And in the restoration process, if the patient has been laid on their back, and you place them one and a half cubits between the shoulders, then press the shoulders, and unite both ribs with your hands. Apply slight pressure to make it even in all ways that are possible until the shape of the bone is as it should be; then put plaster and bandages over the delicate salt formation, or another lighter substance, and wrap it tightly in a cloak, tying it around the broken bone so it doesn't move; then turn their back round again, compress slightly towards the sides, and reward each hour with the treatment, if it stretches then tighten. If it seems to come undone due to corrosion or itching that comes with the injury, or pain or abscesses, do it quickly, undo it, remove the plaster, direct the person who has received the treatment according to healing methods; then reapply the plaster and compress until it's fit.
de la brisure des costes	from the breaking of the ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	Know that the breaking of the ribs only happens after the large bones behind the back, and within the chest, and they bend only because they are slippery; and one can feel it well during examination at the stethoscope.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient. Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And for setting it back in place if needed, you should equalize the breakage, just as it should be done. And then apply the plaster, and bind it with a strip, if you need to do so.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the breaking of the ribs is occurring internally, one feels great pain and sharp shooting pains, like from miscarriage, because the bone points against the flesh; there are also swellings, aching all over, immediate vomiting of blood, and this is distressing for health, and the elderly have experienced severe agony.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if there are those who say it is necessary to consume meat that inflates the belly, in order to expel wind from within.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not follow this, that pus and sulfur should be introduced if it has not already been there.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it has already been there, then heal it.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And it is said by none that we apply suckling mounds to the body in order to draw out forms, and this seems reasonable; however, there is doubt that the suction cup does not attract excesses to the body due to the weakness of disposition.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And it is said that when one must cover the body with wet wool in heated oil, and to place cloths between the ribs to make the wound equal inside, then follow the treatment of bleeding, of meat and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz .i. estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez. Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain that it cannot endure through the bone piercing the skin, and there is doubt with the patient, whether or not to cut on the side of the broken rib area, and it is necessary to place an instrument under the injured part; then one must cut into the bone and gently drain it. And then stitches should be applied to the two sides of the wound if it's large, and treated with plasters until healed. And when pus comes out, then wet cloths in rosy oil should be placed on top of the wound, and on the body; and treat while the part is where it should be, until it heals.
de la brisure dou col	Of the breaking of the neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	No break occurs to the bones of the neck, and it does not bend;
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent. Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	And when this happens to anyone, and you want to know if they will recover or not, if you notice that their hands are softened, swollen, and dead, and cannot be moved or extended, and when you prick them with a needle, if they do not feel it. Know that they may die in various conditions, and if they remain unaware and do not feel pain even when restrained and released, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient has been cured if care was taken.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit. Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet. Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	And when this happens to the spine in the back, and you want to know if they will recover or not, be wary if the joints are softened, and if there are accidents akin to those found on the hands, and wind expulsion and loss without desire; and when it has been observed on their belly, if it expels without desire. And when it is treated on their back and they want to stand up, if they cannot do so. Know that they may die: if they do not heal with their treatment.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this misfortune does not happen to him, then it is a matter of less concern.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the treatment is such that you remove any pus if it exists, if there is an oil to be applied near the spine or the yolk sac of an egg, until it calms down; then apply a healing plaster and let it dry, bind it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that part where one feels pain, until they recover.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any bone is broken, then cover it with a poultice; and set the bone, then join the two edges of the wound together, if they are large, with stitches, then treat with ointment until healed; and if the head of the bone is fractured, which is called the "broken head of the knuckle", if you have your left hand's bag, place it evenly against your right hand at your power, then apply the plaster and elevation if needed; then compress, and if a broken bone exists, treat it there, and set it, and heal the wound until it heals.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	Of the breaking of the hip bone
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	It happens that the hip bone is broken, and if it does, there may be a slight discomfort at the thigh; and it extends long distances, declines towards the knees, and brings pain to the leg, and bruising where it breaks.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And for the restoration, you should stretch your hand upwards as long as you are over the fracture; and know where the break is and its shape. And if the break is only in the thigh, place it with an equal break until its natural shape is restored.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the break extends along or declines towards inside, have the patient lie on their stomach, until you achieve the restoration of that break.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have made it even, place it on the plaster, then put it on a stake of wood or charcoal, and hold the wound in place so that it does not move; and apply heat evenly over the back until the wound is even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	Instruct the patient to sleep on their side or on their back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if the abscesses burst, do not disturb it until the abscesses are soothed and you place them as we have said before; then return to the process of restoration and tighten properly as needed, provided there is no bad incident; this is how it should be done.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	Regarding the breaking of the shoulder.
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The assistants are those that lie between the elbow and the shoulder's head, and if it is broken, you must restore it according to one of these two methods: wherein one is that you take a stick one foot long in the middle size, according to this form:
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And tie as two bones together, and bend them upwards, fixing the skin on one seat; then let your broken arm rest on the stick until it reaches the armpit, and be bent by half a length of the stick, then bend towards any weight-bearing thing or when the attendants are lifting downwards; then place the broken end equally in front of their hands until the broken part returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	The other method is that you fix the skin on his neck, and tie the hand to the neck, then command two attendants that one of them shaves the one above the wound with their hands, and the other cuts down to all half an inch, and extend each in their respective parts.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint .i. liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part. Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes .i. liien moien desoz l’assele, et .i. autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre .i. liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if you see that the extraction is more vigorous, hold a loop near the incision, and above it, extend each of the assistants to their part. And if the incision is close to the shoulder joint, it's necessary for you to place one loop halfway along the joint, and another towards the knife, near the incision; also if the incision is at the side of the knife, it's proper to place a lighter loop without effort until the incision is level with the joint and the blade; then make an even cut, as fits, and hold it in place, so that if pus doesn't come out.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if pus does come out, do not restrain for more than seven days, and place on it greased wool in a quiet place and in oil rose until the pus coming out is soothed; then release it, and do it in this way of restraint by placing plaster on the incision, then attach the arm to the shoulder support, and put your hand on the shoulder or breast; place the towel and restrain on the support, and on the arm, such that the arm remains straight without anything preventing it, or if the bone is not broken.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone does not move, use splints, and place on the incision an extra wide and strong splint compared to others, leaving .5 do of space between each splint, and make sure that each splint is large enough to pass across the incision at least 3 do from each side; then apply traction to the splints as I said at the beginning in this chapter on the incision, applying more strength than in bringing closer together.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns .iij. jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois. Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	And when you see the position of the stakes and the tightening, as we have said, in the hour that you restore the broken member, if you doubt about removing an abscess, if you let it bind until the seventh day, as we have said; then watch each three days the binding, so that itching does not swell up or come to the site where there should not be any pus coming out because it is too tight. If it heals, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés .iij. jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire .i. cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse. Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en .xl. jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.  Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier .l. jors ou .ij. mois.	And if no such events occur, or if the dislocation takes two days or more after the start of the healing process, and if the patient remains comfortable on his back with his hands on his stomach; place one inch thick wool under the shoulder for each hour during which he is to rest. Then watch every day that the figure of the broken limb does not move or soften, nor do you find any pus in the wound. The medicine heals it by its virtue and provides the meat we have placed before as treatment, ensuring that the meat is thoroughly absorbed; when he starts to recover, if it's large. It's customary for both the shoulder and leg to be healed within forty days after all procedures; then you must dislocate again and administer baths and medicines for local treatments until complete recovery.
de la brisure du bras	of the breaking of the arm
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is made up of two bones, which are called the 'fosciles'. One bone is smaller, and it is this one that protects the elbow; while the other bone is larger, and it is this one that lies beneath the small head. Sometimes only the large foscile breaks or both might break together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble. Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	When the smaller fosciles break, the restoration is light, and the healing; and when the larger ones break, the healing is poorly done, and more painful than when they broke together. If it's only the small foscile that breaks, then gently extending it slightly, and putting it on equal footing would be sufficient.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus .i. cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et .i. cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a .i. liien, et uns autres ministres a .i. autre au desus. Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And if it's the larger foscile that breaks, then you should pull more tightly; and extend it on a cushion, and elevate the elbow of your hand higher than the others, and the smaller fingers lower than the other fingers, and have the patient cross their fingers over themselves, and another cushion in front of them raised, so high that the hand does not suffer any strain; then extend your servant's arm to the part above his hand, or at the elbow, and one other assistant on the other side. Then place the mirror evenly according to their best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if during the breaking into pieces, you place each back in its original position, and if none of them is broken to be grasped by the hand, and you cannot restore it to its original position, then you do work on and the bone, as we said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if during the wound caused by the breakage, which I have discussed in the single chapter; take the treatment.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue .i. drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie .i. drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez. Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir vj. esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en .ij.; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit. Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And if during the beginning of the restoration there are abscesses present, then apply .i. a strip of cerate made from rosin and white beeswax, ensuring it is neither too hard nor too soft; and bind this strip finely above so that when the abscesses are alleviated, they are soothed. Then remove the cerate, and replace with plaster made by mixing the powder from the mill with plenty of egg whites; place the splints hereafter, making sure that the splint corresponding to the breakage is more prominent, slightly wider than the others. And you should know that there must be seven or eight splints in various positions: whether the breakage affects one bone, two bones, and it binds more above the breakage than elsewhere, as I have explained at the beginning of this chapter; and ensure the strips covering the breakage are soft and moist, neither hard nor rough; and use threads made from linen that are not too thick or too thin, as we said. And keep up to bind the limb and its joints for several days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer. Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And if any bad occurrences come to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, it should be that you warm the limb with hot water, until that itch is calmed; and let the limb not be left to rest. And then restart constriction, and when this ligament has been split and these bones have been exposed, and similar things, if they are treated properly.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if precaution is taken so that no distresses cannot come to the limb because it is too constricted, it should be that you soften it with pox (a kind of compress or poultice), and leave it in this manner for a few days, until the distresses have passed, and then you should tighten.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a .xx. jors. ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en .xxx. jors ou en .xxxv., et par aventure en .xx. jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	And if none of these things that we have spoken about come to the patient, or if it is allowed to remain unrelieved for up to 20 days. Or until then, then place their hands on the neck and make sure the necks are even, and take care not to move them or to dislocate anything, and let them rest on their back; and know that this swelling has been restored in about 30 days or about 45 days, and perhaps around 20 days depending on the compositions and the nature of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	Of the breaking of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that on the back of the hand and around our thumbs there are few breaks, and only bending happens many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	And when the sole of the hand is broken or bent, it should be treated so that the parts heal in a straight line and directly in front of him equally; then place his hand on an extended surface, and extend the fingers with the broken bones, placing them evenly under each eye, until they are properly aligned; then apply the bandage and splints if no abscess forms, and then place an elevation according to the size of his bed; and wrap it in one layer of linen.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the break is in the heel near the belly of the sole, make a cone of linen and instruct the patient to place it on his broken foot; then draw it tightly onto the heel, and ensure that the elevation is as wide as the hand's sole, and adjust so it fits properly.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the breakage is at the front, it is necessary to place an electrode above and another under in the sole of the foot, so that the hand be open and straight, then tie it completely around the hand, and seal the connection between the fingers.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the breakage affects neither of my fingers, it's the thumb case, and you should place them equally, as is appropriate; and apply pressure with the sole, and if you see fit to use a small right electrode to lift the breakage, and keep it still; and if the breakage occurs on one of the other fingers like in the index or any other, then you should place them equally, and tie them with a healthy finger that follows; or you can tie all together, considering each's position, or you put an electrode here like you would for the thumb; take care in maintaining and arranging the treatment at each stage, and help those who are coming up against problems, as I have explained.
de la cuixe brisie	Of the broken kneecap
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	The bone of the elbow is often broken, and one can see it when it turns in front and behind; and the restoration happens as follows: first, one ties a bandage above the break, and secondly underneath it.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the wounds lie on their face, then stretch each of their joints to their equal parts; and this is when the break has reached into the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure. Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses .ij. mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And when the break is close to the elbow joint's base, then tie one ligament towards the wrist, and the other ligament below the break. Similarly, if it is close to the knee, in which case place one ligament behind the knee, and the extension downwards; then place the bones equal to their two hands until they follow its natural figure, and then apply plaster and bandage, and should no abscess occur.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is an abscess to deal with, let it heal first before returning to your work and treatment; the incision is made in such a manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure .i. bendeil dur doublé en .ij. ou .iij., et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute .i. fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment .iij. tors ou iiij. sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as .ij. chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie .iij. esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is necessary that you wrap around the wound. i.e., bandage it tightly in two or three layers, and retain the excess, then bend the leg until the heels reach the root of the thigh, and insert one long thread between the calf and the leg, under the knee, and guide the thread up through the loops; then continue to wrap around the leg and calf with the bandage, then place a wick on top of the wound, and place another wick on the bone of the leg; then fill the space between the leg and calf with strips of cloth so as to make the pressure equal, then begin to bind tightly in three or four turns around the wound; and when you go beyond the wound, bind more loosely; then take two threads that you have inserted between the leg and calf, and bind them with three wicks placed above, then return under the thread where it was coming from until you reach the ankle; and tighten, so that it does not move from its place, then leave it like this, then if there is no abscess, swelling or other symptom.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if it happens that it dislocates again, reposition as what we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that catch, it is necessary to extract them if possible; and if you cannot, then it is necessary to cut through the wound, and drain the fluid; and treat in the way we have said, until it heals.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And never is the skin broken in such a way when these needles are inserted, as in the shoulder and arm; however, during this kind of treatment, there should be no harm to the patient.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	Know that the skin is restored in about one day, or somewhat more or less depending on individual differences.
de la ruelle dou genoil	from the garden alley
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois. Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou .i. pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	Know that in the garden alley there is little breakage, but it bends many times. And if it breaks, it's usually just a crack, or two pieces missing, and appears on any wound, and even without a wound, and one feels this well.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And for its restoration, we are to make it so that what is round on its ends matches up until they can move together. Then apply the plaster, and place a round wedge if needed, then tighten as necessary. Afterward, confirm all the arrangements we have spoken of in other fractures, like pus formation or similar phenomena; for each condition, use what suits it until it's healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the fracture of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait .ij. os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i.	Know that in the leg are two bones, of which one is called by its right name "tibia" and the other is called "fibula"; and any injury or breakage occurs similarly as with the arm, and for this reason, the restoration method is exactly like that for the arm, and the procedures are all the same.
Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	And if two bones are broken together, then turn the leg from all sides.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the delicate bones are broken, then turn in front.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz. Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	And if the larger bones are broken, then one feels great pain and sees it clearly; turn away from there. Then apply extension, make it equal, and fasten the ligaments equally; but still, when the break is ugly and consists of many pieces, the extension should be smaller and lighter; and adjust according to your skill.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have accomplished your task, take two ropes of hawser that bind the leg on both sides and are as long as the leg from the knee down to there; then wrap them twice around each of the two large ligaments above and below, tying them in the middle so that the leg cannot move either right or left. And thus it is well done; and no one should treat with a single rope of this length made of hawser, and they put the leg to rest from movement, doing this properly at the break where there is an injury; and move the leg every day to see if any abscess forms or any other incident occurs; heal it as long as it is sound.
de la brisure des os dou piet	From the breaking of bones at the knee
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle it does not come from breaking, but with bones at the knee breaking occurs and in the legs, there is only force that acts in various positions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if breaking occurs at the bones of the knee, and you see these bones press one against another, place those bones in the ground like they wanted to go, just as it would with them trying to move. Then place your foot on their spot where the bones are lifted, press it there until they regain movement in their joints; then apply plaster and bandages over it, and place a small table under his knee for about two inches, then force the knee to its normal position, then wrap cloths around it and other things you need.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And once three or four days have passed, you'll find that the ligaments are equal; whether they were broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if any of the ribs are broken, restore them as we have said about the ribs of the hand. Then place a piece under each broken rib according to its length, slightly longer than the rib itself, then place that base on the table I mentioned, and hold it in position; and if there are two or three or more broken ribs, break them, and then for each rib put a piece according to its quantity, wrapped in one piece of linen, and hold the table under this; and while standing over the front edge of the table facing the belly of the wound, make sure to secure it well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And you must not forget the other things I have said about other injuries, once we've discussed them; and attend to each incident according to how it should be.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the breaking of the hand bone
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com .i. sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice .vij. jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bone of the natural womb is broken, if she lets it swell, then incline her to the lower part of the back, and hold her from behind; then fill the opening of nature with cotton, and put in such an amount as half a stick; then make the woman stand up again slowly and gently lift her back bit by bit, and then let the cotton spring out until it reaches the entrance of nature, bringing the bone along with the stick; and when she wishes to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has done so, put it back in place, repeating this process for seven days or more: if you see that healing is occurring, take a goat bladder, tie a piece of cane to its opening, and fill the whole bladder with nature; then blow into the cane forcefully until the bladder inflates internally. The natural process will correct the breakage; afterward, fill it with cotton and let her rest for some more days until it heals.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre. Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	And when the bone of the hand is broken or that of someone else, if it can be restored as we have said concerning the thigh bone; and do not ignore these injuries for those who devote their efforts to them, and hear my book. For the breakage signifies in various positions the right way of restoration: hence, understand this.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the case of a broken penis, take an oyster shell and fill it with the penis; then wrap it securely in cloth, and leave it for three days or as long as needed, and it will heal quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	of fracture with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for the one who has a fracture with wound, even if it's large, like in the case of a rib or shoulder blade or similar, that it be treated surgically now, so that the surgeries we have mentioned can attest to this.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is healing well, one may use vinegar to do so, should you have nothing else; then proceed to heal the fracture in that same hour or day. If abscesses form and remain there, however, then start again on the treatment of the fracture at that point.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And should abscesses continue to form and remain there, let the healing process continue for a new day, until the abscesses are subdued. Don't touch them on the third or fourth day, as you would cause unwanted complications.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the bone is broken and visible under the uncovered part of your body, you should place it lightly with your hands, in a small extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extension does not appear for you to place it evenly with your hands, then take this tool made of iron which is .vij. or .viij. inches long, and its width corresponds to the size of the wound; and in each case of a broken bone, the surgeon must insert three or four (depending on his needs), according to what he requires for each treatment of fracture; it should be round and slightly thick so that it does not bend under compression against your limb when working, and it should be sharp at both ends, and thick at the middle towards the front.
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre. Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And it is called 'palainche', so that the curved ends of the bone should be placed on the tip of the visible bone; and strike once, as long as it holds, and make them even against each other. And if the breakage is subtle, and the tools are unable to properly grasp the bone, then you must hold onto the tip of the bone until the tools have the ability to do so.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot bring back the bone, as we have said, if you have a suitable tool for this purpose, such as an incisor or awl, use your strength; then remove what is left in the bone of roughness and small flakes.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil. Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille .i. drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	And when the bone has been returned and the patient feels intense pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place. Do what you can to have it back there, then apply one part of vinegar tincture mixed with black wine; and if this happens in a dry state; and do not put anything like plaster or other thing on the wound where there was an open sore, so that no gangrene or corruption comes about; then give these remedies after you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and apply the dressing all over according to the size of the wound, and take care well that the wound not be strained with friction; and many times have people done this wrongly, causing harm or decay to the patient; and let your treatments be softer and less aggressive than other injuries.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie. Et quant tu vois aprés .i. jor ou .ij. enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And if the wound is deep or large and you doubt that harmful occurrences might happen there, as we have said earlier, and you find pain in the area, then it does not suit to apply remedies; but cover everything neatly instead of applying remedies, with tough bandages and secure them. And when after one or two days you see improvement on the wound bed, so remove what you had put against all wine, and apply a healing ointment for wounds, such as tetrarmocon's ointment and similar ones.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it must be that you dislocate the limb twice a day, in the morning and at vespers, until it is joined and healed.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it should be that the limb is placed so that the bone goes back up slightly gently.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if this continues for several days, and it can't join at all back to its place, know that there are small pieces of bone, so you should treat the wound with a plaster bandage, and remove all these pieces that cause pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant. Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés .xx. jors ou .xxx., puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And if it leads to a fistula in the place or any other form of corruption, then you should treat it according to what he explained in his chapter above. And when the bone is broken and exposed at the limb, such as the bones of the elbow or shoulder joint, or others like large limbs, do not treat it; many times this leads to death, but let it heal naturally; by chance, it might close after about 20 days or 30 days. Then if you can, cure the wound; if not, leave it as is.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	The burns that come from sweat
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	We often see burns after rubbing the skin by the breeze, especially near joints. An ugly thing to see is how the member's figure becomes; and by chance cannot perform its natural actions on the body.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Take caution then when it is fresh: if you administer any stictch medicines such as aloes, frankincense, and myrrh, sarsagall, aniseed, and similar others, do so according to your preference for any of these things or all together, and mix them with a stichtic wine or with plenty of egg or with vinegar; then apply it on the skin in poultices, squeeze well, and do not remove by hand; afterwards remove it, and start another application until all the lumps are removed. Or you apply on a well-made piece of plaster; for the properties of the plaster so are that it removes all swellings above the limbs; and if the lump has turned into hardness like stone and needs to be removed, then cover it from below, and let the excess show clearly; or take it away with any knife until it is completely removed, and continue treating until it heals.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	Of the member which becomes weak after garrisoning
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the breaking of the bone has been restored and afterwards, the limbs are weak and subtle, this happens due to various reasons: because it was tied too tightly and not as it should be; or because there were too many bindings, and no relief could come to the limb; or due to an excessive amount of swelling; or due to large movements that did not occur in their time; or because he has little blood in his body, being weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the treatment is that you must eat the disease for him, and make his body soft, until the abscess multiplies within him; then give him baths, and make him happy and relaxed. Then put ointment on the limb, so that the ointment attracts to the large swelling, and washes it with cold water frequently, until the swelling aligns with the limb; and restore its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	If the member is bent after illness
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limbs are twisted after restoration, and if the bones were broken apart during this process, even though the shape of the limb becomes ugly afterward; yet it does not lose its natural function. Do not believe in those who say one must break the limb anew entirely; many people have followed this advice in our land; these procedures are criticized and lead to great harms and even death. Nonetheless, if the swellings and pains from the injury are still fresh, they should be treated with hot water applications or with boiled soothing herbs like leaves of fennel, roots, and melilot, among other such remedies. And apply one part of a moisturizing plaster; take figs in oil, grind them with cumin seeds, and similar medicinal substances that soften the wound. Prepare this with oil from sesame or grease, then apply as a plaster on top; alternatively, you can gather fatty figs, crush them together with flour from cumin, and other such medicines that reduce inflammation, mix it with fat from lard or oil from safflower, and apply it as a plaster.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes. Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And whenever there is an injury to the joint, continuously rub it with wet hands for a long time. And each hour apply movement to the affected limb.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the twists are aged and hardened, like bone, and it requires being treated with fire, then cover up to the bone, incising subtly lightly; and apply consideration and study in the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	This begins the book on dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing great pain and injury to the patient.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation affects any part, if the situation requires it now, you should attempt to reduce or reset it without delay.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	For if one delays and the joints swell, and by chance resets it to its original position; because it is not good to move it when it's swollen at that location: many times this brings pus and other pains;
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	If this happens, when you encounter such a situation, have the surgeon attend to the patient, and let them rest until all the pus has subsided; then immerse the limb in hot water and oil, gently move it afterwards, and treat each part according to its natural position.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have arranged the chapters on shoulder dislocations up until this point.
des mandibules	of the jaw
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	It happens that the jaws are dislocated downwards, and the dislocations of both jaws occur in two ways: either they are somewhat bone-like at their roots and somewhat softened; or they are completely dislocated and hang down towards the bottom, and expel saliva from the mouth so that they cannot hold it, nor can they close their mouths, and wrap their tongue with their speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it can return through various positions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	And if it's complete and accomplished, you should reset it quickly without hesitation;
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de .ij. pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And in such a way that the doctors cut into the head of the patient, and insert their fingers from one of their hands into the root of the jaw dislocation inside the mouth, if the dislocation is 2 inches; and the other hand should be out of the mouth to keep it level. And instruct the patient to soften, their jaws, and move them in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And keep the fingers steady until they return to their place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if bringing it back causes pain, similarly when the two jaws are together, if they come from hot water and oil, as long as you gently bring them back; do not burn during the attempt to return them, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	And when they are brought back evenly, and the mouth of the patient feels well when softened, if you place wet cloths in the form of a poultice made from rose oil and beeswax, then bind it gently with soft strings.
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre .ij. cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	And let the patient rest on their back, and if their shoulders are placed between two cushions, so they do not move to either side or strain themselves, but feed them light food until the pains have subsided, and secure the jaws.
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And then test this to see if it can be slightly lifted, and does not struggle with opening the mouth for eating or drinking, until the lower jaw is well healed and sound.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two lower jaws cannot be properly aligned within an hour and are not turned back to their original position, fever and chronic fatigue will result, and in some cases, abdominal pain or vomiting will occur.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	And when you see this, then know that it is a loss; and many times, death befalls the one who undergoes this within eight days.
de la forcelle	from the lever (referring to mechanics or possibly medical tools)
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The forces cannot displace from within along the middle of the chest and the back; it is displaced only outward, and one feels this clearly.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	And the restoration is such that when you lie back on your back and stretch your arms out; then press with your hands to form them like a palm, she will return; then place on the plaster and the bandage, and compress her.
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	And the head that is towards the knife cannot be set back; if it's not able to return like this, and when it does get displaced once, you should reset it to its place as we have said; then place on the plaster and the bandage, compress her, and instruct the patient to rest until she becomes well.
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And similarly, the head of the shoulder is brought back when it's set free from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	On the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc .iij. manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	Know that the shoulder is dislocated in only three ways: one way is when it dislocates at the part below the clavicle and above the elbow; and the second way is at the part near the heel; and sometimes dislocates at the part above, which happens rarely;
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	And the shoulder does not dislocate behind or inside the nerves; and many times it dislocates downward towards the elbow, even in those with little flesh, because in these cases it moves quickly; for those with enough flesh, it jumps to points, and returns to its place.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	By chance, it happens to some men from a blow or dislocation, and the shoulder swells with an abscess filled with heat, and they think that she is dislocated because of this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	So you must verify this thoroughly until you are certain; then you can start the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	And recognize dislocations when it is tilted towards the shoulder blade, and you will see a clear difference between the diseased and healthy shoulder, and you will find their distinct variability among each other.
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	You will find a hollow at the head of the shoulder. From the shoulder blade to the armpit, the head of the shoulder behaves as if it were a socket; and the patient cannot bring their hand back to their nose, nor move it with any movements;
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	Also, if it is dislocated upwards and not completely hidden, for you will clearly find it at the armpit;
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And this way of dislocation must merely be to reposition it, when it is new or if the child is sick.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the method is that the ministers lift their hand from the disease up, then place their thumbs under the joint, and lift the joint to its full height at the top of its position; and the ministers lift their hand and extend it upwards, putting it underneath; if it comes quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	And if it doesn't come as we have said within days, then the sick person should be bathed in warm water; and the practitioner should apply soothing warmth and relief, such as a decoction of garlic and fenugreek and milk thistle in water, and it should be applied.
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	Then dress the sick person on their back, and place a piece of even wool underneath the joint, not too soft nor too hard, then put the heel of the foot on the piece, and lift the shoulder blade upward, and pull the hand towards the diseased area.
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	And another minister pricks the back of his adversary's neck, so that he cannot move downwards; that shoulder returns now completely, and if you see that you reset it in this manner:
et est que tu faices estre present .i. home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	And it is that you make the space present .i., at home which should be larger than the adversary's; and is upright towards the costeit side, and pushes the shoulder onto the slope of the neck, and lifts the slope upwards, so that the adversary hangs in the ar.
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre. Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And another minister pulls the hand from the adversary's neck downwards towards the belly. And if the adversary is too light, then by no means bear any weight with him, and the dislocation returns now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche .i. lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com .i. pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	And you also reset it in another way: and that is to stick a long piece of charcoal in the ground, so that the head is balanced like one pistol, and should neither be too big nor too greasy;
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	Then have the patient place their hand near the wound but with a shield under it, and let the limb stay as long as the length of the staff. Then extend your other hand down from above, forming, and the joint will return to its place quickly.
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren .i. tison de .ij. bras de grant et .iiij. dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	and if she doesn't return with all these things that we have said, then do this treatment: take one staff of two strong arms and four large rods which allow the head to easily enter from all sides, according to this form:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	then tie the staff with a shield underneath so it doesn't hurt the patient, then place the staff under the wound on the patient; and extend your arms along the staff as long as needed, and tie the brace onto the staff, and the arm at the hand's head, then put the arm on one of the pegs of the same size from below, and keep the hands down, and leave the body hanging on the other side: the joint will return to its place now.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when she is in this condition, no matter how it may be, if you need to place a piece of equal thread over the joint, then apply plaster mixed with flour from the mill, along with incense and egg yolk oil over the entire shoulder and around it, then remove the thread when done applying, and tie the bandage over the plaster, and wrap your hand around her neck, and keep your hands in this position.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is necessary that he nibble a little bit, until the limbs are strengthened, for they will heal faster; and then nibble more after about five days or seven, and move them; and if it is firm and not softened, it has healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a iij. pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is loose because of moisture or for another reason, it is necessary to administer three applications of a cautery tool, as was explained in the chapter about cauterization.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this, and it dislocates after seven days, and the joint doesn't hold, and can't lift your arm upwards, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is either cut, stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never properly set in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Dislocation around the buttocks and breasts, or behind, happens due to pushing and stretching of hands, and it can occur elsewhere; and treat as long as they are in order.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after healing there are still pains in the member and late movements, then one should bathe their body many times, until those pains ease away, and it returns to its original condition.
de la dislocation dou coute	From the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	Know that the shoulder joint is dislocated at its points and returns there; if it has been dislocated from all sides, even in front and behind, and this dislocation does not respond, because one sees and feels it clearly; it can be dislocated according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement. Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	And when you join the shoulder bone with your healthy side, if you can see it clearly. For the joint is bony and cannot bend the arm or touch their shoulder in any way.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it must be reset in such a way that abscesses can be extracted and heal, because if abscesses were left untreated, they would cause trouble upon reattachment; and sometimes cannot be fully restored even when behind; this is worse than other dislocations, and causes more intense pain, and occasionally leads to death.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is such that if you can bring it back to this manner: you extend its hand with both of your hands; and its arms are spread out, and the hands point towards the center according to the line of the elbow, inside and outside, and you push the joint onto its bones together, or at the base of its palm, until it reattaches in its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And when the dislocation is forward, it returns whenever it doubles its hand with its own and pushes from the base of the palm using the lever that is dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	And if it does not wish to return to its place, then apply strong extension; and when both administer extend the arm, and hold it in check with both hands, so that it does not move during extension. Then turn the arm from each side, then once you have wrapped a long and wide cloth around it;
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	And when the eyes grasp the joint with their hand, if they apply any oil to soften the joint, then press the joint firmly, until it heals;
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And when it is at the shoulder, if she places dry plaster with egg white upon it, and presses it firmly, then allow the arm to be bent against the side of the body, and leave it for some days, then release it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firmly in its place, release the tie and leave it alone; and if you see that the joint has not set well, reapply the plaster and the tie again, and leave them like this for a few days until it is firmly in place; then release it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse .i. jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	And if it feels sore after the resetting of the joint and it moves again, bathe and rub it beautifully, pressing until it is relieved; or you can place a fat sheep's wool on the joint, then leave it for one day and night, then give it to an osteopath to bathe him.
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai .ij. fois ou .iij., tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And when it sweats, you rub the joint gently, then set the bone back in place, and then submerge it into water; and thus do this one or two times or three times until it is healed; and if possible, place on cow's wet and heated fat with butter, and apply that; if it returns to its correct position.
li dislocation de la main	The dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The hand joint has dislocated, and the return is light, more so than other joints. It's necessary to bring it back to its place immediately after it has been dislocated, in the same state when it was dislocated, thus making sure that the limbs swell or an abscess occurs.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	And the realignment is that you place your hand on a table and extend the minister's hand, and you make them equal, in such a way that they place their palm against the appearance of the joint, and hold it until it regains its position.
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	Otherwise, it must be that you check if it is correctly aligned; then have the patient place the back of their hand on a table during extension and realignment.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele aparance de la jointure. S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, then have the patient place the back of their hand on the table, and you put your hand against that appearance of the joint. If it returns to this position now, it is correctly realigned.
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If not so, if they hold back with plaster that soothes abscesses, and leaves him thus without needing to start again.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it back into place after some days, then the joint remains twisted;
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	And it does not harm the patient for as long as the arms are immobilized and cannot exert any force: thus you know that the nerve is cut, or the artery; if there is no other option but to apply a cautery in this case, and by chance there is nothing else.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the arms are in place, put on the plaster that we have described, then apply pressure and leave it for five days, then release and leave him like this.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he cannot move it well, and there is no swelling, with hot water, and rub it until it becomes clean.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	Neither are the fingers of the hand ever released to one side, nor on the back of the palm or the belly;
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	Therefore keep the fingers, and prevent the dislocation in your pockets until it heals, then support the head of the finger, and bend it towards the part where it was separated.
et le laisse .ij. jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit,	And let it two days, and then put the patient level on that day; and during those days do not tie him up, as we have said, and undo his bindings at night, and make him move him each day; and rebind him in the morning; and repeat this process until it is snug.
et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	And do it similarly if it is dislocated in the front of the shoulder, and do this as you did before until it heals; and do it similarly when it is dislocated on the other side.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	Careful repositioning of the ankle, care of the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When it's dislocated in the back or neck, or there are multiple dislocated (shoulders), if there is no treatment, for death comes to the patient quickly.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les .ij. cuixes ou li dui bras ou .j.	And the signs are such that the expulsions go against one's will, not being able to hold them back, and many times parts of a member, or both feet, or both arms, or one
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a iiij. pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	And it often happens that the elbow bends at four parts; the one that bends behind is called 'gibbosity':
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	The treatment is such that you should address if the gibbosity has come from childhood: if there is no cure or healing at all.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	And the one that comes from childbirth or impacts or similar things, according to old methods of treatment through grand words, there was no benefit in all.
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	But I have shortened it according to my intention, and formed instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	I say that in the inflammation that occurs before the anus, none has any health;
et ausi cele que vient droitement en .ij. costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	And likewise those that come straight to the two ribs, and one cannot cure outside of that which comes directly to the back, as I say;
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en .i. leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	And it is that the sickness be spread over his belly for one league evenly, and have strain underneath him, so it does not blister;
puis fiche .i. tison au chief en terre forment, et .i. autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et .i. autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	Then stick a piece of charcoal in the earth and another at the heels, and tie a band around the knees of the patient,
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les .ij. tisons;	And two surgeons know how to tie them, one on the head and others at points, among the two prongs;
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	And be well closed, the prong as we have said, and the surgeon place her palms on the spine form until she regains consciousness.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de .iij. bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	And if she does not return from this cure, take a board of three spans long, and place it over the body, and if the patient is on their side, have them lay their head on the edge of the table. Then place the center of the table on the spine.
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And have the surgeon place their feet on the other end of the table, pressing firmly until they regain consciousness at their head; and if you see that it turns to the arm turning towards the hand, do it in that position.
Et est que tu fiches .ij. tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez .ij. autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	And you should place two needles at the shoulder of the patient's arm from top to bottom, and between each needle, directly above and below, one palm's length of space;
et ait en chescun tison .i. pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns .ij. tisons ait .i. tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en .ij. tornans .ij. petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	And in each needle there should be two threads, or if it's the elbow area, and the needles are firmly planted into the ground so they don't move; and between each of these two needles, place one twisting needle, because with them the elbows twist, and there should be two small needles of one palm's length between the twisty ones, to twist the elbow.
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And then tie the thread that's between the elbows at the elbow towards the shoulder, and the other thread towards the feet for the other elbow, and each of the servants twists their elbow with respect to all the thread, and the masters make sure they twist equally as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de .iij. dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when they are equal, place them on a drying plaster with plenty of egg whites, and then beat them, and then apply lard from a tablet the size of three inches. The area around the boil and the healthy part of the spine should be rubbed by this preparation. Then tie it with a string, as we have said, and let the patient feel slight discomfort until it is healed.
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc,	And if nothing comes to the end of health, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines with the preparation that we have said before; and each time it is administered, give one piece of lard.
et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	And if there is any appearance behind the lower spine in the back, be careful that it might be a dislocation; and it's the bone that opens up, so we should not have presumption about it: accidentally it could bring death.
des dislocations de la hainche	Dislocations of the hip
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	Know that the joints of the hip and the shoulder joints only produce dislocations, they do not behave like other joints; and the hip joint is dislocated according to four parts: inside and outside, front and back; and more inside than out, slightly dislocated in front and behind.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	And the knowledge of its dislocation from inside is that when you join the diseased leg with the healthy one, it becomes longer, and the diseased knee opens further than the healthy one, and the diseased knee cannot bend to touch the fire.
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And it is when the leg is swollen below due to an abscess, because the head of the hip bone comes there.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of him who comes to the death, is that this event is contrary to what precedes.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs for him who approaches beforehand, are that his leg is well according to its completion; yet, neither double nor walk without pain, and if you try to make them walk, they cannot do it before, and retain their urine, and swell the ankle, and when he walks, he walks on the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs for him who approaches from behind, are that he cannot spread his foot out, nor double it, and one leg is more twisted than the other, and the ankle is softened, and there's swelling in the calf up to the knee over the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The correction of this sign suggesting dislocation is that you should recognize if the dislocation is old and remains in its position, without any treatment needed; and there's no need for assumption about it.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And for those whose dislocation is recent, and there are four ways of dislocation, if you hurry to restore the joint, and stretch it inside and outside, and move it to the right and left; if by chance it returns into place, no other treatment is needed.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles .i. ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a .ij. mains, ou a .i. liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	And if it does not return in this way, then you should apply one strong remedy, and hold the leg strongly with two hands, or at one place where the limbs are tied above the knee;
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	and another remedy extends his hand above in such a way that he kicks out his hands from under his buttocks, then forces it with one puff of strength against the thigh; and another holds the head on the rope;
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And extend upstream and downstream all at once, until the patient is lifted off the ground in one go, and remains hanging.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This way of extension is common for four similar cases, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is indeed well.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance. Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	But if not, you should treat it according to its similarity. When the dislocation is in the chest cavity, it's necessary to support the patient on his healthy side, then place the bandage on the root of the arm, and above the armpit, then secure the bandage towards the armpit and the back;
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	Then secure another assistant with his arms and hug the largest part of the diseased arm, and extend it upwards in this form: if it returns to its place now; and this kind of dislocation is lighter than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les .ij. piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les .ij. talons, et sus les .ij. genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue .ij. dois plus que li autres;	And if you cannot tighten it in this way as we have said, then you should tie the two legs of the affected area together with a firm rope under the heels and knees, and make sure that the injured leg is stretched out more than one foot compared to the others.
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre .ij. bras de lonc; puis comande a .j. ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	Then have it hung from the head of a post, and add two spans above the ground; then instruct one minister to hold onto the head of the chicken, and have other ministers with the affected area hanging as well, who should hold onto the chicken's neck firmly because the joint returns quickly now.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne .i. liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	And when the dislocation is in front, if you lie down with the affected area, as we said for those who are flexible, and pull one rope on the injured leg correctly, and also on the foot.
puis met .ij. tisons, .i. au chief et .i. autre as piez, puis fiche .i. tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	Then put two needles, one on the head and the other in a convenient place; then stick one needle between the thighs at the patient's armpit in the shape.
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	and place damp cloths around him, so as not to irritate the patient, then extend each physician towards him, and make the patient lie with his hand in line with the dislocated shoulder.
S’elle revient, c’est boin. Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If it returns, that's good. If not, place him on a table, and press him like we have said in the case of dislocation of the knee, and let the patient lie on the healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is in front, it should be stretched out as quickly as possible, and according to what I have said; and place the patient's pain on the diseased side, then press with the other hand, and stretch down towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les .ij. hainches;	And if the dislocation is at the back, it doesn't make sense to stretch the patient's back, or lift them from the ground, rather it should be positioned as when their hip was dislocated behind them, just like we said about lying on both hips.
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	And upon their face, and the neck stretched as we said previously, and must apply pressure to the joint at the table;
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	And it will be right when the limbs are extended and equal; then adjust the thighs, and place the plaster, and apply a bandage, so that the hip does not move.
et se repose .iij. jors ou .iiij., puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse. iij. jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And let them rest for three or four days, then release and place the plaster; and if you see that they are equal, tighten as before, and leave them for another three days; then release and allow them to walk properly until the limb is reinforced.
de la dislocation dou genoil	Of the shoulder joint dislocation
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The shoulder joint can be dislocated in three ways: to understand this is as follows, either internally or externally, and behind; and it does not dislocate forward.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	And the signs for this are that you instruct the patient to bend their leg at the knee, and if they cannot reach their knee, know that it is dislocated.
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	And for the restoration of all this is that you make the patient sit up straight, and if they can extend their leg, do so, and place your back on their thigh, and put their foot on your feet.
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les .ij. costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	Then take his knee in your palms, and draw it between your fingers, then bend the two sides of the knee joint; and some other attendants spread his feet as far as the knees return to their place. And the signs are that he has comfortably moved his leg slightly with respect to his thigh.
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort .iij. jors ou iiij., puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And place the plaster on, and allow the leg to be in line with the thigh, and join them together tightly for three or four days. Then release it; and do not move any part of the wound until the limbs are strengthened.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the limbs are not yet properly aligned, apply strong extension therapy, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	Of the dislocation of the heel
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heels are never completely dislocated and neither fully out of place, both inwards and outwards.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	And the signs are that the ankle swells, and it tries to move forward towards the part where it is dislocated:
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	The readjustment is quick; you should gently stretch it with your hands when it's only dislocated.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne .i. ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	And when it is dislocated right away, you should have the patient sit upright, and hold them one and a half lengths of your body length by their leg, above the ankle;
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre .ij. fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	then pull their foot towards you with your right hand and then with the left twice, then extend them upwards, and firmly hold their foot high;
et fai ce .ij. fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	and do this twice, as we have said, by gripping and pulling the foot; if it returns, that's well; if not, start the process again because it will return.
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche .i. passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	and if it cannot return in this way, you should let the patient lie on their back on the ground, and place one stick firmly in the ground between their buttocks, and tie cloths around them so that they don't hurt the patient.
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a .i. liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	Then the ministers burn the leg, and other ministers extend his feet to his hands or two inches below the knee, as he ties them above the neck of the foot;
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	Then extend each minister equally, and have the helper placed between the legs of the patient to hold the patient when they are extended.
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	Then put the dislocated joint in equal position at your hands, and other ministers burn the healthy leg at its base; the dislocation will return quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	And when it is in the right position, put on the plaster and fasten it up, then tighten properly, bind the foot to the leg, and guard the nerves that are above the ankle bone, so the bandages should not be too tight.
puis le laisse .ij. jors ou .iij., et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par .iiij. jors;	Then leave it for two days or three, and if the patient sweats, remove them; then release it on the third day or the fourth, and continue to guide the person for four days;
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And even if he goes beyond this, it doesn't mean that he won't dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if pus comes out at the incision site, it is necessary that you soothe it, just as we have said in other places, while it remains clean.
des dois	Of the cautery made with fire, command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the shoulders are dislocated, if they can be properly stretched like in manual work, it's a simple task.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus .i. leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	And if the dislocations are in no bone of back or feet, it's necessary that you make the patient lie down on their full back or on the table completely straight, and place your foot on what opens from these joints, then press with your foot firmly until they regain consciousness.
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a .ij. chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse .iij. jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when they are even and do not open anything, place under the foot of the patient a board with two shoulder heads, then hold them in form, and leave him for three days, then release him; and make him rest until he is well.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	regarding injuries and dislocations together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	When an injury comes with a dislocation, and one needs to restore it, many times it happens that the patient dies:
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	if you are not presumptuous in the treatment, and if you are knowledgeable in the art and have practiced it for a long time, and if you are compassionate and merciful but patient, do not be reckless;
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	And at the beginning of things that soothe, remove a hot abscess, and leave the patient in God's hand, if you do not see hope for recovery;
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	And when you see hope, then reset the limb in its place immediately, so that the abscesses are removed and heal.
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	And when the limb is in place, administer remedies that soothe abscesses and heal wounds, according to what is necessary, with drying ointments.
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	And if there's a break due to the dislocation, and small bones are exposed, set them back in place, and do as we have said for simple illnesses.
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors. Amen	And protect yourself from entering the path of fear, according to what I have said, because this is worth doing in accordance with your Creator, and for the knowledge that you arm yourself and guard your body. Amen
Explicit le romen de fisique	End the discussion on physicality
