O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	You, dear sons, I have completed this book which is the culmination of medical science gathered together with its applications, and I have finished it through its explanations and declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And in my vision, I came to understand that I should complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is flourishing in our region and has spread far and wide, so much that this knowledge and art have been lost and dissected, and nothing remains from it except for small descriptions in old books that the hands have used.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And because of this, errors and vanity have arisen, closing off thoughts and distancing knowledge.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	It seems to me that I should revitalize this treatise in a single order following the path of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and will come together with the forms of the cautery tools, and other instruments for work along with their adjustment of declaration and preparation as it is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because no skilled masters are found in our times, the art of medicine has been lost.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary for the one who intervenes in this to ascend into the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so long as he knows the location of the members, and their forms, unions and separations of the organs, and have knowledge of the bones and nerves and muscles, and the number of bones, and their movement patterns and rest positions, and where they originate.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And thus says Hippocrates that with speech it is much, and with deed it is little; and in the art of hands especially.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you at the beginning of this book that anyone who is unaware of the matters previously mentioned risks making mistakes and wasting people's time; just as I have seen many times, numerous individuals who interfere in this field and abandon their studies and lack of practical experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	And I saw a fool who treated a woman's neck abscess and cut the arteries in her neck; because so much blood flowed out that the woman died in his hands.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And I saw another surgeon who treated a stone in an elderly man, and the stone was large; he took with it a part of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And indeed, I have already called upon the art of draining pus, and observed the position of the illness and the size of the stone, and if one were to treat it properly they would likely die.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I have seen another place where the cure was given to one of our country's Duke who had broken his leg, and along with the break there was an injury; and these places were full of ignorance causing the breakage upon the injury in various ways through strong anger, and did not leave any rest on the injury throughout; and thus ended after .i. term (3 months); and they commanded that he not break it again; and waited until the leg was fully swollen and the feet and came to ruin.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I have been summoned to come to him, and I hurried to come to relieve the leg; and when I heard it dislocated so much that he was in peace and did not feel any pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But any path of corruption had already been confirmed within the body or member, and could not be cured; and the process of corruption continued through the member until the limb was completely lost.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And see one other site that collapses an incision into an abscess, and then inflames due to the wickedness of its lordship.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For a sore, when it is full of melancholic humor, does not require iron to be touched if it cannot be removed in part so that all the corrupted parts can be taken out.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And for this reason, dear children, you must know that the work of hands is divided into two parts: meaning, where there are dangers in multiple situations; and I will show in each part of this book where there is danger and risk.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	Because it is necessary for you to keep this knowledge, so that no one can speak ill of you.
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	If you take your weapons in hand and treat your diseases gently yet firmly, and use the best methods so that through the grace of God you come to healing and become healthy; and abandon the fearsome illnesses of lack of health; and remove from yourself what makes others doubt, and have faith in yourselves so you can go from this world to the next with glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.»	Galen advises in some of his admonishments: "Do not take any illness as evil medicine, lest you be called a foolish gossiper."
J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc .iij. chapitres.	I have composed this treatise according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapters are about fire cauteries and medicine cauteries, and the chapters are arranged from the head down to the stones; and on the forms of instruments, and iron tools for cauteries, and all that is necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapters are about cutting and piercing, and suction cups and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and the chapters are arranged with the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapters are about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and they are arranged from the head down to the stones, and include the forms of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Just as we remind ourselves of the work, it is necessary for me to discuss the quality and harm of each temperament.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the qualities of aid and the harm, are the longest speech and most subtle science and the secrets answered. And these were spoken about by many wise people, and they agreed with this; and their words satisfy me somewhat, for I fear lengthiness.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that the fire cautery universally aids all compositions or where there is matter, for it applies to two compositions: these being known as warm composition with matter, and dry composition with matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In the warm and dry combined with matter, there was no agreement and they said that the fire cautery is a great help; and the other ones said the opposite: that the fire cautery only helps diseases that come from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is so hot, and should not be treated with heat or drying for a disease that comes from heat and dryness. And someone who says the opposite, claiming that the cautery provides great help to hot and dry diseases that come into people's bodies,
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the body of the person and its moisture to the character of fire, you find that the body is cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this word.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it true on every occasion through experimentation.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And every method, do not interfere with it unless the one who has proven it does, and who knows through long use the art of cauterization, and the diversity of human complexion. And they understand the dispositions and causes of their illnesses, and the outbreaks and duration; we have no fear for other complexions, especially in cases of cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all things agreed with the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	Know this, children, that a fire-cautery contains secrets of treatments, and it brings more benefit than the burning medical cauterizing tool.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and does not come out except from the member that is burned, and it harms no other member if I name it.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	Hot medicines spread from one member to another, causing diseases of poisoning in the body; and by chance they reach the patient.
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	Fire due to its height and due to the goodness of its substance does not do this, unless there is excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And I have found this through experimentation and the length of my service and study in the art, and it corresponds to the truth of things; and for this, I apologize for the length of speech, because I do not want to withhold from you the secret of fire, and its quality, how it relieves diseases of the body, as the philosopher says by demonstrating; now receive it in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that they determined when the cauterizations should be done, and studied the prayers.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cauterization is suitable at all times, because the harms arising are diminished by the aid of the fire cautery; and moreover if the cauterizations are for necessary pains that cannot wait until greater evil befalls the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And never think like the foolish, child; for a disease cured by cauterization has no return; and they say it this way. But it is not as they believe, because cauterizations are only medicine that alters the complexion, dries out the fluids causing pain, and is valued more than medicine for its swiftness in enhancing strength, and due to the virtue of its work and authority.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And it is possible that diseases come at no time according to the complexion of the disease and its place, gathering in him excesses through the acquisition of meats and similar things. If not cauterizations administered within him where there is little excess and moisture, like cauterizations for pain and such things, then this kind of pain does not return; but it happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And there are few people who understand why cauterizations are called the ends of medicine, and this is seen; but they do not believe that cauterizations follow after medicine, but their understanding is false, and it is said that cauterizations follow in medicine because when we administer methods of treatments for any illness and if they don't work, then we administer our cauterization, and it works.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Thus clearly understood, cauterizations are indeed the ends of medicine, not according to the understanding of others.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The old ones said that gold cauterizations made from metal tools are better than those made of iron, and they said this only because of the quality of gold and its high nature; and they said that gold cautery blades do not cause decay, but this is not true as I have proven it and found out that it is true in some people; and gold cauterizations are worth more than iron ones, just as they said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And still, when you heat the gold tool, you do not realize that it is heated by the color of the gold, and then it cools off quickly; and if it is heated too much; should be put in the fire; thus there is enough prevention.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this, we use our iron cautery that we have equipped for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	So I have ordered this chapter on the old shoulder until the elbow, because it makes finding it easier.
dou cautere olivaire	wooden cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	The fire cautery works against moisture and cold on the head, and there are two ways to perform this due to illness called "soda," and because of many bodily fluids that drain from the head as hair, and ears, and due to a multitude of dreams, tooth pain, throat pain, and most especially for all diseases resulting from cold such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The shape of this cautery is such that the patient's body is cleansed by dissolving medicine, modifying the head. Three times or four times, according to how well the properties and heat and habit of the ailment can be endured; and then again after the head of the ailment.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then place it between your hands, and press your hands onto the sides of your nose; afterwards, place the root of your palm on the root of their nose between their two nostrils; and when your middle fingers arrive, if there is bleeding from this point, warm the cautery which is called 'olivare', and its form is as follows:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place his head in its usual position with ink, and draw slowly and steadily as you adjust your hand a little at a time; then lift your hand alone, and check if the bone comes into view when you see it is only .i. sol (a small unit of measurement) underneath; if you do not see the bone, continue the cautery until you see the bone as I have told you; after that, take .i. poc (another unit of measurement) of flour, and place it in a moistened soft cotton inside, then put on his head, and let him keep it for .iij. jors (days); afterwards, put some buttered meal on the wound; and leave until the scalding is gone; after that treat the wound with ointment known as 'tetrafarmaçon', until it has healed.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And if they were told by the old ones that when a wound remains open longer, more pus comes out; and for this reason it moves.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And they were told that we should continue applying the cautery until part of the bone is burned; and then when what is burned from the bone has been done, it should be treated.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And the other says that we must apply the cautery here and press so hard that we lift as much of the bone as one small twig would be by women putting it into their tubes for when body fluids flow out. And should we leave the wound open for a long time; after that, we must clean and heal it.
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two methods of cautery do not seem to me to be good in all respects, except when there is a path of fear; and it seems to me that I should leave them; for the shoulders are weakened by the continuous drainage from nature, as we demonstrate on other limbs; and even if the shoulder of disease is weak through nature, and my first sign of cautery heals better for me, and I use this method in essence gather together salvation.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	Of the old pain in the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When throughout the head comes chronic pain and lasts long, one must use the patient's herbs and pills which are called 'cochies', and treatments for cleansing of the head and ears and bandages; and if one applies the cautery as we have mentioned before, it is useful.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take care that the shoulder of the sick is of strong nature, and it should not be too cold; therefore apply the cautery under this one for a bit as we have said above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After apply the cautery to each horn of the head up to the bone, as we said before, and do one more application in the neck area which is called 'wheels'; and do another application under where suction cups are put; and move your hand so that you don't go past the bone: the patient feels too much pain in this cautery compared to others, I will speak about it elsewhere; and it's necessary that the horn applications are more subtle than when applying to the middle of the head, and this is its form:
dou cautere dou chief	For the fire cautery,
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When suddenly pain comes in one part of the head,
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The medicine cautery involves taking a spoonful of vinegar, and using the peel and its residue on both sides for about two inches around each head; then apply this vinegar mixture exactly where the pain resides in such a way that you can spread it under the skin; and when it has spread well, press it tightly like that for 12 hours; afterwards remove the vinegar bandage and let the wound heal naturally for another two or three days; then put on a clean bandage with butter until a scab forms.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the treatment of ointment until it is purified; and if you notice that you are applying any of the burning medicines I have written about or the first volume on burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere. Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	The iron cautery is done in this manner. Heat up the cautery as depicted here:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And call it "closed" because its head is made in the shape of a bell or has .i. point of curvature, and in the middle there's a small appearance; put it over the painful area, and hold your hand and gently move the iron, until half of the thickness of the flesh at the knee is burned; then lift your hand to prevent the artery from burning, which has been exposed, and allow an abundance of blood to flow.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After placing this in the area to be sewn, leave it on the affected area for three days; then change to cotton soaked with butter and apply it. Continue treating the wound with ointment until purified; if you wish to cauterize this migraine using the cautery known as "cultellare" at its tip, take care not to cover the artery in this migraine that is not old.
de emigraine	Regarding the treatment of headaches,
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you treat migraines as we have previously discussed in the divisions of diseases, and if it doesn't help, and you find that the heat treatments mentioned before concerning medicine and steel don't work, then you must heat the cautery called 'cultellare' until it turns white; and do this so that your tool is touching one line from half a degree long on the skin, and use your hand once, pulling it so that you don't cut an artery and stop just before reaching bone; and guard against the jaw becoming silent when eating, and make sure only the tongue is to be silent and spasm does not affect the patient, and guard against bleeding from the artery if it's been cut, or cutting with great fear and even those who are unaware of these procedures and have no experience in them; and leave the work halfway done; but I will tell you how to stem blood when an artery is cut, and show you where this is mentioned in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that the previous cauteries don't seem to help for this illness, and the patients are suffering, use them on the opposite side of the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed; and if you see that they tolerate it, administer the cautery mentioned in us or chapter on extracting an artery, with a two-bladed cautery; and these cauteries are better than the others and more useful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of the pain of the ears due to cold
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When pain comes from cold in the ear, and we have applied solutions of medicines and other treatments that we have mentioned in the division, and if the pains do not subside, then heat this cautery which is called 'pains', as follows:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After applying the cautery to all parts of the affected ear, or around the two points where the pain is located in both ears, and then move away slightly from the root of the ear after you have marked its location; apply ten points around each ear; after that treat the area until it heals properly.
de la torture de la bouche	of the pain in the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Pain that should be cured by a cautery does not encompass those caused by pus, as we have stated in sections on diseases; and no cautery should be applied to symptoms originating from dryness and rashes of the nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you treat this symptom of pain caused by pus from ears and nasal discharge as well as phlegm in the head and gargle, and if it doesn't respond to treatment, then it's necessary that you apply three cauterizations: one at the root of the ear, and another a bit beyond the temple area, and the third for aligning the two lips; place the cautery on the healthy part of the body, and have the patient receive the application right where pus may be found above the ear, slightly under the head's horn, and in the temple area to a length as long as one inch; keep the cautery over this until half the inside of the ear is burned; this is the form of the application.
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And this is the symptom of cuteria which we described earlier, but it's slightly more subtle; so when you treat the hand as I explained before, until it is healed.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When dealing with an old case of apoplexy and you treat it as we have said, if it does not benefit and the patient has a fever, then you should apply three cautery treatments: two on the two horns of the head, and one on top of the head, and one where the neck is called 'vassel' as we have mentioned before. And the fourth application of the cautery is to be done near the mouth of the stomach; and treat it as we have said previously.
de litargie	from alchemy
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this illness, you should give the patient large pills that purify the brain; after that, take back the head of the sick person all around, and place the camphor plaster on the occipital area; and here is the way to do cautery: do it as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If it goes well like this, then it's good; and if not, do three applications of the fire cautery descending from head to collarbone, leaving an interval of one finger-width between each application. And treat it as with the others, and if you see that it has adjusted, and the patient is suffering, do another application in the middle. If necessary, two more on the two horns, and keep treating until it heals; and let the applications called "olive" be those previously mentioned.
de la froidor dou chief	from the cooling of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary to cleanse the head of warts and what we have discussed previously. After treating the head with the patient, then apply fire cautery around the wart and on each horn, one behind and three on the spine below the collarbone; and if you need more applications, and the limb is moist and the patient is suffering, and the disease is extensive, then do four more cauterizations on the spine of the back. And leave it until the most sensitive part becomes dry, and raise your hand; afterwards treat it until it heals, and let those applications be called "olive" as we said previously.
de l’epilempsie	Of the epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	The epileptics should only use the cautery for those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary to first modify the brain with years and other treatments that we have mentioned in the section where the patient experiences large ailments and suffers from lack of medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if the child cannot endure it, make them gargle and chew, modifying the brain often with good meats; after that, insert the head halfway in water, and then apply one cautery as we have said previously, and another on the vessel, and each horn; and if the patient experiences pain, apply cauterizations like I have explained for those with paralysis and softness of limbs, on the spinal column and neck area, and use olive wood cauterization according to the method that I mentioned.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	And if the ailment is in a child, perform one fine cautery according to this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When due to melancholy the excesses or fluids are corrupted and thickened, therefore apply the fire cautery of the parts like we have said earlier to him who has paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if due to the cause of melancholy, these excesses decline into melancholy and leave the body with wet malaise, then let him drink something so that his brain may be cleansed, as was stated in the previous section on this subject.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After removing the head of the malaise; after make .i. linen thread well done, as .i. circle, if you put it around the head; and let the malaise sit in place, and is held well from all sides; after apply the liniment, and use butter from an old goat; and warm the head gently so that the patient can bear it; then empty the circle from within with the aid of the head, and let it cool; and do this to each malaise once a week with different governance properly, until they are cleared.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere. Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	If you see multiple points being seared while doing the cautery over the entire area, this method of cautering moistens the brain more. Then place damp cotton and butter and gelatine grease upon it.
de l’awe des eulz	of the power of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the power of the eyes first arises through the signs that I have mentioned in the division, then begin and continue to instruct the patient to consume something purifying for the head, and protect it from all moisture. Make him sweat or take baths several times on an empty stomach.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After having him drink after his head, and I have him cauterized near the head, and I perform two cauterizations on each of the two temples once the weakening due to eye power has reached both eyes together, or when only one temple is affected; and apply all the cauterization over all the veins and arteries that are within the skull, and ensure the cauterization lasts as long as the width of the temple; and guard against bleeding, and if you see too much blood coming out, then stop it with a piece of material in such a way as you can.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	And I will teach you about the extraction of arteries and cutting the cautery site, how to properly conduct it; every time one performs a cautery or ligature operation, do not perform it over the two bones behind.
dou cors des larmes	of the path of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	When the tears of the eyes have been longstanding and accustomed, and are located on the veins, or over the arteries that are beneath the surface towards the head's appearance; one sees that they are cold excesses of phlegm, thus I apply the cautery that I mentioned at the beginning of this work concerning the descent to the eyes: .i. a cautery near the eye socket, and .ij. cauterizations on both temples, and .ij. cauterizations where ligature is done over the two bones; and if it requires more, then carefully cauterize above the eyelid with every .i. small cautery.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	through the eyes from within tears
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you medicate according to what we have said in the division, and it doesn't benefit, then give three roes of wine to the patient. Afterward, heave the head up, and apply a cautery or olive oil in its middle; and make two applications of the cautery which is called "clavilis" on the two ears, just below the hair. And beware not to cover the artery.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the shape of the cautery which is called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare». de coi ci est li forme:	When the paper of the oil has become soft due to illness and moisture, then apply it with this type of cautery which is called "olivare". And here is its form:
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see that it's been done twice with the fire cautery on each of the two nipples as long as they are there; and don't let your hand go until a third part of the paper is burned, according to the method I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	The hair that touches the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	None of the times has it happened that the hair of eyebrows turns into the gums and touches the eye; in this case, you do a cautery according to two methods: namely with fire or with burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so that they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they are long and even, then command the patient to let them grow in health; after that, on the piece of paper for the eyes, draw a figure so as to resemble a leaf of myrtle, and make its beginning like the sign between the hairs; then place wet cotton soaked in egg glue and garlic paste onto the eye, then heat up the cautery tool which has this shape:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterizing over the figure you have drawn little by little several times, until the scabs are dry in that place; and the signs of healing from the operation are that you see the paper shrinking, and the hairs lifted to the edge of the eye; then lift your hand, and leave it like this for three days, then place wet cotton in butter as long as the scorching is removed; after ointment treatment until it becomes clean.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if hairs and the paper become softened after this, then resume the cautery on that same spot as you did initially; and when the hairs have fallen out, cauterize until the paper rises to its natural position, is even, and doesn't stick to the eye.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The fire cautery of medicine commands that the patient allow hairs to grow until they are large and even; then make the form of parchment like the leaf of myrtle. Then take French soap and live coal from a flame, each one of them is an ounce, and grind them together well; and make haste so it does not cool down, then spread it on the form you made as like the leaf of myrtle, put it on the paper under the eye. If the disease lasts for one day only, you must open it in one place, and if in both places similarly; and fill each hole with wet cotton similar to an egg; let the patient's head be in your healthy hands and place your finger showing over the medicine, press once every time the patient feels the irritation of the medicine, as they also feel irritation like from fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, then apply the medicine to your finger.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien. Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the irritation has passed, then raise your finger from the application site, and if you see that the paper is raised similarly as it would be lifted by the constraint of fire or incision; and if it is like this, then it's well. If not, apply more medicine onto your finger or where the medicine hasn't worked yet, until your movements are even, and your eyes are properly set. Then place wet cotton in butter until your burned skin feels comfortable, after that wipe out the ointment called "dyafenis" and another, until it's healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.  Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if you need to guard your work well with great caution so that no medicine sticks inside the eyes. And if the paper becomes damp afterward, and the hair pricks in the eye, then begin the medicine on that part of the eye which is softened by the proper clean paper; do it just as you did before; after that cure until it is healed; this is the form of the mint oil:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the eyes of humans are diverse in size and smallness, and according to this be your constraints; and do not have the right way respond to him who studies this craft.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	Of the treatment of fistulas by cauterization
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you are treating a fistula as we have said in the sections on diseases, and your treatments do not benefit, then it is necessary that you apply the cautery using this method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to place their head in your healthy position; and cut the hair on their head between your hands in such a manner that it doesn't move or shift; afterwards, put moist cotton, akin to an egg's lining or garlic juice, on their eye; next, heat up the cautery which is divided: and while above the head, shape it as you would with a goose feather, assembling it so that the cautery sits there; if you see it, let it be pointed from one end of the head to the other, and if you see it, allow it to resemble a tent; but in any case, whatever is above serves well for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After pressing the fistula if it has been opened, and treat its putrefaction and dryness; and if it is closed, operate on it, and remove from under the bow. Afterwards place the cautery in a suitable form, hold your hand near the cautery to the part of the nose above the eye, so that your hands do not cause mischief; and put the cautery into the grease of the oil, causing contamination.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien. Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse .iij. jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se .xl. jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If you come to the beginning of the cautery until the bone, it would be well. If not, start the cautery again once more and another if necessary, and leave it for three days; afterwards place wet cotton in butter, and the cure of the drying ointment until it is healed. And when forty days pass without it being healed, apply corrosive mercury medicine until the bone becomes exposed; then follow his prescription as he would suggest in his chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent. Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure .i. camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	And there is a way of cauterizing fistulas that none of the old ones mentioned. Understand what a fistula is and do as it says; afterwards, place one thin camel's thorn into the incision, as this fits its form:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	And it's made in the amount of three parts of lead; and hold your hand or camel firmly, and don't let the patient move, so that the melted lead doesn't flow out of its place; then, when you apply this to the patient's eye, use wet cotton soaked with hen's egg or oil: the lead works on the fistula, causing marvellous healing.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin. Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have said, it is good. If not, then it is necessary to administer pertus to the child and bring back the fistula into the body according to what should be done in its own proper place.
des crevaices en levres	Of lip sores
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Lips often have sores that are called "whiskers," and similarly on the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these sores with what we have advised about divisions, and the treatment does not help, then heat the tip of a small surgical knife according to this shape:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place them promptly into these openings until they grow just as far; after that, cleanse the area of wax while it is still healthy.
de l’aposteme de la goule	from the boil on the neck
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess comes to the root of the boil or in the womb, or on the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, after it turns rotten and inflames and gets hardened, becoming a fistula; and you treat it as we have said in divisions, but it doesn't improve: then you must have one cautery according to the size of the fistula; afterwards, make an incision at the base of the fistula, and keep your hand until the metal rod reaches the bottom of it, and further into it; and do this once or twice, after treating as we said in treatments, while it is still healthy. And if you treat it like that, it's good; and if not, you must expose the area and remove the rotten bone, according to what you find in your manual.
dou movement des dens	movement of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicines, when that doesn't work, then put the head of the tooth into your healthy position; afterwards heat up the cautery according to which you will do this in this manner: place a stick under the tooth; and place within the cautery quickly burning embers, hold your hand as long as the patient feels the warmth coming to the root of the tooth; afterwards lift your hand and continue with the cautery according to your wish; afterwards fill the mouth of the patient with salt water, and let it sit for an hour before rinsing it out.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this manner, the tooth that was moving is now stabilized, and the soft gums are restrained, and the moisture has been corrupted and dried.
de la dolor des dens	from the pain of teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When toothache comes due to coldness, or there is coldness in the mouth and throat, and medical treatments are ineffective, then it must be done according to two methods: and wax cautery and fire cautery.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Wax cautery if it's like this that you take cow butter and put in a spoon made of iron or copper; afterwards take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a needle, and make the butter into a lump, then place this on the painful tooth quickly and hold until it cools down; do this often until the power reaches the root of the tooth, and if you see damp cotton and cotton in cool butter, put this again on the aching tooth, and place red hot iron on for as long as the fire reaches the tooth pain.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain. Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	Fire cauteries if they are like this that you take a piece of iron or copper, and make it large enough so that the fire does not come into contact with the patient's skin; after heating the cautery, from which its heat will come afterwards, place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery cools down; do this repeatedly, because the pain will be relieved either that day or the next. And is necessary for the patient to fill their mouth with good butter when the heat of the cautery is about, then quickly remove it; and this is the form of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And make the fire cautery according to how much you want and according to your ability; and this is the form of the cane:
des scrophules	of the scrofula
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait ij. aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou .ij. se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi .iij. jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the scrofula is due to cold blood and moisture, and does not respond to digestion by medicine, then prepare a cautery as described below, and use it. Create two openings for the fumes to escape from the other side; and place the heated cautery against the abscess once, or twice, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, position the cautery according to its size, and leave it in that position for three days. Then cover it with moistened cotton soaked in butter until the pus is drained out; afterwards treat it with ointments and bandages until it heals.
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc. Aprés li fai .i. autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the moisture invades the channels of the heart and especially when this comes from a cold constitution, then it is necessary to first purge the patient with solutives. Then apply the cautery at the root of the throat, and make sure not to go all the way up to the throat but just until it feels warm for a little bit. After that, do another cautery at the junction between the neck and the base of the spine, and use the cautery named "clavile" which we will show in front; treat it as explained earlier until it heals.
de la toust	Of the cautery by fire, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they pierce at their root, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all and the diseases of the prostate are caused by cold moisture, and patients do not have fever or dryness, and it is an old disease, then apply two cauterizations to their force in their veins; and another cautery near the buttocks between the breasts; and let the cauterizations that are called 'clavile' according to the shape mentioned previously.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a .xxx., ou enqui entor. Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a .iij. rains selonc ceste forme:	And if you see fit, apply the cautery by pressing on all the one called "points" whose shape is as described in the illness of the ears; and make the points up to thirty or slightly more. After that, treat the body according to what was said previously, and place the cauterizations at three fingers' width according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And because of this they use lighter cauteries, as you make three for each person.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	Of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the shoulder bone is reset due to moisture, and then it's put back in its place but can't stay there, it repeatedly dislocates with slight movements, just as we have experienced; therefore, you should first reposition the dislocated joint.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	After that, bandage the wounds on his back and sides; after that, lift out the kidney which is inside the testicles with your left hand; and if the joint has been dislocated internally, heat the cautery to a point where it can be used as described:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	And burn the thigh until it is pierced to the bone, and let the mark of the burning come together in one. The four marks; and this is done by using a fire cauterizing tool with three needles, because the patterns of the burning are made up of four marks; and they follow the intricacy of a tent and that is the shape of the cauterizing tool with three needles:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And once set on this one nerve, because there are seven marks on it.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After applying the cauterizer, press with force; after that, allow the patient to rest, and do not let their limbs remain in one position for too long until they are well settled.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant. Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	And if it is reset above, where very little happens, then apply a cautery on the thick part of the bone cautery or to several cauteries when pressing them. For the joint is closed, and eliminates the moisture, and heals the patient's injuries.
dou cautere de pleuresin	Apply a weeping cautery
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The old ones said that one should do weeping cauteries using the roots of aristologe, and in this manner: take a long root of aristologe, the longest you can find, make it dry, and make it as thick and long as your thumb; then soak it in oil, light it on fire, and apply it between your elbow and neck for one cautery. Apply two smaller cauteries somewhat down along the part beneath the chin; apply four cauteries between the fifth and sixth rib, leaning slightly behind. Apply one at the navel, another on the stomach, one between the two shoulders, and two more on the next ribs below the cautery that is between the two shoulders; don't squeeze your hand but apply it openly as you would when smelling.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a .i. raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie. Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	And it is said by no old one that any man uses a fire cautery like to the half of an arm hair, and they heat it up and place it between the ribs, until it reaches that abscess; and once out goes the pain, as we have stated for the pain in the chest. But in this work there is fear or the patient dies now, or a fistula comes which cannot be cured.
de la mice	From the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the illness of 'the mouse' in those ways that we have mentioned regarding the treatment methods, and if it doesn't help, then they apply three methods of cautery that are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices .iij. cauteres, ou .iiij., en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	In which there is a method such that you make .iij. cauteries, or .iiij., drawing according to the length of the mouse, according to the shape of the heart as we have said before; and do not rush your hand all over the cautery, and let the patient be slightly behind their back.
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	And another way of applying the cautery is that you heat the cautery with two points, as we have demonstrated in the dislocation of the shoulder; lift the keur which lies at the mouse's position, where the pain originates from the left side, and let the height under which you lift the keur follow the keur itself, following the length of the body, and the cautery should be according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les .ij. ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra .iiij. Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a .iij. ners. Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After burning the two flaming points until both ears feel it on the other side, then remove the cautery and thus will have three. And if you see fit, cauterize all over with a three-pointed cautery. After treatment when pus has formed over a long period, this is akin to the other treatments mentioned before.
de ydropisie	From dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes». Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres entor la boude, et .i. sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et .i. sus la mice, et .ij. derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et .i. endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	The fire cautery is not effective for dropsy, except when it's called the "asclytes" method. If your treatment doesn't work as per our previous instructions in divisions, then you should apply four cauteries around the belly and one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the kidneys, two behind the back on the spine, and one on a spot near the anus; and ensure that the cautery points are well close to the urinary bladder.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After that, leave the cautery in place to purify for a long time and don't stop treating the patient after the cautery; and then recovery would speed up and both treatments (the cautery and the other remedies) would work together with God's help.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The shape of the cautery for the belly is like the one we have shown before; and the one for the back should be olive-shaped, according to what was illustrated earlier.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the swelling of the joints
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner. Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	When the joints swell in someone who is hydropic and full of yellow bile, it's necessary to apply the cautery behind the knee between the thumb and the ring finger; lift your hand with the cautery without turning. And don't go too far down, so as not to remove the yellow bile, and apply the cautery according to this shape:
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After applying two cauterizations on each leg at the tip of the heel; and make the cauterizations along the length, one in front of the knee cap and the other behind, halfway down the leg; and let the cauterizations last for a long time without treating them until the bile comes out; after you have treated all the other treatments as we have said.
de la menoison	on memory
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	When it comes to the problem of abdominal pain due to cold and moisture, as long as the digestive and retaining virtues in the stomach and intestines are compromised and not functioning properly, they cannot be treated by conventional methods; you notice that the patient is suffering significantly and with considerable strength, so apply one large gastric cautery according to what was discussed previously or the gastric cautery, with the circulating cautery; and four additional cauteries around the mouth of finer material in each spot. Apply one fine clavicle cautery and four more on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see that the moisture is abundant and the patient suffering, then apply a cautery to the knife point, and one cautery on each hand, and two small ones on the stomach near the large intestine. For the treatment benefits when there's good help.
de la cure des emorroydes	regarding the treatment of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: .iij. sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et .i. cautere desoz la boude. ij. dois;	When the abscesses are located at the base or one more and they are old with thick cold and moist pus, and they are treated as we have instructed in divisions, yet if it does not benefit, then do cauteries: three over the spine of the back, that is all done outside of the large pocket bit by bit in a triangular pattern, and one cautery under the buttocks. Two dozen;
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on .i. grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et .i. autre sus le foie, et i. autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens. Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you think that the stomach has cooled down and the meat is not cooking, and we see swelling of the belly, then the belly one should apply a large cautery over the stomach as was explained before, and another one on the liver, and yet another on the spleen with the entire clavicle. Leave the cautery in for long periods. After that cure until it is healed completely.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the inflammation known as 'thelul'
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you apply the hot iron, if it seems to be .i. razed, and then place all of it on fire over this iron; keep your hand there until the heat reaches the beginning of the vein from which the blood comes; do this once or twice, and if there are multiple parts, cauterize each one as we have said; after using beneficial ointments while they are still good; and if you use a large heated iron to treat, it will provide greater assistance.
de plaie mal curee	from improperly treated wounds
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot tolerate surgery or opening a wound, as we will explain in its appropriate section, if such sickness occurs that can only be cured through cauterization.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont. Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou .ij. ou .iij., selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes. se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	When dealing with a fistula that has aged and is characterized by putrefaction and moisture corruption, one must thoroughly examine it to determine the extent of its depth. Always be aware of knowing the full depth of the wound. Heat up the cautery to resemble a .i raseur size, insert it into the fistula according to the quantity it entered, then re-apply the heat until the infected pus and corruption are burned away. Do this once, or .ij times, or .iij times, depending on the need for heat; be careful not to burn the nerves and large veins. If the fistula extends into the body of the bladder and the intestines, take care with these points and do not apply heat outside them when they are in their natural state. After curing the area until it is healed, and if the pus has been completely drained out, and the tissues have remained long enough, then you can know that the wound is fully healed; but if the tissues haven't hardened by this point, be aware that the pus is still present, and there's corruption at its base; act accordingly as we will explain in its natural state.
de la maladie des reins	On the disease of the kidneys
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When stomach pain comes from the kidneys and large windiness affect a woman's body, then it is necessary for you to apply the cautery on both sides of the kidneys and with the wrist cautery as we have previously mentioned; and if we cauterize in the middle, there will be three cauteries in line, and they would provide more assistance.
de la vessie	From the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is weak and moist due to cold, so that patients retain urine, then instruct for a cautery on the lower part of the bladder, where the pubic hair begins, and one on each side, both right and left. Each cautery should be as long as the width of a finger; and do one in front of the back or two if needed; and let the cauteries be round following the form mentioned beforehand.
de la marris	Regarding the treatment for Marosis
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the womb is cold and moist, and does not allow for conception, and the flowers (likely referring to menstrual blood) are corrupted with delayed passage; and when they come, there's great pain: then it should be done that three cauterizations be performed inside the vaginal orifice, as we have said or for bladder cautery treatment, and two cauterizations at the back; and let the cauterizations be round, as we have said.
de la hainche	From the thigh
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the viscous moistors descend to the thigh bone, and for this reason it moves out of its place, and the signs are that one leg is longer than the other when measured together; and you find the joints at their separation points, then it should be that you cauterize the skin on the thigh bone like one fire cautery resembling a circle, and mark before the joint where the bone turns, so that the bone is within the circle; and let the cauterizations be as those from which we have cauterized the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if these cauterizations are not present, make three large olive-shaped cauterizations instead, and let the cauterizations be as perfect as all the others; and treat until it is healed.
de la dolor de la hainche	The pain of the thigh
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain occurs in the buttock area, it is due to cold and moisture. The patient needs treatment for this as we have discussed earlier on division, and if the cure does not work, the disease is old: therefore, you should cleanse the body of large, thick humor with foul-smelling pills or other good-looking pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu. Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche .iij. cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a .iiij. selonc ceste forme:	After you do the cautery; and the method of the cautery is according to two methods: this means gathering together burning medicines, and fire cautery. Fire cautery is according to many ways, among which each one is like this: you will cauterize in the buttock area three triangular cauterizations according to this shape, and do it with good depth and largeness, and leave an interval between each cautery equal to the size of a coin, and may be olive-shaped; never make a cautery in the middle on the top of the buttocks, because there are four according to this shape:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see that when cauterizing with the circular cautery as we have mentioned before regarding the dislocation of the buttocks; but do it in such a manner that the circles encompass all the buttock area, and all parts around the knee are burnt.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe. Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai .ij. cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et .i. cautere desus la cheville .iiij. dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor .iij. poins ou .iiij. au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And this is how it's done in sciatica, when the pain stays in the hip and doesn't reach all the way to the thigh or leg. And if it reaches up to the thigh and the leg, then we do two cauterizations at the location where the pain resides, and one above the ankle three inches, on the left side a bit; and let them be cutler's cauterizations, and burn off the thickness of the skin; and if the patient feels that the pain extends down to the heel or close to it, then cauterize there where they feel the pain, three points or four at the cauterization known as 'points'.
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if more work is needed, then do so; and if the pain seems to be spreading from the knee towards the thigh, apply cutler's or circular cauterization there, and ensure good care in all your cauterizations that you don't leave any part untouched, burning nerves and major arteries, and that you do not cause more harm and constriction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez. Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	And I myself have seen many who did cauterization on the ankle up to the heel, and left them until the leg swelled completely, and even the foot became infected, leading to all parts of the foot being affected. After this, they suffered from a stomach solution that led to their death.
Et se li dolors est en .ij. parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere. // Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai .i. tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de .ij. pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait .i. mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And if the pains are in two parts together, make a cautery on one and on another, according to this manner.
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And heat it until it's entirely red and gives off steam, then place it on the sore hipbone, and twist it towards the healthy side; and apply this cautery once for each rod and leave it there for three days; and afterwards, make a bandage of butter, and let the wound be open for as long as necessary; after oil treatment until it heals.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasim says that we use very little of this type of cautery due to the fear of his patients, and there are few who use it; however, this is a good type of cautery which can be endured, and leaves no marks.
de la dolor dou dos	of the pain of the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether by impact or from percussion or due to excessive evacuation, or due to any appearance of cold matter spread out, none of these appearances are worth cauterizations, for it is akin to what comes from the infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary that after the maladies have been emptied of rotten pills or other appearances, one should be performed on the back, where the pain resides, three lines marked by an incision, and in each line from 5 to more cauterizations according to the strength and quantity the maladies can endure; and let the cauterizations be done as with the cautery called "points"; and if you see fit, perform 3 or 4 cauterizations at the midpoint of the clavile cautery according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	This disease often befalls the young children, and at its beginning it is such that they become pale when they stand up, and fear; and you find in the last spinal cord of the back and within us the appearance that comes upon other spinal cords.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and observe its cure, if you apply it with a blood cautery in the form described like this.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument. Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant .ij. lignes ou .iij., et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre. Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	If you see this and observe its treatment, then apply it with a specific blood cautery to each section of the spine equally. And if you notice this, when cauterizing within the spine use the piercing cautery at two lines or three, and have the points close together. After treating it until it is healed according to what we have said, be careful not to apply the cautery in places that are in proximity to nerves.
de la dolor des jointes	of the pain in joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When joint pain arises from moisture spreading throughout each limb, and when the pain affects the foot, it's referred to as 'gout' properly, and when it's due to cold reasons and can be treated with medicines alone, it should be cured using cauterization in this manner: make a cauterization around the joint of the foot, and let the olive oil cauterizer look like this:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point». Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you need to touch the foot of the patient, if you make them take a brand over their entire body where we claim "point". And if the pains go up to the knees and other joints, and this happens many times, if you apply the brand on each knee. Three or four brands per each knee joint, across all the olive brand's usage; and if you need more, make them as needed, but do not remove your hand until the healing is done inside.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre. Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile .ij. lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines. Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	And if the pains descend to the knees and back, then they administer the cautery that we have discussed in this chapter. And if the pains are in the hands, you make marks inward on the flesh over two lines; and if there remains any pain in the back, you cauterize each joint and on every hair of the hand; and if the pains come up to elbows or shoulders, you cauterize each part, and take good care with the patient and give medicines. For if you treat them well and purge phlegm, they will be healed by God's aid.
de la routure dou syfac	Regarding hernia repair
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When rupture occurs in anger, and the bowels descend into the crotch which is new, it must be that when you see them being cured, do not let him eat that day; and use things that relax the stomach so that his intestines descend from his belly; after make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to shave his pubic hair until the bowels are repaired, then take it with your fingers, and test for any movement over the rupture on the bone under the knife, and at all a sign that is similar to half of a circle above the navel; then heat up the cautery as described here:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles. Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui .i. cussin et .i. serjant sus les cuisses, et .i. autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Until it's white and emitting fumes. Then take the bowels up to their place; and let the servants cut her hand so that they don't turn back; and work well on his legs against the patient, and put one cushion and one surgeon on his thighs, and another near his anus where your hands are cutting; then place the cautery at that mark with all your hand, and keep it straight and steady until you reach the bone, and if you don't reach it the first time, try again once or twice until you get there; and carefully watch so that the bowels don't escape when you apply heat; do not burn them; and make sure that neither the patient nor any other harm occurs.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien. Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés .iij. jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides .xl. jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	Know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is useless. And it should be that the children's cautery iron should have subtlety according to their size, and likewise for the larger people; after three days cure his thigh from the cautery of butter until the scorching dies out; then apply other ointments until he heals properly, and let him rest on his back for forty days so that the wound is well healed; and it should be that his wounds are not irritated for a long time, so that the intestines do not escape when he wants to get up in bed.
Et aprés .xl. jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse .xl. autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement. Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And after forty days, when he wishes to stand up, he should have a well-made bandage and wear it for forty more days; and with good rest, he should work little and guard against over-consuming food and drink, and not raise his voice too high; and when he follows this instruction, he is completely healed. And I will speak of the treatment of surgery in my chapter afterwards.
de la routure dou ventre	Regarding the rupture of the stomach
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai .j. cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a .iij. angles selonc ceste forme:	When ruptures occur in other bellies and are known, if you observe that they are no longer growing, then apply fire according to the quantity of the rupture using a cautery, taking one-third of the cup's content; after this, follow the treatment as we have instructed. And none of the old texts advised that the affected area should be treated with three angles of heat in the shape like this:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile. Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first sign is to make an incision and draw a line across the width of the tear, and another below, and firmly hold your hand with all the fire cautery. But the initial cauterizations are lighter and more fluid.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of old age in no limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor. s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence .i. autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	When pain comes into any limb, whether from falling or being struck, and this pain lasts long, and medical cure does not help, then it is necessary for it to be cauterized with the cautery called "point", and perform cauterizations according to the length of the member and its smallness and weakness and strength and location of twists and pain. If there is healing in the first cautery, that's good; if this doesn't work, do another one on top of it, because these practices are such that they must move towards the part of the body that is closest to it, so you must make cauterizations until the patient feels better.
de meselerie	In mixture
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie. Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai .v. cauteres sus lou chief: .i. emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et .ij. sus les .ij. cornes, et .i. derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	The mixture must be heated to a high degree by the cautery's aid, and similarly for the disease that comes from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy. If you see it being cauterized, take care lest the disease is in its beginning stages, and if it's treated according to what we've said in the division, so that it doesn't spread or remain, and you fear that corruption might pervade the whole body, then do this: .v. applications of cautery on the head: .i. near the forehead at nine o'clock, and the other towards the forehead at the end of hair; and .ij. on the .ij. corners, and .i. behind at the neck; and let your hand remain so that the cautery reaches up to the bone, and until the scabs come out fully allowing for the evaporation of the excess fluids; and cauterize it on the mouth according to what was done before.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	And if the mixture is spread everywhere and it becomes obvious that it's spreading, you should cauterize using these cauterizing methods we've mentioned: one on the nose, and two cauterizations on the spine at the neck, and seven cauterizations on the spine of the back, and one large on the sternum and another underneath, and two each on the shoulders; and two on the ribs, and two on the tendons of the heels, and one for each joint in hands and feet, and on the creases of the palms; and be careful not to burn any nerves under the heel, do not cauterize anywhere on the bone of the fingers, and one on the bone of the stomach, and another on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus. Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers. Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	And know that when I do more cautery, I give him more help, and he benefits from it; and know that the patients do not feel pain during cautery as the healthy would, because their bodies are already thoroughly corrupted. And you should have large and small cauterizers according to limbs and joints, like what you will find in instructions for iron tools. After treatment, wash with flour mixed with honey and other remedies until it is healed.
de enfleure	To swell
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez. Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	When swelling appears in any limb and is treated with medicines, oils, and bandages, and it doesn't heal, then you should make cauterizations on the limb according to the size of the limb; and let the cauterization go slightly into the red part of the flesh; then treat with ointments until it heals. And do a cauterization at both hands and feet and back, at the exit point of the nerve that paralyzes the limb, and in this way, the swelling is removed; and still, no one should interfere if they don't know about limbs or how nerves move within the body.
de albaras	From burns
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease known as "albaras" is matured, and medicine does not help at all, then use a cautery to treat it slightly for some time, according to the amount of blood in the wound, until the pus is removed and its color changes; then cleanse with flour mixed with lentils and rose oil, and leaves from the plantain plant, as well as chicken blood and quail urine, each using one part of these ingredients. Mix them all together, wrap it with a cloth, and leave it on the wound until it heals.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The treatment for the sore by cautery
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble .i. cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.  Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	When the sore begins to appear, and you want to stop its spread, then use a cautery that seems like one circle, searing around the entire circumference of the sore. And still, some argue it's better to apply cautery also in the center of the sore; but I do not find this advisable at all, fearing it might lead to an ulceration and putrefaction, which is something I have already avoided on numerous occasions; a more straightforward approach would be to cauterize around with the "circular" type of cautery, as we explained in our discussion about different types of cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	Of the swelling which cannot perish
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi. Car elle se hastera de meureir.	When someone has a disease which is called "adubelati", and it takes time to die, either due to the excesses that it causes or because of old age in the body when it becomes decrepit (meaning too old) and it has little blood, or because of tension; and you see it hasten towards death: then cauterize internally with several small cauteries by pricking; afterwards leave it like this. For it will hasten to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see that it is pierced all through the cautery, then heat up the cautery as described here:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis. Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And place your hand in the middle of that disease which is called 'adubelati' as long as the cauteries have pierced through the flesh, and use those cauteries such that the patient feels relief in such a way that the course of decay is alleviated. After cure until it is completely healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	The treatment with fire using a hot iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches. Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit. Et puis le laisse .iij. jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption. Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.  Et se tu vois aprés .iij. jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus. Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	Another method of disease is called 'corrodens', and it's nothing else but a member lesion, for it consumes limbs just like the fire reduces dry wood. If you can apply a cautery with fire to this disease, then shape your hot irons in various sizes small and large, according to where on the body or where the illness is; after that cauterize from all sides until you remove every corruption, leaving nothing behind so that all that has been corrupted is removed. And let it be for three days, and while the burns from the fire heal, bear with suffering from the oil, removing all infections and corruption. After this treatment of ointments causing injury.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	The text "des porrelz qui vienent as piez" translates to "the stones that come towards the bones" in English. This seems to describe a medical issue related to stones or deposits moving towards bone structures, which could be a description of gallstones, kidney stones, or other similar conditions in medieval medical terminology.
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet. Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc .ij. manieres. C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude. Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe .i. cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi .iij. jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines. Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Sometimes it happens that within the foot develops a sickness which is called "gout" according to our understanding, and it's a large hard thing causing pain in the foot. And for this type of disease, there are two ways of using cautery. This means fire cautery, and hot water cautery. Fire cautery involves heating one tool like a feather from a chicken, making it similar to a needle, made of good iron sized so that it could pierce all around the nail, and having small margins; after doing this, heat up the entire tool on the nail until your hand gets red while holding the needle right at the end; then leave it there for three days until pus begins to form; afterwards, make a plaster with crushed garlic mixed with oil, apply the plaster overnight over the whole area, and the nails will fall out from their roots. Then treat the foot with an ointment that heals the flesh until it's healed.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines. Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	And if they are located within the body and occur in hands and feet, it's necessary that you use hot water cautery; and do so like this: take a spider hair or iron rod, or a feather from a chicken, place them on the nail and around it; this is for warts. Place the rod such that it burns all around it, then add some hot water, keep your hand firmly while applying pressure in a circular motion until the edge of the rod reaches to the root of the nail and manages to penetrate deeply into the hot water reaching up to the root; allow the patient to tolerate this for an hour with mild burning sensation. Then leave them like this, and they will all be pulled out from their roots. Repeat this process until you've treated all those in the body, then apply ointments that heal the flesh afterwards.
li cure dou trembler	The treatment involves shaking.
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When there are trembles due to cold or nerves, or fever of the fourteenth day or other similar conditions, it is necessary that you perform 4 or 5 cauteries on each of the spine points of the back. One cautery between each spinal point; and one on the chest under the olive cautery; if this continues, hasten the patient's recovery from the cold illness.
des pustules puans	pus-filled sores
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues. si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire. Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	Whenever pus-filled sores or pustules appear due to the bath of corruption, or from large rotten materials, it is necessary that they come from decayed substances. When they first show up, it's appropriate at once for each head of the pustule: a fine cautery made from the bark of myrtle, where the tip is heated by fire, or from the long root of aristolochia, or with the lentil-shaped cautery. And one should not cauterize them when they first appear according to this manner; instead, it discharges the excess that causes them and renders them healthy. But it's necessary for this to be done after blood has been evacuated.
quant li artere est copee	When the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many times great hemorrhages of the artery occur from where it is cut in the wound that reaches to the opposite side, or at incision of the abscess, or with the cautery on the limb, and similar situations; and it is a very grievous thing to occlude.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And yet, when this happens to any person, if you quickly place your index finger on the wound of the vein and hold it firmly until the pulse becomes quiet under your finger, and no more drops escape; then heat several olive oil cauteries of various sizes until they are all red. Then take one, or a larger or smaller according to the size of the wound and the location where the artery is located, and place the cautery on that vein where you hold your index finger, and keep the cautery there until the pulse becomes still again.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it jumps out when you lift your finger from the vein, and the cauteries are off the fire, then quickly take another one of the cauteries that are on the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And never stop doing this one after the other until the bone is fully healed; and be careful not to burn the nerve that's nearby, and that no harm comes upon the patient; and know that when there is a break in an artery, it can't be mended very well by itself when the artery is large, unless done through one of the four ways we've mentioned: by cautery, or extraction if not already treated, or with strong stringing, or with medicines placed which have power to mend blood; and then tie and hold in place.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Who will provide for the mending by tightly binding with cloths or by putting heat sources on, or other similar things, if they do not benefit unless so prescribed.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this happens to anyone and they have no medicine or remedy at hand, should apply their finger on the wound site as we said before, and spread it well until the wound and the vein are mended upon it; and do not move his hand but keep it moist with cold water often till it becomes very cold until the bone is frozen, swollen, and mended. And perform cautery and medicine preparations for what needs them.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	This begins the second book of treatments for surgery
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have explained in the first chapter all diseases where it is necessary to use a fire cautery or hot medicine, and we discussed their causes, instruments, and forms. I put that chapter up until the foot, and I will proceed through this chapter using the same path as what seems easier for those who want it.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And as I begin this one, you should know that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first about the cauteries, so it requires greater caution.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and treating wounds, and extracting arrows, and cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie. Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures. si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	And I advise you not to embark on foolishness. For many ways of people come into treatments. Some come from those who are so afflicted by their illness that they die lightly because of the absurdity they find in their sickness, and the horror of their disease; and towards these one should have fear.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse. Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	And concerning these I give you their meaning, and say: "wait, I am a physician"; illness is deceitful. It would not be proper for you to agree with those who come to your aid in this manner, but rather place more caution on your honor than on your greed, do not act foolishly but wisely of those whom you are certain of, and have taken care of; use prediction and indication in treatments for the health that is converted from your patients; and this will help you gain good reputation, glory, and long-lasting memory. And it will assist you to acquire a valuable renown.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Dear child, Our Lords give us good understanding and righteousness, and if you wish to aspire from the holy inspiration of His hand, Amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or I have arranged this chapter in devising by chapters, according to what is before or the chapter on cauteries, which I have devised from head to feet, because you will find it more easily of that which you will need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	at the head full of water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	Know that this disease comes very often to children at birth, and when the mother constrains the head of the child too tightly; and sometimes it occurs due to a response reason that one does not know.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this disease in anyone other than children, and among all those I have observed, their death hastened; for which reason it seems to me that it would be better to divide the work of this chapter into these cures.
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw a child of this, the shoulder was full of water, and the head swelled each day so much that it could no longer bear it; and believed to such moisture that he died, and this moisture is assembled under the bone near the elbow, between the chest and the bone; and the muscles are like these when moisture is between the chest and the bone, and abscesses are small, that you cut in the middle of the head a wide crack; and let it be so long as two fists, as long as the moisture flows; and see this form of the syphilitic:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is more abundant, and the abscess is larger, make two cuts in a manner like an X, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is under the bone, and you see that the edges of the head are opened from each part, and the water spurts out when you press it from your hand inside, and this is not relieved: then you must make three cuts in the middle of the head according to this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers. Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	And after making the incision, remove all moisture. After stopping the cuts from bleeding with bandages and powders, and applying wine and oil, let it be this way for up to five days; then reset the dislocation, treat the wound with different methods and applications, and allow the head to be held in place equally until the limb is reinforced and healthy. Then give the patient dry meat from a source free of moisture as long as the limb remains strong and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another way of making an incision is that you look at where the opening of the abscess is, and place the hot iron; for it is never in front; it's never behind; not to the right; nor to the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Therefore, make the cut where the abscess opens, and place the hot iron, and perform the incision according to what you are able; and be careful not to damage an artery; watch for a flow of blood, so that the patient dies due to bleeding and evacuation of moisture.
de reume	On cautery of fire commands the diseased person to let their hair grow long and even; and if they poke at their origin, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When it happens to anyone that a disease is called "catarrh" with the eyes or at the bottom, and this disease is old, and the medicine treatment does not help, then the last resort procedure should be the cautery, using which one would cut off the two major arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout .i. drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de .ij. pars. tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	Therefore, you should cover the eyes. After that, let the patient lie on their back; rub the area with a coarse cloth until the arteries are visible. Then pull the diseased part of the neck to the entire length of one cloth. Next, observe where the vein lies and determine the position of each eye after the ears, ensuring they have returned to normal. Then mark both eyes with a cross, then cut each of them with an extremely sharp knife until the size reaches bone tissue, and do this by going across the width of the neck.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see it, pinch the pus near the artery and the vein above, cutting also as one inch through.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, let the blood flow out continuously from high up.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de .iij. dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est .vj. c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins. selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery doesn't open upon touching, it is necessary to measure the length of the space of three inches and then cut until reaching the bone; what needs to be done with the blood that should be expelled is two-thirds (and by chance a bit more or less) according to what the patient can bear, and the filling of the artery. Then look at the wound: if it remains on the bone slightly, or if after incising we don't find the pus, then tighten the wound and bandage it, and apply ointment treatment until it heals.
de emigrainne	In the treatment of a fire cautery, instruct the patient to let their hairs grow long and evenly; if they prick at their base, hold them still so they do not move until they fully grow.
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	As the old age comes with and experiences acute inflammation and congestion, due to the moisture of tears and heat in the temples and lower back areas from past illnesses and similar issues; medicine treatment for these is done through methods of medical cure techniques. Yet, none of these treatments are effective, so we remove the arteries in the temples and apply fire cautery, as we have detailed.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the method for extracting them is such that the patient feels behind their temples, and listens to the artery which opens up at the temple, as it opens well through its pulsation, and responds only in some people who are too cold; if it does respond, then cool the neck of certain cloths, then rub it with a rough cloth, and raise the head under hot water until the artery appears clearly. Then take the sponge that is shaped like this:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des .ij. chiés. Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	Then lightly scrape the skin until you reach an artery, then direct it upwards with forceps, and remove well all webs that are from each part; and if the artery is subtle, cut at the tip of the hook, then shape that section according to the amount of two joints. For if it's not cut properly, it will neither rupture nor pierce completely.
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And remove the blood from two to three; and if the artery is large, it should be tied with two threads of a strong silk thread, so that corruption does not occur in front of the healing of the wound, nor in subsequent bleeding; then cut off the excess between the two threads at this moment. And if you see, then apply the cautery gently until you reach the bone as long as the joints are cut; and this is the completed work, if the patient doesn't have fever and has warm complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	And the cauterization helps to finish off infections: because it provides more assistance against infections.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	In order for the removal of arteries, fill the area with old cotton and place it on well-made gauze; when you separate them, apply dry medicines that produce heat and gauze until they are clean; and should you cut into the artery as you work, quickly use a cautery or fill the area with vitriol and press your hand against it so that the wound is sealed; and if you do not have this present, place ice on the area instead until the wound is frozen, then rinse with cold water while keeping the wound from moving; and treat it as necessary. The one who moves faster during artery extraction when using a cautery should cauterize the blood vessel by cutting it in half across, but ensure that the cuts are deep enough to retain more of its heat for longer periods.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instruments are too tight, they retain less of their heat.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And must have a gap of one large finger between the two knives, and then when you prepare to apply them both at once, and place the hot iron until it reaches the bone, and cut the blood vessel in two; and keep them apart from each other with the shoulder joints because there is no welding effect throughout this cautery technique; and this is how a cautery should be formed:
des larmes	Of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears of the eyes are flowing from veins above the testicle of the head of strength, and no medical remedy benefits, and you see the reddening action of the patient, and feel or front pulsation as if gasping; and at places they are tenacious and moist such that the hair of papers falls, and the papers heat up, and burn from the intensity of the tears, then it requires this treatment.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai .iij. fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com .ij. doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres .ij. as .ij. costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as .ij. costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des .ij. mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de .iij. dois au traver joins;	And they called the old one 'healing for injuries', and do this to the patient with this disease by making them let their hair or head, then I make three cuts across the forehead equally according to the length of the forehead; and make one cut as if two out along the forehead downwards until it reaches the nose tip, and the other ones two at each side above the papers, and be careful not to incise the arteries that are above the papers; and keep your hand away from the continuation of the two jaws, and each wound should have three inches in depth perpendicular to the joins.
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de .ij. pars de coi ci est li forme:	And have ready a piece of sponge and some cloths to wipe off the blood, then pour in the quicksilver from two parts as it is shaped here:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	From the incision that is made below the temple up to the second incision; and burn all the kerf that is between the two gaps throughout the entire sinus located above the bone. Then cut further along from the middle incision up to the other second, and then remove this pus-filled space.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	If there is a tool placed in the first gap which is called 'cultellaire', and it has very sharp edges on one side, but not so on the other, it forms this:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure. Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place the cutting edge of the tool towards the fatty part in the kerf and the flat edge towards the bone. And insert the tool until it reaches the middle gap. And cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes as long as the incision continues up to where the incision opens into the kerf, then cut further on the middle gap up to the other gap; and then drain the blood evenly, and pour out the pus; then place a piece of old cotton in each gap, and apply a moistened cloth with wine, oil, and saffron. And make sure that any abscesses do not appear. And on the third day, remove the stitches and apply a large amount of watered vinegar, then treat it with basilicon balm mixed with rose oil, and other treatments for wounds, until it heals.
dou reume des eulz	of the eyes
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When there is a sudden onset of thick expectoration and you see the eyes withered and small, and weakening of vision, and burnt paper; and the hair falls out, and one sweats in fullness from fever, and the patient shivers, and the body is racked by fevers. Then know through these incidents that those substances and this mucus come from many veins, and the wet treatment applied, if it is correct, then this is how it should be.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large. i. poc. Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les .ij. levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And you instruct the patient to look at their forehead again. Then make a large incision through the forehead, and another one wide. Now start from the left temple incision to the right temple incision, and ensure your cut goes until it reaches bone; and hold your hand away from the temples nerves that move during eating. And when the bone is revealed, drain all blood with an sponge. Then clean between the two lips of the incisions and insert old cotton wool and linen cloth; then cover with wet cloths soaked in wine and oil, making sure not to expose any abscesses; once the bone is removed, it's important you rub the bone until you see new tissue start forming, then apply desiccating substances that promote healing.
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this manner: take two parts of the wheat flower and four parts of comfrey, and make them into a paste; and apply it to these wounds to promote the healing of flesh throughout.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Regarding ear piercing.
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	Everything that passes through the ears is one of the four things: or grains, or beast, or mine stones or similar things like iron; or seeds such as beans, peas; or any flowing thing like water and air and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel. Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus. Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	When they pass through the ear piercing or any other form of thing that does not fit with the ear and does not grow in the ear, you should expose the ear to sunlight. If you see the piercing, if you apply a few drops of violet oil or saffron oil, then proceed with extraction; and make them sneeze with consin (a type of ointment), when the sneezing comes, insert pieces of cloth or wool into the ear, and keep the ear above. Many times this cure works; and if it does not work to relieve pain, you should extract using fine tweezers, which is described as follows:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it jumps by force like pins, that's good; if not, proceed with the extraction using a fine needle of slight curvature; and if it doesn't jump through this, make an araneus (a type of tool used in surgery) and take hold of the head of the tool or the ear pinna firmly, and stick it into the waxed part of the tool until the wick cannot enter with the tool; then apply force with your hand as we have stated many times; and if force does not come out in this manner, grasp the tool at one end and take hold of its handle, place an instrument suitable for that task on either side, and insert a little cotton. Then press the wax firmly onto the stone or whatever it may be, and pull with force.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it does not jump through all these things that we have said, then hurry to pierce the ear as though an abscess would burst from wax, and convulse. And the method of piercing is such that you first make a surgeon's incision in the tympanic membrane and drain blood according to its extent, then place the surgeon's hand between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and create a small incision at the base of the ear where the fat hangs down; and let the incision be as round as the moon until you reach the bone, then operate according to your ability, and suck it out quickly into your mouth; and treat with care when it is clean.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it's granules that are inside and they are swelling, proceed with extraction; and if they cannot come out, proceed as follows:
et amenistre incision de celui grain. Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	And make an incision of that grain. But do not perform this when you think the grains are moist due to ear moisture, until you have done many pieces; then extract them with fine forceps and suction, as we said before, so that the extractions are clear.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton. Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est. s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin. se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent .i. jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	In water then, if one vomits in the ear, let the patient use the discharge of cold water first, and fill up the ear with old cotton. And be standing next to that ear where the water is. If it splashes out through this method, it's good. If not, take many pieces according to their length and gently, then heat them slightly on fire; and place one or two of these inside her ear, and pull away from one foot from another part, and pull off with another piece from the piece that is in the ear; and do this continuously from piece to piece until all water comes out, and thus completely vomits. And if you see, take a small reed, and insert one of the shoulders into the ear, and the other shoulder in fire until the hottest part becomes charred; then redo several times until all water is expelled, as we said about the piece.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the removal of the beast, if it is small in size, like a flea and similar things, treat it as we said in the division; but if it is large enough to be felt, perform the extraction with forceps; and this is the easiest thing to remove that is in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of worms from ears, when you treat it as we have said in division and dealing with distillations, if the treatment does not benefit, you must observe the ear to sunlight: if there is no worm opening, if you extract them using fine probes; and if nothing appears, take the form of this:
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus. Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent. Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And make the opening narrow at one end and wide at the other. And insert the finest probe into the ear according to the intensity of the pain caused by the disease, then gradually extend the whole length; do this repeatedly until all worms have emerged. And if they do not want to come out, stuff a cotton swab inside as I mentioned in the part about piercing stones; and if they still don't protrude like we said before, administer worm distillations that ancient people tested during worm extraction, and you will find it under treating distillations; and if you distill your oils and medicines into the ear using this instrument, following the shape shown here as you can see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And make it of silver or an earthworm with two small holes at one end and a wide opening for distillation; and to press the essence within during distillation use one well-made araigne's tool fit for this purpose. If you see a rasp and wrap tightly around the tip with cotton; then pour your oil or juice, and what you see of your medicines in the swab, and place that swab inside the ear; then stuff all the cotton into the rasp, press your hand gently until the oil is fully distilled or until the ear is filled; and sense the disease internally, and let the essence boil for a while when distilling it inside the ear; and make sure it isn't too cold because the medicine would not be as good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	On the cauterization of ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born without a perforation in the ears; and this same thing happens to those who have ear injuries or dead bodies inside the ear. Such injuries occur none of them within the ear if it cannot be seen; and they do not appear twice to expel the perforation, yet one can see well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And that which comes from within but cannot be seen is due to infection in various dispositions. And according to what you see, it is necessary for you to place the ear under the sun; and look inside: if you see the apparent opilation, if the work has produced this pus of which I speak:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And cut and scrape all around front and back so it doesn't hurt the ear; if there's a thickening due to dead tissue or a bump on the ear, use sharp tweezers and gently pinch, until all the hard parts are removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren .i. raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille. Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	And if the operations are inside the ear, take one subtle and light rasp, then heat it up a bit with the fire. Place this in the ear. If you feel the operation causing pain to the ear, make a slight incision, making sure not to damage the ear's nerves; afterwards put in the ear something that fits the size of the opening, and fill the rest with Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Continue to do this every day until the wound heals, or take a bandage and dampen it with rose water, then add powdered vitriol. And if you notice swelling in the ear, it is necessary that you change the bandage and use another one soaked in a wick made of rose oil and wax, until all the swelling has been removed; then treat it until it becomes healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if bleeding occurs, dip an sponge and soak it in cold water, then place it on the ear, and use other treatments that stop the bleeding which include remedies used for distillations.
de la char des papieres	Of the wax of papers
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	When the hairs come out on the papers when they are wet and then dry, it is necessary that you spread them with forceps and prongs, and cut from its roots with a spit bowl; then place under the sulfur crucible.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if you don't peel them, cauterize with a small lens cautery, and after the incision, let it burn; and many times they are repaired, so that nothing remains from their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
de la gresle	Of the gravel
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope. se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	Many times in the papers come certain things that seem greasy by their shape and hardness, and because of this is this disease called "granulation", and it's a collection of moisture in large amount on top and below the paper. The operations are as follows: watch if the granulation remains motionless from one side to another, which is an easy thing to know; then make them wide, then scorch each part slightly, then pinch them, and cut them out. If you can't cut it without piercing a bit of the paper or causing any pain to the patient, do not force much elsewise; and if the tear is large, if there's an opening seam, treat until it heals; and if she's small, don't exert any strength for that matter since ointments will soon restore her and promote tissue growth.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the granulation descends within the ear towards the upper part, reverse the paper, and cut out the granulation with one or more pinches from both sides; and should the paper be moved away by the incision, it doesn't cause any pain. And when the granulation is cut, remove the salty water, and treat the area until the patient's tissues heal.
de la graisse des eulz	From the grease of the ulcers
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil. Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	Extraction is an oil that accumulates on the sheets of papers, and this happens more often with children than adults, causing great annoyance to their eyes. It comes to them in tears during mornings, and they can't look at the sunlight because tears rush into their eyes; thus they rest on their sides immediately after waking up, sleeping right there, having their paper sheets moist under their eyes. And then the oil and appearance are covered by the extraction that opens in the eye. And when you press your head with your fingers and feel the extraction between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the way to do this is that the patient places their head into your healthy place. Then take one linen cloth, and set up a tent in such manner as a circle according to the quantity that contains extraction from each part; then put it on it; press with your fingers from both sides, so that the extraction is gathered within the circle; then cut in the middle of the moisture using a sharp blade for a crack of some size, and not bigger than the wound one makes when opening veins; and let the leather fit all around until you see the extraction through it. And in various positions, extraction comes out from the slit, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Extract it then into one piece of linen cloth between your fingers at the front, and turn your hand to the right and left until it is scattered; and make sure you don't stick in the slit, that you don't come up to the whole blade up to the eye, that you do not hurt it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the incision does not open at the start of the cut, increase the cut slightly gently until it opens; then pull it as we have said, then moisten with cloths and water, place on the wound, and stretch with bandages.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree. Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez. Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there are people who grind grain and place it to corrupt the moisture that remains. Then treat them until they are well. And if an abscess forms on the wound, then treat with ointments until they are well.
des poilz des papieres	"Des poilz des papieres" translates to "Paper hair" in English. However, this phrase doesn't seem to make much sense contextually and could potentially be a typo or an error in the translation. If it's referring to paper made from hair, then it might mean something like "hair-based paper". The precise meaning would depend on the broader context of its use within the text.
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When hair grows out of place other than its natural position and ages, they harm the eyes and bring on ailments such as familiar infections and degenerations of paper-like tissues, as well as albugine disease, all because these causes lead to destruction of the eyes; and one must cure according to four methods: or with a fire cautery combined, or by using medicine in accordance with what is stated before or concerning the chapter on cautery, and this can be done either through incision and suturing or by ligation, depending upon which I will explain.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	It is necessary for you to place the eye's main part in its health. Then turn the paper of the eye with your left hand; if it turns, that is good. If not, then insert one needle through both layers at once. And do this either inside or outside the paper edge where hair grows from these hairs. Then pull two threads upwards across all the paper and turn them on a seam. Then cut along part under the paper, under those hairs in place, from the large tear up to the small; then remove one thread, and insert between the paper a little cotton tent, and on top of the paper make a figure like an asterisk, as if it were the leaf of a myrtle tree. And be sure that the figure matches the size of the area you lift where the paper is folded down to all.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les .ij. lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des .ij. angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout .i. fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les .ij. sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a .iij. jors ou .iiij.; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	And if at this place you need to prepare a large amount of paper according to how the paper is softened. Then start the entire area from the large tear up to the small; and if it's one of the natural hair gaps in thickening by about an inch, then insert the thimble into one of the two corners of that keyhole, and then scrape off everything; then assemble both lips with a stitch using one needle through both fine thread strands, and clean out any blood, and make sure no excess thread hangs on the two eyelashes in any sticky way if you see fit; and if not, then don't bother with it, just leave the stitches and threads for up to three or four days. Then treat the wound without stitches using dried and binding substances, because the paper heals quickly from the wound's direct contact and the assembly of the parts. However, stitches become moist (as old ones said), and this is work without fear;
et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a .iij. oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	And if you have another way: and it is that you mark the paper with a figure which be as like to the leaf of myrtle, as we have recounted, at three inches deep according to the form which is here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	Then cut those that are at the top equally according to this shape:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait .i. fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute .i. autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	And if you don't have the ability to hold the forceps, and if the object isn't equally formed, take one needle with two threads, and place it on the shape; then place another thread below the large seam, and the second thread below the small one. Then join between your fingers the threads equally; lift your hand equally, lifting all the skin from where you marked it, as we have described, then sew both edges of the wound together by cutting stitches, and treat until it heals completely; and if pus comes to your incision, soothe it with ointment and other healing substances.
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	And it often happens that the paper hair is converted: so it is necessary for you to use what we have said about incisions; but the stitches in both are more artificially made.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The treatment of canes follows this form: and it is that you should convert the paper and cut inside according to what I have said, then create two stitches by art, and also two fine threads as long as the paper width is; and take two parts of the thread; then assemble each one delicately on top of the paper's oil opening, and tighten the two cane stitches from both parts in a formed manner; and leave it like this for some days, and the skin that has been tightened will shrink and heal until it flows out by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope aunes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des .ij. cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it lags behind, and if the process takes time, then treat it until it heals properly; and when the wound is healed, and if the paper is removed, and no longer will hair grow; and this is the form of the two stitches that you make according to this figure, and according to this length and width:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	The procedures are as follows: you need to take a delicate needle, and attach two strands of fine silk thread to it; then align the joints and tie them precisely together with these threads, making sure they're about the length of one hand in total; next, weave another short piece of fine silk thread through this process briefly, and secure each end of the joint. Then place the sickens' joint at your healthy position; ensure that sunlight can reach it because this procedure involves intricate details and precision, then insert the needle into the root area where the hair is attached until you pierce paper as you pull upwards from the natural hair; next, extract enough hair up to the insertion point of the thread, and secure each strand in place if there are two or more strands. Finally, withdraw your hand so that all hairs protrude evenly from the sheet along with their natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the process of extraction is done and the hairs do not come out with it, then pull the thread from underneath all the way to the end that you have ordered, until the extraction point goes beyond the part you can see with your eye; then once you remove the thread and the hair, let the wound heal for two or three days. And if the hair is small, accompany one long horsehair along its natural length, and raise it together with that or leave it as it was, until it becomes long again and then raise it.
de la porriture de l’oil	Regarding eye infections
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de .ij. manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.  Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	When this illness, which is called "aleacrati" or the putrefaction that occurs in the eye, happens there are two ways: one natural and the other unnatural. It can manifest suddenly due to an injury, from surgery, or with similar incidents.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent. Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	And the way of the operation in this is that you cut through that seam, and open the eyelid, and place linen wads inside it, and keep them until it heals; and it should not be that you use remedies for it that dry out and restrict. For if you do this, the disease will return worse than the first one; but work with things that soften, like fennel; and pour in water or vinegar and linseed oil, and dissolved garlic ointment into no oils, and cover it with a linen wad, and treat it with these.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasures of your treatment are that you must be cautious not to seal it according to its original form; and these operations that we have mentioned do not leave out remedies for this disease, so that it does not return according to its original form.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	from the matter that comes in the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens. Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait .i. fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en .ij. chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a .i. spatumile large.	This disease which is called "axacrati" really and truly is natural and accidental. The accidents come from wounds, cracks, cautery, and similar things; and the way of the operation in this situation is that you take a needle, into which there are two threads, and you insert it into the flesh, and make cuts on the left tear腺 just above, so that the threads go through .ij. fibers of the flesh; then the flesh comes up to the whole length of the needle, and the hole is made wide at .i. spatium large.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren .i. raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent .ij. fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des .ij. fendures des .ij. angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «.j. griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les .ij. parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the figure of the paper returns according to what should be, it is good; if not, take one of these tools and place it in the crack, then turn the paper around, making two cuts inside the paper. Let there be the ends of .ij. cuts at both corners of your incision, so that when they are joined together, the figure resembles a letter from the Greek alphabet with no 'j'. Then remove this flesh according to how wide its edges are and how much there is before it was cut out, based on where the paper was placed, then adjust the two parts which were removed using the stitches of wool; then apply the cure that we have spoken about for softening medicines and antiseptics until he/she recovers.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the disease comes from a wound or stitches or cautery, it is necessary that you cut a full opening across the hairs of the papers, and in accordance with what was said before; then cut between the two halves of a tent, as I have said; and must do the work according to the shape of the disease, for she varies greatly in form, and the surgeons prepare tools everywhere so they know how to bring the figure back to its natural shape; and the patients themselves, according to what is appropriate for action and instruments in various positions.
dou soudement de la papiere	quickly from the paper
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this stitch occurs using the hands in such a way that the paper is fastened with the white of the oil, and it cannot move or do its natural tasks, then you must therefore take the tip of a razor under the paper, and lift it upwards; and set it at the pinholes, as long as you manage to reach the fine wisp of wax that is not too hard nor too sharp, so that the patient does not suffer from the wax being too hard and causing irritation in the eye; and make your incision, which you scrape the gathered together part slightly, so that the paper regrows according to its natural shape; and heal all that assembled together, and do no sharp cut within the eye, but instead lift it with fresh water and vinegar; then place between the paper and the eye a linen tent, and put damp wool on the eye. And after three days use a colander and other tools continuously until it is healed completely.
de l’ungle de l’oil	From the eyelash of the eye
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	Know that the eyelash has two ways: it is nervous and resembles a single hard thread, and another which isn't nervous but resembles white moisture that is frozen. When you touch it with iron and treat it around like needles, you cannot; both similarities start near the large tear ducts, grow little by little until they cover all vision, light, and movement of the eye.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the way of incision is such that when you treat the patient with their healthy head, then release their eyes; lift the eyelash using your hand, then pull out the nail with small double-folded scissors, and place it above; take a needle, and attach one horse hair or cow hair or ox hair, along with a strong thread; double the needle's tip slightly and insert it into the nail, piercing it completely through. Then bind the nail to the thread and place it above; burn the entire length of each hair on both sides of the nail that lies under the eyelid membrane and the silk-like hair until the root, then cut off any remaining at the root beneath the tear ducts while preserving fine tissue and using gentle force, leaving the natural tears unaffected by the incision process. Then, when the nail has been removed to just its base and thread, as we have said; burn away all excess hair from this area as shown:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And see to it that the cautery doesn't touch the fatty skin and damage it, and that the needle doesn't pierce; and after incision pour a bit of powdered sulfur into the wound, and create a collar with mercury paste, and leave it until another day; then treat as necessary for as long as the person is well.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail isn't nerve-filled and you can't push in the needle, and the small nails cannot enter it, this is often treated by applying medicines to resemble a nail; and proceed as I have described in division, and if you see it become swollen, treat with an ointment that the patient might apply lightly pointy according to this shape.
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	Remove the nail carefully upwards, and if you see that it is thinning slightly and its base has compressed, then apply a collar made from mercury paste and a red collar with powdered sulfur to the eye, and keep this in place until another day; then proceed with the next operation according to this same process until all of the nail is removed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing goes against your sight, like an abscess on the eye, then proceed, and first clean the abscess as long as it is healthy. Then restart the operation as described previously, until it's healthy again.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if there's the appearance of the eye tissue damaged by considerable harm, then suspend treatment with the onion, and apply only part of it not all at once, making sure tears don't come in contact; then instill red collyrium made from litharge into the eye.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh that grows on the pupil
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tune bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	From some individuals eyes birth only red flesh, and covers the pupil and restrains over the eyelids and gets to the outside surface, making it seem like a rose of baluster; and in such cases you do as follows: when your patient’s body has returned to health after illness, then treat the eyes, and with this entire amount of flesh use onion slices that suit its size, and hold them in place with the force of your hand; then remove the first layer of flesh, and shave everything smooth until reaching the end, and make sure not to damage the eye during surgery. And perform the incision as we have mentioned for incisions on the fingernail bed, following similar small techniques shown after this chapter; when you remove the yellow nail, so as to leave behind a white one, just like what this chapter demonstrates afterwards.
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	And when the incision has been completed and all the pus removed, use oil of sulfur or distill it with red clover leaf medicine and other similar corrosive remedies. Place a cotton ball dipped in oil on top of any remaining pus; if there is no fever, and you notice signs of healing, then let the oil be and treat any pus-related inflammation. If nothing remains and there's no fever, but you still suspect an abscess, leave the oil and apply remedies that soothe abscesses. Then return to your task until it has healed properly, and thus create as many incisions as necessary in this manner within the oil through these procedures.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	However, it is necessary that you treat each weak oil in the natural way; and also the accidental path, in iron work; and do not let your hand enter any of these works until you see that this limb endures that operation.
des voines des eulz	of veins and eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors. Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	When the veins are red and covered above the eye, they obstruct vision of the work ahead and weaken sight for several days. Therefore, when you first look at the eye, examine this condition carefully; there is no other disease besides this inflammation; then handle it like this: instruct the patient to align their head with your healthy position, then suspend those veins according to every ounce of their wisdom, and have the ounces thin yet double in size following this form.
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And let there be two ounces by degrees at each side according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	And then continue to gently displace those fine veins, and expect the blood to drain for another hour, until you see those veins leave the eye; be careful not to cut into the eye with the points of the spatulas, and do this operation at midday in front of the sun, and take great care in your work so that you do not remove more than just those veins. And when you have done this, apply a garland of green and red oil to disintegrate what remains from the inflammation.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you do not have the power to complete all this at that time, then apply a plaster of things that soothe the pain in the eyes, and leave it for some days until the pain is soothed and assured of the extraction of pus, then restart according to this manner which was before until it is cured; and this is the form of force:
de la fistule de l’oil	Of the ear canal
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The method known as "arissati" ear fistula: when you cure it using cautery and hot water according to what I have said before, and if it is not cured yet, then open into the pus pocket in the area where it should die, and drain all the moisture until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is discovered, and you will see the corruption and the darkness, if you take out all the tool used as described; and call it "hard head", and be made of iron in the shape of half a dozen heads, and be sharpened like a sawblade just like its current form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And place on it the part of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your hands, and press your hand a little until you know that this corruption is removed; and do this once, then restore the area with medicinal desiccants.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi xl. jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent .i. foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a .iij. angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	When the limbs are joined, and the flesh begins to grow, and the body of the wound is joined, and remains like this for 40 days, and does not heal or become an abscess, and no bad events occur, know that it is healed; if not, then there is only another remedy of bringing back the fistula to its original place according to this form: and when you expose the bone again with iron and medicines, and once it's exposed, take one tool according to this form, and make the iron head in three angles, and the shaft should be narrowed down like a sawblade just like what you see here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil .i. poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then place it on the bone near the eye socket, and keep your hand away from the eye for .i. pox (a unit of measurement), then continue with your whole hand until it pierces the bone and feels the pain through that area if your breath is in it as you hold your hand over his nose; and afterwards restore the arm with dry medicines as I have taught you, and when the child has grown and hardened the joints, let the matter go to the nose; so there's a lighter thing for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	from the opening of the eye
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the eyes have fully opened and there is no disturbance to the neck or diminishment, it's necessary that you tie the patient. Then heal them, then place suction cups or hatel (a type of dressing) without piercing in order to suck out excess fluid, then put on an eye patch made from acacia, aloe, incense, and sarcocolle paste, and then strain the eyes, and plaster it with bandages and cloths; and the way you use the cloths should be that you take cloths that are quite soft enough to double each one in half twice (.iiij., four times), and then place them one on top of another according to the amount required by the eye. Then strain it from above using a stiff bandage, and repeat the suction without piercing; then remove the suction cups and leave the eyes strained day and night, and if the bandages disintegrate, do strain as much as necessary; then remove the bandage after the day and night, and if you see that the eye has healed, it's good; if not, start again with the plastering, cloths, bandages and suction cups until it is healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	from the breaking of a veined cloth
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When disruptions occur in the veined cloth, then open it and comes to pieces like small grains of resin, which are hard to see; thus when you see them covered, the works are such that you poke one needle into the base of the part below until up to halfway above, then poke another needle or with a double thread from the part behind the eye; and make it pierce, and leave the first needle according to its placement; then cover with the double thread and tie a part of the membrane inside, and squeeze it well, then remove the needle and place wet linen wool on the eye with plenty of egg; and let it be as long as the thread is consumed along with the membrane, then cure the eye with comforting things until the wound heals; and in no way should the wound be restrained by the membrane each part from a circle of cloth until it has healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eyes then show a large appearance, pierce them at the delicate spasm that comes from under the eye and corrects the moisture albuminous and lowers the eyes, and enters quickly; then remove it until it has healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	From the flow of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de .ij. pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit. si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee .i. poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	This disease which is called 'alcunnati' does not originate from flow in the eye that appears like tears flowing down; it is not real tears; and the way its symptoms become visible is when you make the patient sit upright and straight, then take their head between your hands, two by two, and move them until you see the tear come up to your eyes; then place it back, don't let it descend and remove any remaining light, observe the patient's condition as usual; if it doesn't descend immediately, know that there is a tear, and when the tear's descent isn't apparent in this way as we have said. Then situate the patient between your hands, take the delicate spatula and make cuts along the corneal tissue at one point, following the continuity with the corneal tissue and the crown until the tear comes out; and once it has come out, apply hot water mixed with honey to the eye, or water boiled with fenugreek, then after that application is done, it will be treated further until it heals.
des aigues de l’oil	Regarding tears from the eye
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit. Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre. se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	In our experience with operations involving the eyes and what needs to be pierced; so when working according to health principles. You should have the patient sit between your interlocked hands away from sunlight exposure, and hold the healthy eye firmly tight. Then place the piece of paper next to your left hand under their eyes if they're on the left side or under their eyes if they're on the right; then take with your right hand (when they're on the left) or your left hand (when they're on the right), the tool called "almagda," and place the tip of this tool just below the cornea by the thickness of a hair along the tear duct, then forcefully thrust the "almagda" tool into the corner of the eye until it pierces through to the other side of the eye's interior tissue, sensing that almagda reaches the hollow thing. The measurement of the path of almagda should match the size of the space from the lid to the darkest point; this is the cornea area. If you see bone in the paper because of the transparency of the corneal mesh, then place the tool until it touches where the pain is or where the eye is affected by it, and then express through another channel afterwards. If the pain subsides now, you will observe the patient looking ahead with the tool still in their eye.
Aprés repose .i. petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens. Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.  Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	After resting a little, and if the pain ascends through the second passage, apply force with the tool; and when it's securely in place and no longer rises, gently extract almagda by rotating your hand back and forth slightly. And then, partially reinsert some oily substance like grease or egg white into the eye socket, and remove the eye from this. Then place a moistened wool or oil-soaked cloth beneath the eye area, covering it abundantly with eggs. Now, those of our time, let's apply this treatment similarly using ample eggs.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if almagda cannot enter the eye because of its hardness (some people have particularly hard eyes), it is necessary that you take the tool called "alberit," which has this shape:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai .i. leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide .i. dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en .j. leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And then pierce only the conjunctive part, do not go too far forward but make it about an inch subtle, then add almond oil as we have said; and upon completion of the operation prepare for the patient one ointment, on which they rest on their back in a dark room for an hour; and stay completely still, and prefer light foods, and do not move his head neither to the right nor to the left, and tie him according to his position until the third day; then untie him within that same dark room and check his vision, and show him some things, and then reapply the bandage up until the seventh day; and it should not be done during the curing time or after an incision now, but you should wait with this process because the wound will heal rapidly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice .i. orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse. Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	When discharging pus comes out, you should release the eye before the seventh day, and use a dressing for the abscess. And when it has calmed down, then release vision and place two wicks on his face for covering one day, and stay in that dark room. And remain within this dark house little by little, and adjust to his surroundings; know that no pupils should interfere in this situation.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one person came to us who was from the region of Arach, who told us that everywhere they use almond oil dressing, after which they drain the pus, but still I have never seen anyone like this in our land, nor have I ever read about it in ancient books; perhaps this is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the appearances of the forms of alum, for he who does not know them sees them; and they are properly of arsenic:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And it is the head of those from this same subtlety, and the last at three angles of sickness.
de la char sor le neis	from the flesh under the nose
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color. En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; puis cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	None are born or under the nose are jointed in various ways; among them some seem like scorpions with the feet of a pie. And if there is such a one with a jointed char from the color of fux, and if it has a char that smells of good color. Therefore, for those of these chars which smell well and is not adorned, you must have the patient lie between your hands against the sun; work on his nostrils and pour the oncine onto those chars, and drive them out. Then hold what you can withstand at the fine sharp spatumile of one side until you know that this char is completely jointed.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if there remains no substance we cannot cope with, when you open the entire body with all the surgical instruments very gently, ensuring nothing is left behind; and should there be no wound or abscess rupture, then apply gentle pressure as needed; and if it's an abscess, apply pressure carefully until it ruptures. If they are malignant ulcers, quickly act and cauterize immediately once the pus stops flowing and all edges are sealed, then rinse thoroughly with water or wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, acoi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes .i. fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice .i. doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil. Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu .iij. jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	And if there's an opening due to moisture reaching up to the throat, know that it is bleeding; and should moisture not puncture properly as intended, know that there is new tissue forming in the bone above, where surgical tools fail to reach: thus, you must remove .i. thread of linen, somewhat thick, and hold both hands tightly, keeping each strand apart by roughly .i. inch or less; then insert one end of the cloth into the throat near the nose and pull it out through the odorant so that it passes through from the inside of the mouth; and this process is often done on infants in school settings, and it's a simple task for those who wish to perform it; then hold the head coming out by the nose with one hand, and the other head coming out by the mouth with the other hand, ensuring they come out one after another while holding onto us tightly. Do this until you're sure that the thread has corroded that tissue, then remove the thread, stop the bleeding, moisten the thread in Egyptian ointment, and place it back inside again as before; do this for .iij. days or more, until the ointments have dissolved all remaining tissue; and then keep some pine resin in your nose for a few days until it heals, and if you need dry medicines, use them; and this is the form of instrument to cleanse the head, which has distilled oils and medicines inside when used with oil or water.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And make it of silver or iron, resembling an open lamp, like a cane, and guide this as well; and if you see fit, make it a closed cane, and ensure your surgical tools are filled to purify the head; and have one hand on the head when heating oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	from the flesh near the nose
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times, near the nose, a disease is born which is called "telul", it grows and becomes large until one can see it; and for this reason you should cover it at the beginning, and fully remove the bone, then place the cautery or burning medicine in its place; and if you delay covering it until it is large, beware if it is hard, changes color, loses sensation: do not touch it with iron as it contains an embedded abscess, for when one covers it once, great harm comes to the patient; and if the abscess is due to cold touch, not due to loss of color, and you see that it can be completely covered, let the patient breathe normally and treat the area with dry and restrictive substances.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	When the nose has been cut and sewn.
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes. Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les .ij. levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Understand that when solutions come into contact with one of those internal cartilaginous parts in this chapter, it rarely benefits anyone. Therefore, such occurrences should not happen to any person at all; if their injury is fresh up until the blood comes back completely; then adjust the two lips towards a stitch, proceed with treatment while they remain healthy; and when the lips are already desiccated from both sides, you should scorch all parts of their skin until they heal, then join the two lips together in one stitch, hold them firmly, and sprinkle with dragon's blood powder and incense. Then place a piece of plaster underneath the powders until it begins to heal; after that, apply ointment treatment while they remain healthy.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The method of the stitch is that you join the solution together: either with needles, as we have explained for the stitch in the abdomen; or with thread, which I have already told you.
des apostemes des levres	from abscesses on the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	Hands should be inserted inside the abscess wound, similar to grains sometimes, smaller and larger; therefore it is necessary that you return the lips, cut through each nook, and take them with forceps and collect in each part; then after the vitriol incision, keep the hand under until the wound dries; and then remove the dressing, clean the lip of dry things until it heals.
de la char des gencives	from the flesh of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times, a piece of attached flesh originates on the gums, which the old ones called "albulus"; you should hold this with tongs and cut it at its root, allowing bleeding or blood to flow. Then put under the vitriol (sulfuric acid) or other retarding and drying powders. And if that flesh returns after cutting, and many times happens, if you cut it a second time, and cauterize it: if it does not return after burning; these are the forms of tools to use for cutting.
des sordens	Of cauteries of fire command the ill to let their hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold them steady so they do not move until they grow.
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Certain times are gathered at the root of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, those that are ugly and harsh; and certain times there is a black tooth and citrine one with worms as long as the decay comes to the gum, and they make the teeth stink; then it's necessary for you to hold the ill person between your hands, and let their head be on a pillow, and pull out each tooth or each piece of the harsh substance until nothing remains; and thus create blackness and verdure, jaundice and other colors, as long as they're removed; and if what comes off at the first attempt is good; if not, it starts again from the second day onwards, up to when you have everything pulled out; know that the teeth need different kinds of instruments for pulling them, depending on how the work shows them, because the rasers that remove teeth between the teeth have other shapes than those that remove teeth outside; and these shapes along with others should be prepared in front of you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is necessary that when you treat the tooth for its pain, you delay pulling it as long as you can, because this should not be done lightly; indeed, this substance goes quite high up so one must have no excuse for the rasping.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant. Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Therefore, when the patient is forced to bleed, you must be sure of the tooth causing it. Many times the pain guides the disease and makes one think it's a diseased tooth; thus, one should extract the healthy tooth. Yet do not completely relieve the pain until all the bad tooth has been removed, as we have already instructed our healers; and when you are certain which tooth is causing trouble, you must sear around the tooth with one pinch of strong sulfur for to preserve the gum in every place. Then move your fingers or your delicate tongs into this tooth's first joint and out slowly until it is well extracted, then firmly hold the tongs. And have the diseased head of the tooth between your knees, and keep your hand steady so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier. Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	After extracting the tooth properly without breaking it, and if there is no bleeding, take any of these instruments and gently push them in every part from each side, and move them as you did initially. And if the teeth are pierced and fused together, you must fill them with cloths where they were; and when extracting them with delicate tongs, make sure not to break them during extraction. It's best to carefully open around the gum tissue for removing tooth debris.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere. Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And make sure that you do not break it or leave a part of the tooth, and inform the patient about the increased pain from the root due to this action, which can be worse than initially. Also take care not to perform this operation as ignorant healers do, who often break the tooth once and don't follow our instructions, causing repeated injuries by opening the same large disease or breaking the tooth while doing so; instead, they come back with this very same illness due to the roots that remain or due to the tooth they broke. When the tooth is extracted, wash out the cavity with wine or oil and vinegar; and if bleeding occurs after, which often happens, fill the cavity with burned vitriol. If it doesn't work, cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The shapes of the tools, to which you first get your teeth into, should be long pointed and have big handles, so they do not bend when you pull on the tooth; and these are their shapes:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And may have large members that do not bend while pulling, and be made of well-made iron, and be toothed for gripping.
de la racine des dens	from the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre .i. jor ou ij., tant que li leus soit amolis, puis i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	When the root remains during pulling, you should place cotton that is wet with butter on the left. For one or two days until the cotton turns to ashes, then remove the pliers called "algefri", from which the shoulder seems like a doctor's mouth; and they should also be made as if it were a file, this is its shape:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not wish to come out with all these tongs, then you must uncover the entire flesh right up to the root, and place the tool known as "altalhi", which is essentially a spike, in that manner:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And make it so that neither breaks or swells, and if the root jumps out through this, it's good; if not, use all the tools you have, as their forms come next:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if help is taken from this tool which has two prongs, as its form is shown here:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other tools that are in front according to the order of teeth, and this tool which seems like a large pair of tongs, as its form is shown:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And let this tool be such that it cannot break, and know that few tools of bone exist; and also other tools, which are not counted; and the skilled surgeons find their instrument by themselves, according to what their work and disease show them, for there are parts of diseases where old instruction did not teach a tool because of the diversity among others and if it breaks from wear or from the rest of bones, or if it decays, so he searches among the tools that suit him, which I have told you about, and helps with gestures, as is described here:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And may they be large and well holding to hold the bone, so that it doesn't escape but can be held and removed; and then restore at its place with medicine suitable for this, and if there is decay in the bone, and if it is small, then use all this instrument.
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the tooth appears not according to its natural form, and the shape is ugly, especially in virgins, it's necessary for you to know whether the tooth was born after another one, and wasn't placed straight, and can't be pulled or filed: then pull it out; and if it is together with a tooth, take this instrument described here, which resembles two small hooks, and made of sharp iron.
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the tooth is extracted bit by bit in my hands due to its hardness, and because you do not move others, and if it can be seen that one could grind it out, then I will grind down with one part of the file as this shape:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	And it is also like the file used to make needles; and I grind the tooth bit by bit in my hands lightly, so that you do not move until it finishes; then make it flat at the end with all tools, and if it's too sharp and irritates the tongue, then you should grind down the roughness until it is even, so as not to irritate the tongue or damage speech.
quant li dent lochent	when the tooth swells
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les .ij. dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a .i. ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper. Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des .ij. dens sains, et des .ij. meus, si com tu vois:	When the tooth is before the cheekbones, either through percussion or by hitting, and if the patient cannot press upon it so that he/she doesn't vomit after eating, you should have treated it with medicines to restrict, but this doesn't work; then bind it with a gold thread, because silver threads turn green and rot, whereas gold never does. And choose the thread neither too thin nor too thick, according to the width of the space between the teeth; and if you see to straighten the teeth, take the thread and the double-ended needle between two healthy teeth, then place the dislocated parts between the diseased teeth, whether there are one or more than one. Until you can feel them properly touching the other side of a healthy tooth; then repeat the covering until you've covered up to where you intervened before. And remove your hand skillfully and carefully, making sure it doesn't move at all; and tie your knot at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape. Then cut the threads with pliers, gather them together, place them between a healthy tooth, and set them in such a way as to not irritate the tongue; then leave it like this tightly until it can stay without discomfort, and if it loosens or the threads break, retighten with another thread; if stays in place properly serving all its time, and that is the form of the teeth and the insertion of the two healthy teeth into the diseased ones as you can see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth is lost, you set it back to its place piece by piece as we have explained; and do not interfere with anything that is not fit and endure pain, nor at any time make the shape of a bone tooth from a cow, and put it in the place where the defect exists, and tighten it as we have said, and stays like this serving for as long as possible.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	To cover the wound of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder. Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	No time comes from within the tongue or nature that we are born with; or by accident of healed wounds; and the procedures are such that you work on the mouth against the disease, have its head in your healthy area, then lift the tongue; afterwards cut out the nervous cord across the width until the tongue is dislocated from its place. And if there's hardness or swelling, particularly due to suddenly healing wounds, if you bend and cut that section of the cord; and be sure not to make the incision too deep as there is an artery underneath; and once done, lift the head from pinkish and watery fluid, then from cold water; then put under the tongue a linen bandage each night so the head cannot stick. And if bleeding starts, place vinegar on the head; and if it doesn't stop, cauterize with slow burning cautery which is good for this situation; then apply another healing method until it's healed.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see that it's of any color or black or hard, and the patient doesn't feel it, don't touch it because it's a boil; and if it's turning towards pus, and there's moisture, then use the hook tool to puncture it with a subtle incision from both sides, and heal it from one side and the other; and if it doesn't stop draining in your procedure, place vinegar on it until it is healed completely. Then return to your procedures as long as you are using force; then lift the head from coolness and perspiration, and apply further healing methods until it's fully recovered.
des apostemes de la gorge	extracting abscesses of the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les .ij. amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer. Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez. Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	No disease enters within the throat cavities that are called "godaths", and they're properly named as two almonds. When you treat them, just as we've explained in division, if they aren't healed, be careful: if these are pus-filled blisters small in size and with a white color, don’t touch them with metal at all. And if they’re red and the root is large, don’t touch them with metal either, due to blood discharge; but leave them until they're wounded, then you will remove them, or they might break by themselves; and if they are of pale color and have a thin root, prepare your tool for extraction, yet first check that these pus-filled blisters settle and calm down. Then make the patient face towards the sun, let their arms be in good health, and open their mouth while the surgeons press their tongue under all the tool, as depicted here; it should be of silver or finely crafted as knives.
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	Can't you press the tongue with all this instrument, and you see the pus-filled blister? Take one and put it into the almond, then pull it upwards more than you can; remove nothing from the threads, then extract with the tool, as depicted here; it looks like a force. And both the head is placed upright, and one part after another are extremely sharp, and made of iron or silver.
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you don't have this tool at hand, use tweezers instead, as depicted here:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	And make cuts on one side and the other name; and when you have performed one of the almonds, perform the other in the same manner, and after cutting gargle the patient with hot and cold water, as well as a gentle flow of blood occurs, then gargle with hot water or slices from cooked cherry tomatoes or laurel leaves, and similar things, until the saliva is fully cleansed; then continue the cure until it is healed; and no other abscesses are born in the throat than the two almonds, so perform them accordingly like the two almonds evenly.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir .i. aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi .i. jor ou .ij. Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis .ij. rains par les .ij. pertuis dou neis. Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un .i. oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	And I treated a woman with an abscess that was born within her throat, namely a small abscess. I had almost completely sealed off the entire throat channel, so she could not breathe due to the obstructed passage and also could not eat or drink, dying if she remained in this state for one day or two. The abscess had ascended quite high, causing it to force out two tears through each of the two nostril holes from birth. I immediately acted quickly, put an ounce in one (of the nostrils), then pulled out the passage and a large portion of mucus; then made another cut near the other nostril hole, and had her open her mouth while pressing on her tongue; after that, inserted the ounce into this abscess, took out a part of it, and only came out with a little blood; and thus opened up the passage in her throat for the woman, started drinking water now and then wine, and did not stop cutting away at this abscess over a long period; and the abscesses were growing back immediately, filling the space that I had emptied until it became quite large; then I removed these parts, and only let God do what was left after me.
de l’uve	of the eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve». Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li. Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide. Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a .i. des .ij. estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des .ij. amandres. Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des .ij. amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee. Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor. Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague. Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	When the head descends into the eye socket, and it is swollen and long, this is called "perpendicular"; and if it is out of place being large and round, then it's called "eye". When it is cured as we have said in division, and treatment doesn't improve, and you see that the abscess has calmed down and is subtle, then it should be handled; and this one which is round assembled and not long; and if it's bloody or of fusse color or black, then you should avoid making an incision into it. For there is great danger to the patient. Therefore, when you see it, according to the manner I said regarding its size and length, make the patient face the sun, press their tongue against the instrument we described previously; then insert the ounce into the eye, pull outwards from there, and cut it with two of the instruments that were mentioned in the division of the two almonds. And you should not cut more than the excess which is beyond the natural limit; because if you cut more, it harms voice and speech; after the incision, use what was said about cutting into the two almonds, and treat until she's healed. And if the patient feels fear upon cutting, then you must apply a tool for cautery sensitivity. And the method of the cautery is sharp. And let the patient put their head back in your health, and then press their tongue against the instrument described or under the title of cautery, and clamp with living force; but not too thick nor too thin; and use the movement of this tool as it's formed:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let my head have a hair where I apply the medicine, like the movements of a spoon, and place the tool over all the medicine on the eye; and let the patient rest with their head on its side so that saliva and the mucus flow from their mouth to the medicine inside, but not down to the throat or causing pain; then hold your hand over all the medicine and press it onto the eye for half an hour, until you see that it has dried and the effects of the medicine are reduced; and if you see this, take cotton and envelop it with any tool, moisten the cotton in the medicine, and place the tool on top of the cotton on wax, so that the cotton burns into the eye while it's damp; and do this often until the cautery is perfect, then let it dry, and wait for four to five days. And if you need to repeat the medicine cautery procedure, then do it again, after which clean around the eye with cotton dipped in butter, and clean off anything left of the medicine; and rinse with cold water, and treat with gargling until healed.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This cure is safer than incision or using the cautery; if it's treated with fumigation in this way, take calendula and ipecacuanha and oregano and rue and chamomile and lettuce and similar herbs, and combine them all or some of them into one pot, put them there, and bring it to a boil; and the pot should be well sealed with strong earth, and inside the pot place two sticks according to this method:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut. Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And it should be made of silver or sulfur, and until the vapor rises from the patient's mouth through their nose as long as the diseased womb is dead; after that you should repeat this often, until the womb dries out. Make sure not to do this at the beginning of pus expulsion when fever occurs, for many things can happen; instead, don't use this method during the decline of pus expulsion. And if this tool isn't available, take a reed and place an eggshell inside your mouth so that the diseased part doesn't get too hot; because the eggshell does not make the vapor weigh down on the mouth, it is a good combined remedy for salvation.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times, you may use the os or spine of a fish bone, with no need for anything else; if so, then it is suitable that you remove what you can see, and press your tongue against the sun on all the tool, until you see movement. For what cannot be seen opening in the throat, it's necessary to make the patient vomit out the diseased part so that the food becomes cooked in their stomach; if by chance this forceful expulsion fails to remove the disease; or if the disease swallows a piece of sponge, or belly button, or a lettuce root, or a crumb of dry bread; bind the sponge with thread and then swallow it. And when she comes to your mouth, you will see steam rise, and then proceed to force an expulsion; and if this doesn't come out from what we have mentioned, then take one tool shaped like lead according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And ensure the tools are adjusted near the head so that it can enter the throat more easily, and have the head raised high; take care not to touch the epiglottis, letting nothing go through or pushing the bone inwards; instead guide the patient when they push the tool, as if they move or if something is too tight; should it be pushed down, or pull it forcefully with all the tool evenly, until she can do so.
de la sansue de la gorge	from the saliva of the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit. Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout .i. petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu. Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine .i. fer chaut, et fai ce sovent. Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor. puis pren plein .i. voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	No treatment is made with saliva alone, as I have described in the division by medicine cures; and when this does not help, then look into the throat of the sick person towards the sun, and press their tongue with the tool that I told you. And if you see saliva, draw it out to about one small uncia or use fine tongs suitable for this purpose. If this doesn't work, take a hair, insert it in the throat toward the sickness, then apply pressure on its tip with heat like from a red iron and repeat often. And wet the sick person's mouth fully with cold water every day. Then wash their mouth open wide and let the water swallow slowly, and move their head often; and as soon as saliva feels the water, they will vomit it out.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier. Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes .i. pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And if she doesn't give birth as we have said, then fumigate the patient with asafetida, using the tool that I mentioned in the fumigation of the eye. Do this multiple times, for she will not bleed without it. The method of fumigation is such: take one pot containing charcoal briquettes, cover it partially from inside with a perforated cover and place the tool's head inside its center. Then pour your fumigation into this, and hold the tip of the fumigator in her mouth, sealing it so no fumes escape but only reach up to the nostrils; and now the blood will come out. If she doesn't bleed, start the fumigation process multiple times again. Allow the patient to be thirsty, eat salty foods and alike, do not drink water; then she must leave her body in this manner.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the shape of the tool used for bleeding, when it can be seen, resembles curved scissors meant to cut into the throat; and it has a similarity to the tip of a surgical scalpel, and it is sharpened like a rasp, so whatever she takes does not slip away; here's its shape:
li chapistres des apostemes	The chapter on abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en .ij. manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor. Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors. car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	No mention of abscesses are made according to what the memory brings forward from one and another in this book, and they differ both in perforation and in size; it is done in two ways where one is similar to its nature, and because it holds moisture. And the second way is for those that are on the body or they are within it. As abscesses at the head are different from those at the base, and abscesses at the fatty part of the head are different from those that come into joints, each has their judgement in operation.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures. Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre. Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	And for abscesses, one should not pierce them until the body is dead according to its maturation. And if there are such that it's necessary to pierce when they have grown and do not mature as expected, like abscesses originating at joints. Because when abscesses originate at joints and are left until rotten inside by chance, perhaps the ligament and nerve of the joint become corrupted, which causes contraction in that limb. Or if the abscess is within the main member, if you delay perforation until it's dead, it will harm the principal limb. Or if it is deep in the foundation, then piercing it so that it becomes dead; there should not be a situation where you pierce an immature, undigested abscess other than one that has become rotten from its base, and it grows into a fistula; and cannot heal within a large extent.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And it must be known when the time for perforating an abscess that is dead according to its maturation, which is when the pain has subsided, and the departure of fever, and reduction of pain and flush, and the movement and firmness of the head of the abscess, and other signs; and it should be ensured that you place the perforation site above the abscess or as closely as possible to where it opens outwards, and if the perforation is along the length of the body, and if the abscess is located at hands or feet, or joints and nerves and arteries, and in all places where there is no crease.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre. Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit. Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui. Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.  Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com .i. drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en .iij. angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	In those who bend, according to that limb. And when abscesses are within the fatty part of flesh, if you see them burst, let the puncturing continue until it is confirmed by digestion completion, as we have said. Because if you pierce before this confirmation, it might stretch across his body with venom from him and be full of heaps of filth; and might harden his lips and damage the parts beneath him. And for abscesses that are pierced along the width of his body, according to what the limb requires. And you must introduce small tools for smaller abscesses, small hooks; and in larger abscesses, large hooks, and many incisions according to the size of the abscess; and if there are such abscesses where it's necessary to use a knife, and cover them; when it has become as big as two cloths, and is numb, then do as you would with milking: and for those that split into three angles, and those that need to be covered like the leaf of myrtle, like abscesses from angles; and for those where a round cut is made, and other cuts and similar operations are done.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites. Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois. Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Those who have none (of the tools), such as abscesses superficially situated, it is necessary that you pierce them completely; and when an abscess is large, and has accumulated a lot of pus, if you pierce but do not remove all the pus at once, but remove only part of it; then stop puncturing until the other side heals, then leave nothing untreated; perform this procedure by size in order from largest to smallest, until the pus exits entirely. Also, if someone's health is weak or a pregnant woman, young children, elderly and decrepit people. Because their spirits tremble with every release of pus, they might accidentally die due to it. Therefore, be cautious throughout this chapter, when you have pierced your abscess, if there is an opening, then check that the wound from the abscess is small; and if it's a clean cut, use linen or old cotton for treatment; and if it's large and many hooks are used, each must have a tent so they face each other. And if you removed part of the skin in the abscess and sewed it back together, then fill it with old cotton or linen shreds without moisture, and secure it until the third day; then rest, and treat with ointment until healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille .i. drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.  Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if bleeding occurs in your procedure, then treat with cold and ease, and moisten with a cloth for multiple times. And if the bleeding continues, then take control and treatment, and use the powders I mentioned in this book, and if it's in an area of water or if the skin around the abscess is very sensitive, then place wet tents and cloths soaked in wine and oil; and if it's in a solid area, and the skin is fatty, then apply moistened cloths soaked in water and oil, or wine and cold oil, until the third day as we have said; then remove and treat and cure properly, until it heals.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And it is necessary to understand universally in the treatments of abscesses: I have told you how one should proceed before treating abscesses, and here begins this chapter.
des soros	of the stones
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances. Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire. Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout .i. estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient. Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc. Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit. Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez. Et se li apostemes tient .i. nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés. Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	Or the chief brings out small abscesses, and their ways are like those found on a linen cloth, as with a goose's gallbladder, and many others share similar characteristics. There are some that are fatty and have moisture just like pustules; and there are others that are hard and stony when cut open, and there is no doubt that the artery would oppose it. And the operation of cutting involves using an instrument known as 'entromissoire', the form of which follows this description, containing something within it. For if it contains moisture, it is done from above to its length. And once the moisture is drained, it scalds without leaving anything behind in that containing the moisture; for it returns immediately when nothing is left there. Then dip cotton into Egyptian ointment if it's available; if not, use water and vinegar, apply it to the wound, and let it rest until another day; and this practice continues through the night. And then resume using the cotton as before on the second day, and the third, until you know that it doesn't stay overnight; then treat the wound with ointment as appropriate, until it heals properly.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc. Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut .i. apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere. En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	And the size above the abscess stones and moisture, it is lighter because there is little blood. And if in any of these abscesses or roots or there's no moisture, and of these two abscesses that I observed on the roots; and found the abscess just like a soft stone, rough and white, and unable to break; and if one had pierced through it, it would have been treated the same as a stone. In other abscesses coming or such as those that come from children's teeth and from ear canals, the opening is always for the longest possible time so that the pus can exit; and treat them accordingly.
des scrophules	of the scrofula
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre. Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes. Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit. en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les .ij. levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	Many times there appear abscesses at the throat, and near the glands, and in angers, and not once come to other places or organs, they are soft and interwoven with each other. And each scrofula is properly within its node, like a nut and an abscess around a root, as we have said; and there are many appearances of these scrofulas. There are some that contain moisture, and others that do not want to obey treatment. In this one then that you see with good disposition towards the surgeon, and resembles the color of the chest, silent from every part and is not sensitive on either side of the neck nor artery nor conduit, and is not deep; it should be that you take it from above, and scrape off each part, and have both lips around the node if necessary, as we have said for abscesses around a root; handle them little by little, and make sure that you do not cut through the nerve or vein, nor make too much of an incision, so that you do not cut what you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir. Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde. Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if you cut the vein or artery, and it does not allow cutting, place vitriol broil, or any powders that expel blood in the wound; and hold the wound until the abscesses are relieved and the wound is softened, then begins to putrefy. And when the blood has been expelled, return to your work until you finish it; then decide according to your skill if there are no small scabs remaining, remove and cleanse them. And if there's a large vein at the root of the scab, it should not be cut from its root but bind with a double strong thread, let it fall through this without harm; then fill the wound with old cotton dipped in Egyptian ointment, and proceed with treatment.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les .ij. levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule. si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit. Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you have cut the entire scab, it is necessary to assemble the two edges of the wound and stitch now. There should be no remaining excess due to the size of the scab. It's necessary to pay attention to cutting the root of this one, draining fluid, and stitching as we previously said. Those scabs that contain excess, pierce them where they open and drain; and do so in a similar manner as described before, depending on it, then apply bandages with ointment and other such things, until it is rottened by the corruption; and when the wound is well cleaned, apply ointment with flesh inside, until it's healed.
de squinance	regarding obliquity
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The old men spoke of how to make an incision in the throat; but I never saw anyone do it here, and this is written down from their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	For those with squinting vision, it is necessary that the incision made in the throat which is called 'epiglottis' be avoided; and one should not offer aid by this method, because all the veins and the heart are close to the patient who has pus in their mouth or in the throat or between two almonds.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the illness is within the channel of the heart, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to prevent the loss that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz .iij. cercles ou .iiij. une petite fendure dou travers, entre les .ij. cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	Therefore, when we wish to make an incision in the epiglottis, it is necessary that we make it through three circles or four with a small incision across, between the two circles. The size of the incision does not extend into the cartilage;
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	And these joints can be suitable for the sectioning of the epiglottis where there is no flesh, and the vessel is long from above.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	And if the surgeons are fearful, it is necessary for them to extend the throat skin all the way down to the navel, then cut through the keor until they reach the neck; and avoid any blood vessels, if you see anything, and then shape the syfac, just as we have said.
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	and it is demonstrated by the section of the flow from the neck which jumps out through the limb that has been broken, and by the loss of voice;
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	and leave the wound open for a period.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the time has passed where one doubts strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound as neatly as possible, and all the skin without the cartilage; then administer medicines that create flesh, until it is healed.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasis insists that one should not perform this until the throat is entirely blocked, and the patient is judged dead, and the defect is evident.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	So cut off the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe normally, and they are breathing through the wound, and this prevents death.
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en .iij. jors ou en .iiij.	And to command the old man to keep the wound open until the illness has passed, and it has passed after three or four days.
Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	And then they commanded to stitch up the wound and treat it until it was healed.
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist .i. coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	I saw that a maiden took one knife and stuck it in her throat, and cut some of the channels near the heart.
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	And I was called to treat her, and found her just as if she were dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound and found that blood was issuing from it, and indeed, there wasn't a cut or exit for the blood other than the throat, and the wind flowed through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	I acted quickly, treated the wound as it healed, and then I cured it until it was healed completely;
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	and there was nothing left for the maiden but to regain her voice which had been weakened by illness, and she returned after that to her usual state.
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I swear that there should be no need for the surgery of the epiglottis.
de la grosse gorge	From the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	Cysts known as "throat hernia" are often referred to, and they are large cysts in a dark purple color, and occur frequently in women;
et est selonc .ij. manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	And there are two ways: natural, and accidents; or natural does not have an organ.
Et li accidens est selonc .ij. manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	And the accidents are according to two ways, of which one appears like fat in us, and the other way is similar to an abscess that comes from us through an artery.
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	And there must be fear, and it doesn't suit to make cuts outside that in the one who is small, and the proof and search take place throughout the intervention:
se tu le trueves ausi com .i. nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	if you find it as small as a nut, and cannot cut anywhere, then operate, just like one operates on nuts, and the treatment goes through all its stages, if there is any doubt;
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And search well first, and treat it as appropriate until it becomes completely healed.
des nous	from now on
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	Many methods exist for us, so I will mention all similarities;
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	And it is necessary that I tell all the differences between us and issues.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that issue is characterized by heat and fever lasting until the body's secretions have passed and putrefaction has occurred; then, the fever and heat subside.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient .i. syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	In contrast to us, there is no heat or fever and no pain, it contains a pus of i syphilitic sac, which serves as its own sack and is according to the color of the body, and begins like a boil, and becomes large;
et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	And according to two appearances, or greasy, or moist, and none of their colors are as I have said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary, when you come to treating the new, that you first test and inquire about all the instrument which is called 'intromissor', according to what its shape comes or chapter which follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	And the method of inquiring about abscesses among us is that you take or more moistened than what you find inside the abscess, and twist your fingers a little at a time, until you know that the instruments have pierced the pus, then according to the size of the abscess;
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	Then remove the intromissor, and be careful not for it to jump.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	When moisture causes a problem, regardless of its nature or how it occurs, cut it just as I have instructed for other abscesses;
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	And if after the incision no moisture comes out, know that it is fatty, so cut it in an X shape and take it with tongs. Gently burn each side of it and place the piece where you found it back to ensure a clean extraction.
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	And if you can't remove it cleanly, remove it in parts so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	For if anything is left behind, it will recur to us many times;
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if it remains a little, and the patient doesn't suffer much, use some corrosive powders on the wound, and keep the wound clean, and place things that soothe and heal an abscess in hot water, and treat with other remedies until it's healed.
et se li nous est grans, si cout les .ij. levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	And if the wound is large, then stitch the two edges of the wound together, and treat the one who has been wounded with care.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	And if the vein is too close to be treated in opposition or otherwise if there's urgency, then use the site of vitriol juice and let it take its course for two or three days, as long as the wound heals, and rest with the boiling of blood; then return to coppering where some has remained from new.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de .iij. manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a .iij. quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et .i. qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de .iij. manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	These are the forms of the instruments for insertion, and they come in three ways: large, medium, and small; and there are four squares which are called "albaret", and one that is called "breb". And among these there are also three kinds: large, medium, and small, to surround the ulcers of fistula.
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	And they are also like needles that one removes from the spine, and made of citrine quartz, or iron, or silver, and yellow ones are valued for their use, and they are more adept at trapping black tar to seal abscesses;
et sont de .iij. manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	And there are three ways: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the opening of the wounds.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont .ij. corbeures de .iij. manieres ausi;	The shapes of the lancets resemble sheep in appearance, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and if there are pairs of lancets with two curves also, in three different ways.
et si a oncines qui ont .iij. corbeures, et sont ausi de .iij. manieres; et si a oncines qui ont .ij. corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de .iij. manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	And if there are lancets with two curves each, they also come in two ways; and if there are pairs of lancets with two curves each, and one-lancets with a single curve, all these come in two ways as well; and all this is necessary according to their size.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	The head of this person to whom one makes the incision is sharp, and there are some who do not cut halfway but only from one side. We burn their cheeks because thus we do not cut into the vein or the nerve;
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	And for these introducers, their handles are put into gloves, so that the patient does not feel them during the opening of abscesses;
et sont de .iij. manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	And there are three ways: large, small, and medium, as you see;
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	and only one should be used in the thigh area, such as legs, arms, and nipples, and similar body parts;
et aucune fois fait on .i. autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	And no other small instrument once is made, resembling whips of surgeons, according to this shape, to which bleeding has been stopped:
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	And it is placed only once in the healthy part that closely divides veins and arteries, and not according to this large shape:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	No man's nipples ever swell when they begin to become corrupt, until they seem like female nipples;
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne b. jusques a .g.:	And remain ugly and swollen, and whoever wants to cure them should do it according to this shape described in line B from b to g:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	Then strip off the fat, and apply medicinal ointment to the wound, then bring together the two edges of the wound for stitching, and continue treatment until it is healed.
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en .ij. costelz desus, par .ij. semblans fendures;	And if the belly sags down, and is flattened due to its size as in women, if they divide it into two sections above, by two similar cuts;
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	From which one holds to the other at the end of each and both, so that the longer line contains the smaller according to this shape, from this line B until the line G;
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les .ij. levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then strip the skin that is between the two edges, remove the fat, and apply what we have instructed about stitching and powders, and whatever is necessary for treatment until it is healed.
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	And if it is not healed, or the incision has not been completed entirely, because the patient does not want to rest, or due to blood clotting, then you should fill the wound with wet cotton in a corrosive ointment;
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	And leave him until he eats and regurgitates the meat and fat, then treat him until he is fully healed.
des apostemes des asselles	removal of abscesses and gallstones
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	Wounds that occur from abscesses are manners of hard scrophulas, and if there are any containing moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those which contain moisture should be cut according to this shape, from the line b until the line .g.:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the pus inside the abscess is drained, fill the wound with old cotton and leave it until the next day; then remove all the cotton, and apply ointment as needed until the wound heals.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscesses resemble smallpox, then cut them as we have said in cuts of smallpox, and if the wound is clean, then apply the cautery as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	From the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	And when the artery is ruptured, and the skin above it heals over time, many times pus forms there. And similarly, this happens in veins with abscesses forming;
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	And if one knows that it's due to an artery, then the pus will be long and straight;
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens .i. estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	And when you feel it with your hands, if you feel this squeezing sensation; and if it is through the vein, it will appear externalized.
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	And it's foolish to deal with this abscess, and similarly when it is under the armpits and in the groins and around the neck and elsewhere, and it's quite large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	So one should avoid iron treatment, and also the one who is at the head, one should avoid this as well, and in the one who is swollen from an artery, do it over the skin until long.
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	Then work with the twelfth part, and remove the artery from the tissues, until it is fully exposed;
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en .ij. leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des .ij. arteres qui sont en temples;	Then take out a needle from there, and pierce it up to the other side, and hold the artery in place with a double thread of two lews, just as I taught you in removing the two arteries that are found in temples;
puis point le leu qui est entre les .ij. liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	Then place the lever between the two threads with an introducer until the pus comes out which is there, and release the abscess;
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	Then administer the treatment that draws off the pus, as long as the thread drains it.
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then apply this ointment accompanying this, until it heals properly;
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir,	And if the abscess is due to the size of the vein, it's necessary that you color with your hand what part of the abscess you can reach on all the skin,
puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait .i. fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	then with the needle from the side you're holding in your hand, pierce it and leave two threads, so that you can pull them on the other side;
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de .ij. pars as .ij. chiés dou fil;	then tie off the abscess, just as I have instructed you, or tie a stitch with two of the thread ends from each side of the thread;
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout .i. fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en .iiij. leus;	And if you doubt that the child will endure pain, should you have difficulty with one needle made of all .1 filament throughout the entire abscess incision from the first needle's location, and hold the threads in four places;
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	Then cut out the abscess as long as the excess goes out, then cut away the excess smoothly and leave that which is tied.
puis met sus .i. drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then place a moistened linen cloth in wine and oil, then administer treatments of bandages and medications until they are healed.
des apostemes des ners	abcesses of the nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	As with pus that comes into the artery and vein, pus enters the lungs when they are cut, or due to excessive labor, and similar occurrences.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est .i. grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	And this happens more often with shoulders and elbows and in all places that have joints, and it is one, pus filled abscesses, and its color resembles the color of flesh, and manifests in various positions without pain;
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	And when it is squeezed, the patient feels pain, and does not fully match the sensation of flesh but rather within the gut;
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction;	And moves in all directions, neither going forward nor backward, neither above nor below, and that which is located at joints does not fit well under iron: by chance it would cause constriction;
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And the one who is a head or forehead, causes the skin to blister.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	If the boils are small, and you have some forceps, grip them at their base;
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if they are large, lift them at their root, and cauterize them, then cut the flesh, and suture the wound together, and continue treatment until it heals properly.
des grosses boces pendans	Large boils hanging down
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	No instance occurs in wombs or any other part like this, and it is a disease that is called "fungus" by its appearance, and has a subtle root, and large knots; and there are both small and many large ones.
et je vis .i. home qui en avoit .ij. ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	And I saw one person who had two bellies that were more similar to fungi than anything else, and there was no difference between them, they were white, and had a small root, and were cut open, and were corroded by moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un .xviij. onces pesant, et en l’autre .vj. З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	I dissected them and found that in one there were 16 ounces weighing, and in the other 5. The organs at incision show that when you look, the patient's body is moist, and the color of the fungi is white and moist with a subtle root;
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu. Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	If it is large and full of pus, then let the fire cautery be at your disposal. For the surgeon often experiences too many blood losses during operations, and if you are absent, then quickly take up the task of applying heat treatment;
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent .i. fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse .ij. jors;	And if you see the patient frightened and fearful from the incision by the iron, then take a well-made piece of hemp string, and tie it in a knot as we have said, and leave it for two days;
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet,	And then keep pulling it tight, and do not cease to pull the hemp string until you reach the knot, and feel no strain; and if the roots are thick, then feel frightened even for the belly, but you should be able to cut half of them.
puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	Then apply heat treatment so that it does not heal prematurely; then treat the wound, and make sure you do not cut into the tender tissue which is of a red color and has little sensation and produces pus.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For this is an abscess, and I will come to the treatment of gangrene next.
quant li boude ist fuer	When the bile flows freely
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	When the appearance of bile comes from a surgical wound or a cut in the stomach and is found on some parts of the intestines, just like it happens in other cuts, or blood that escapes from veins or arteries as per its position, or due to windiness;
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	And if it's from the cut in the stomach and by the outlet of the intestines, then its color is similar to that of a pus-filled lesion, and it is a slight matter without much pain, opening from various outlets.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is due to the passage of an intestinal obstruction, then it is more varied, and when one presses it with their fingers if it returns, and then comes back, and by chance if it gets stuck, and expands quite a bit at the entrance during bathing and due to strong labor.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	And if it is due to moisture, it's a simple matter and opens well when you press it with your hand, it doesn't get stuck; and if it is due to blood, it will open through these signs large and hard pus blisters, and are located according to the amount.
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is due to wind (or风气), you feel suffocation at the throat, and the veins so that you observe whether their appearance resembles blood from an artery, or a vein, or wind.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure. Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	If you must leave the treatment alone. For there is doubt and fear, as I told you in chapter on abscesses, concerning arteries and veins.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	And if it appears to be near the intestine or the bowel, then you must instruct the patient to bleed his liver and ensure that he lies fully straight, then pierce through all around the belly;
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains,	then instruct them to lie with their body between your hands,
puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile,	Then go straight to the area where you marked on all parts of the body,
puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	then cut half of the abscess above each major curve;
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	next tie it firmly around with a strong thread or a sturdy silk cord, and bind it tightly until the abscess is fully resolved;
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	then cut half of the abscess laid out over the binding, and place your index finger in it, and examine the intestine;
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	If you find it has been tied up by the bellybutton, release it, and push the intestines forward beyond the stomach.
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	And if you come across the kidney, take hold of it at the root, and remove the excess.
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren .ij. aguilles, et i boute .ij. fors filz, et boute les .ij. aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	And if it goes against the artery or vein, go straight down through them and then come back to your task; take two needles and push out two long threads, and place these two needles inside where you pierced in a cross pattern.
puis estrain l’aposteme en .iiij. leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	Then pull the abscess up with four fingers on top of the needles and if you see anything, remove the needles; let the wound heal on its own until it dries, and bury the dead flesh by itself.
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	When it becomes subtle and solid, then you should treat according to what is needed, and incise the abscess as we have said.
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And remove the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the wound according to what is needed, and sew the wound.
dou chancre	and the ulcer
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have discussed the appearances of the ulcer and how to handle it with medicines, and how to avoid iron treatment; let us speak of the ulcer that is in the marrow, and there is great caution needed in its treatment, as the ancients said. If the ulcer is in a place where you can scrape it out, like one on the breast or in cooking utensils, and other similar places, then you should remove it entirely when it's just starting; but if it's large and old, don't attempt to touch it, because I have never known anyone to recover from such ulcers; no one ever recovers from them in front of me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the works, when it is in place or can be taken out, as we have said, you must purge the patient of black bile only once; then let a surgeon treat him if he shows signs of fullness, then remove the black bile to where it needs to be for surgery. Then wash your hands and hair thoroughly everywhere without leaving anything behind; and let bleeding occur completely while you keep pressure on the area with your hand or nothing else, and if the bleeding goes against the incision of an artery or vein, cauterize until the wound is cleaned; then treat it again until he heals.
de ydropisie	Regarding dropsy (edema)
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces .ij. semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	We have discussed the appearances of dropsy in division, and how this water assembly is made, and the signs of each appearance, and the treatment that is done with medicines, and that which is treated with iron: it only refers to these two; and should one not use iron in these two conditions: these being tympanites and yposarche, because they are deadly things; therefore when you treat this dropsy appearance called 'dropsy' with medicine, and if the disease doesn't improve with treatment, then check if the patient's condition is weak or if he has any other disease apart from dropsy, such as abdominal distention and similar conditions; if iron should not be used in these cases because there might still be doubt; and when you see that the patient is very pale and has no other disease apart from dropsy, and isn't too young nor too old, then you can proceed:
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme: Et soit trenchans de .ij. pars. a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	Lift the patient straight up with your hands, and have them press their belly as they drink water at the lowest part of their foot. Then take the thorny spike according to this form: And make it 2 inches long at a pointy end, but do not make it so deep that when you insert it, it cannot reach until inside the intestines upon insertion, and cannot be pulled out;
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude .iij. dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude .iij. dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	Then look to see if the dropysis is beginning near the intestines: if it seems that you need to cut through in this area about 3 inches from below the belly button; and if the dropysis is due to liver disease, then make your cut on the left side of the belly button at three inches. And if it's due to gallstones, then do it on the right, and it must not let the patient lie on the cut where excesses might flow into that weak spot.
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme: Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz .i. petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, .iij. pertus; et .ij. d’autre part, et .i. d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	Then pierce all the skin with the tool and pull it out, lifting your hand to place the thorny spike between the skin and flesh as you would scorch at the size of a fingernail or around that; then pierce the flesh until the thorny spike reaches up to about an inch from the top, this is the width of water, then remove this tool which has been described in detail. It resembles a thin silver cane, made of iron or brass and is light in weight, with one small point on each side; on one side, there are three points; and on the other side, another point and again on another side; and you shape the shoulder as if it were a feather, this is the form of incision that writers describe when they carve out feathers.
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	At the top is the liver, so that when the instruments come to the water, they now descend on the instrument; empty it then either half or one third, for if you empty more than it should in this hour, by chance the patient might die from the release of his spirit due to the weapon's action, or he could faint, or he approaches death.
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	but empty according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the virtues indicate in the patient, and their pulse; then move the instrument and hold back the water, and it is held now for the anesthesia which numbs the pertus that is on the syphilitic lesion, as I have spoken about, that you pierce this way; then begin using the instrument again another day, if you see the patient suffering from this one, and draw a small quantity of water.
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue. Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	Do this each day, and refrain from drinking as long as there is no remaining but a little of the water. And if you doubt about the patient, leaving more water, if the treatment for burial or sand becomes hot, and by much sweating or bath and in sunlight, and if it stains with drinking; and treat with drying medicines until he has recovered, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after removing the water, as I said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	Regarding the stoppage of the penis
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu. Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout .i. spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme: puis met ou pertus .i. clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi .iij. jors ou iiij. et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	No child is born without having testicles in the penis, or if they are small, or if they do not occupy their proper place. If it happens that he has to pierce through all .i. very fine spatumile according to this form: then put one .i. very thin clo of plonc and tie it and keep it like that for .iij. days or iiij. days, and when it wants to urinate, if you remove the clo, it will urinate, and then you put it back again; and perhaps this does not happen because the urine that comes out does not leave the clo closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera. Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	If the testicles are small, if they use a plonc clo medicine, as we said before, it will enlarge. Those who do not have their testicles in their proper place are blind, because no one is born with testicles at the tip of the penis, so they cannot urinate until they lift their penis upwards; and they cannot conceive either due to the matter being unable to reach the prostate, and this is a bad disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the way to do this is for the patient to lay on his back, then lift the head of the penis and the scrotum as well as large as a feather's tip, so that the bits are spread out in the middle, just like it should be; and beware of bleeding which occurs many times, and if it happens, stop it with the one who stops blood flow, and treat the wound until it heals.
des pustules de la verge	The boils on the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times pustules appear in the penis, and there is a sight of unpleasant appearance; and among them, some are malicious and others are not. It's necessary for you to take .5 ounces of these carefully, extract and cleanse them all, then place moistened cotton with Egyptian ointment on it; after that, cure it with diafinicon ointment until it heals.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere. Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer. Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the boil is malignant, changing color and discharging pus, it's necessary that you apply a cautery to it. Once it's applied, and if the boil is in its early stage with the tip of the penis involved, and some part inside the skin and another outside, it's necessary that you remove the boil which is within first; and once it has healed, then treat the one that extends outward. For when you treat them together, it won't ensure the soundness of the penis head and cause blackness and corruption in its tip and around the urinary opening; so it's necessary to remove all that turns black and corrupts, then cover with a dressing made of honey and flour from walnut shell extract and lime, then continue other treatments until it becomes healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme: Li cauteres si aide as .ij. dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a .i. estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	And when blood leakage happens, it's necessary to apply the lunar cautery according to this form: The cautery should be applied in two positions together: namely, during bleeding and corruption; and if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, then it's necessary that you use a stick made of opium and make the patient urinate while holding it, allowing the patient to pass urine among themselves. And when the hair is trimmed at the tip of the penis for those who haven't been circumcised or because of wounds or abscesses, then it's necessary that you sear with one tool made of hair until all ligatures are released and ensure that the head of the penis is freed from all sides;
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a .i. spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre .ij., et i met .i. subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	And if it's hard to discuss this matter, then you should sear the opium and one small point at the head of the penis and skin; then cut properly between them, and I place one fine linen bandage in cold water so that it doesn't dry right away.
de la circoncision	Regarding circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not just about cutting off continuation like other wounds; nonetheless, when we perform this work of our own will and on infants, it's necessary that we do the best job and the lightest for their health.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the old did not refer to circumcision of their children, for they did not practice it in their laws, and we only have what we have acquired through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	But I have wanted the majority of the masters and the nobles who practiced circumcision within a day or two after birth, and throughout the entire foreskin; it was necessary that they use two threads because there are two layers, and by chance one might use these above and the other below.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	One receives it from the head covering, and the pain is doubled, and at the dislocation where there is a doubt in its direction, the point of the limb; and at the dislocation of the nail by chance escaped the blow, and went off work, and many times grow thus that they do not need dislocation and I have wanted.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	In dislocation that is made with force, I found the advantage of experience, for the forces cut just as well above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en .i. tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	But when you press your hand, if it cuts equally in .i. all around; but let the threads be well woven inside the skin; and let the method of the first operation be such that you make the child think that you are only tightening the thread inside the penis up to this point, and then proceed to work it in every way possible;
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz .i. poc a .i. autre liien; et la tien as .ij. dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les .ij. liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	Then place it straight between your hands and redistribute the strength between them or under your feet that the child cannot see, nor any of the instruments; then guide your hand to the penis and blow or hold, and pull upwards until the head of the penis is inside. Then clean it well of the debris that has assembled, then tie the head with a double thread, then secure it by .i. inch to another .i. length; and keep it at .ij. inches through the second layer on the scrotum and on the thumb index finger, and place between the .ij. threads, then lift the hold quickly and pull out the head of the penis.
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre .i. drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then let the urine flow slowly and gradually, for it is a remedy; and apply powder here and there on top of the powder, one strip glued with a beaten egg yolk tempered in pink water, mixed with rose oil that is fresh and well-prepared, and leave it like this until another day, and treat with other treatments until it is healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The method for performing the operation of purification is as follows: both ends should be held firmly and should cut straightly, and they should make the ends as long as an equal hand.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The mistake of the world's creation happens when the kidneys inside move during an incision; hence it is necessary to extend them up to your nail, so that the kidneys make an abscess; and do it evenly, and if you cannot hold it up to your nail, then use tweezers, and then do it.
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if they penetrate for three days, and what is below the penis becomes swollen, leave it until the pus from the abscess subsides, then lightly scrape; do it as much as you can move, and avoid touching the part of the penis, for that will not harm him.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the wound with powders as we have instructed in our treatment of powders, and if you move beyond the kidney too far, and it goes above, it will do no harm; thus treat it, as we have said, until it heals.
dou retenement de l’urine	The retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	The retention of urine is due to stone formation, or blood clotting, or blockage, or a formed mass, which are what we have discussed in the division;
et se li urine n’est desliie, et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	And when the urine is released and you see that there's retention due to the stone in the ureter or at the bladder neck, it is necessary for the patient to have their legs bent. And they should place their feet under the back, and extend their abdomen from above the back part, and restrain the patient so that their lower body can move as much as possible; and then forces are applied to the bladder's neck, pushing the stone upwards due to which urine is released;
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	And if it does not come out as we have said, and the patient feels intense pain, it is necessary to apply extraction with all the instrument which is called "syringe", of which this is its form: and make it made of fine and light wire, like a bird's feather; and let it be the length of a palm from half its length, and very fine at the tip.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren .i. fil double, et lie au chief .i. poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus .i. siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	And the way to direct urine is that you take one double thread, and tie it around one end of a piece of wool or cotton at the head. Then put the head into the needle with the string inside; remove any excess wool until it fills up to the top of the needle. Then coat the needle with oil or butter, and add egg yolk, and place the patient on one seat. And you wet the bladder and penis with olive oil and water.
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	Then gently insert the needle into the penis until it reaches the root of the penis. Then bend the penis upwards towards the anus. Next, place the needle before and around the bladder up to the point where urine is about to flow out, and this must be done according to this order because whoever guides it goes in the wrong direction; then pull the thread out slowly while pulling on each piece of wool one by one, and the urine follows the thread. Then empty the urine and correct its flow.
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And repeat the process until the bladder is emptied, and make sure to guide the patient properly.
des maladies de la vessie	About diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When burns or blood come into the bladder, or putrefaction has assembled there, and you see distilled waters and medicines, if make all the tool which is called 'clepsydra', and this is its form:
Elle est close, et si a .iij. pertus: .ij. d’une part, et .i. d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	She is closed, and if it has three holes: two on one side, and one on the other, as you see; and let there be a channel through which medicine can properly fill the penis without addition, so that if moisture needs to be treated, it can be expelled when necessary;
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	And when you see the medicine flowing into the bladder, place the catheter in the moisture and pull it towards the one pulling it out; if the moisture can be pulled by the catheter, then firmly apply pressure on the pulling end; if the moisture enters inside, it will come to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it;
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	And this is the form of the subtle bladder stone that one treats with catheterization: thus:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a .i. sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les .ij. seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe .i. poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	And it is made of silver or iron, and the head is higher up; and directly above one kidney or between them lies the urinary stone; then take a lamb's bladder and put in some moisture to be used for catheterization, then tie it between the two kidneys with a good double thread, and heat one end of this moisture on the fire; then place the urinary stone head in the urethra, then press your hand onto the bladder with all the moisture until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder;
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai .i. cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute .i. fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble .i. dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And if you do not have a bladder, take a piece of parchment and make a circle out of it, then puncture it smoothly around the edge. Then insert a strong thread into these punctures, then join the circle together like joining one plate to another, and place inside what you see that is liquid, moisture and water, and bind it in the device; do this as you did with the bladder, pressing your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
de la piere	from the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have discussed in detail the methods of stone dismemberment and extraction together with medicines; we also spoke about the differences between stones that are small like raindrops and all their signs, and when to open large stones; and I will explain this clearly and briefly for you.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I state that stones which are small like raindrops in the bladder often occur in children, and this is a sign that an infection has jumped into the bladder similar to how it jumps through its delicacy; open the urethra, rub the painful areas of their penis, and let them urinate many times, then rest; and note these urinary jumps; and for a while after these jumps, the treatment of children is light until they are four years old, and becomes much more troublesome in the elderly, being in between childhood and age; and the cure is lighter for those who have large stones than for those who have small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines. Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	And when we come to the treatment, it is necessary first to clean the body through urination in order to extract all the waste that is inside the intestines. For it does not once try to remove the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche ded ens;	Then take hold of the patient by their feet, and lift and move them downwards, so that the stone descends to the base of the bladder, and emerges no more than once from its upper part; then have them sit between your hands with their feet placed below, such that the bladder is fully sloping downward; then inspect and touch it from there.
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere. Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	If you feel the stone in space, now hurry to cut on the stone. And if it doesn't urinate upon touching everywhere, moisten your index finger of your left hand; if the patient is female, or your middle finger, if the patient is young and fully grown; and push into its base, inspect and touch the stone, and when you feel it on your finger, remove it from the neck of the bladder; then press upon this finger, and push outwards along the line where you see to cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And command the servant to press the bladder with his hand, and instruct him to stretch up the testicles with his right hand, and with his left hand hold the skin over the testicles at the part where you will make the cut; then push out the spermatic cord, of which this is its shape:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	And cut between those who are between the lungs and foundation, not in the middle but at the edge of the left lung's cavity. And stand straight on the stone, and place your hands either on the foundation or against the stone wall, and make them fit through so that it is broad outside and narrow inside according to the size of the rock, not too large;
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	By chance if the press is where it's at the foundation, that it can jump out without effort; and know that there are parts of stone with angles and edges: if they're meant to come out; and if in other parts it's under, resemble a hazel nut, and round, whose exit is light.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li .i. estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge .i. poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	In the sky where there are angles and edges, make the opening larger; and if it doesn't jump out, then you must force it with the tongs which resemble a file at their end, to strain the stone so that it doesn't escape; or you drill under it .1. small thin curved tool; and if you can't devise this way, then widen by one inch the slightly pointed tool, and if it's smooth, you strain it with vitriol;
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors. Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie. Car .ij. choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	And if there are more than one stone, first remove the largest at the neck of the bladder, then cut upwards, then force on the tool, and do so with smaller stones after if there are more. And if they are very large, it may be necessary to make a larger incision. For two things happen to the patient: or he dies, or urine comes out immediately through it that the legs cannot stitch; but nevertheless strive with the force or on the removal tool until you remove them piece by piece;
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus .i. drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	And when you have completed your work, apply the incision with frankincense and aloes and dragon's blood, then tighten it up, and place over it one wet bandage in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water to soothe the hot abscess; then have the patient lie on their back until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you release the tension, make sure to lift it with oil and water well, then apply a diapering ointment and a basilicon ointment until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	And if pus comes out in the wound and corrosion, and blood clots in the bladder, causing retention of urine, which is known to behave like this without jumping along with the urine: therefore you should treat the wound, extract that blood, for if it remains, it will corrode the bladder and damage it;
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les .ij. cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	Then heal the wound of water and salt and earth, and help it in all the ways you know, until it is healed; and it must be that every time you treat him, you tie both his thighs together, and apply the remedies on top of him.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure. Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	And if the stone is small, and it's located where the penis leads and stuck inside, causing urine to not be able to come out; then treat it as I have described, by cutting multiple times, and excuse yourself for this treatment, because I already know of a successful method in this way.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take one iron branch according to this shape, and have it fixed at three points on a stake:
puis pren .i. fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge. Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	Then take one thread and tie it around the shaft of the stick so that it cannot come back into the bladder; then insert the iron branch into the shaft gently, until it reaches the stone; and twist the iron branch with your hand in the stone little by little, until you can pierce the stone from the other side; if urine comes immediately, then press your hand on what is left of the stone that is inside the stick. If it breaks immediately, and with the urine, and the patient feels well;
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie .i. fil desoz la piere et .i. autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les .ij. liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, tie one thread around the stone and another above it, then place the shaft in between the two threads where the stone is, then push forcefully, and remove the threads, and clean off the congealed blood from the wound; and treat until it heals.
de la piere des femmes	From the stone of women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	It happens that stones are found in women's bodies, and if they occur once, it requires special care, and is forbidden for three reasons: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a woman who knows how to reveal herself through tears, even when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a.	And the third way is that perhaps one cannot find a woman well versed in this art of surgery; and the fourth way is that the stone in a woman's body is more forward than a man's stone, for which reason it requires a deeper incision, and great fear there is.
Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier .i. caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	And if necessity requires this, you must seek out a competent midwife, and on her knowledge lead the way. If she does not find such, rather than one wise woman; and present someone well versed in women's life, or a woman who knows part of the art, and instructs them to do what you command about investigating the stone;
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	And look very carefully to see if the woman is a virgin: then she should thrust her womb or base and seek for the stone; and if she finds it, force her against its base, and advise that she thrusts her womb or into the sickness, and presses her left hand on the bladder in shape.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	If she finds it, it is necessary that she move it from side to side as she enters the bladder until underneath, as long as she comes to the root of the thigh; then press against the stone at the root of the thigh against the middle of the penis, where it becomes a little swollen, and feel the stone in this part; and do not move her womb above the stone or under it, and be careful with your first small action.
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains. si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	Then press the root in the waist, if you feel the stone increase the wound until the stone can emerge forcefuly, and know that many kinds of stones are: that is to say, small and large and rough and smooth, long and round, and which have grooves. And understand their appearances to know the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	And if you do not find it, place sulfur on the point and hold for an hour until the sulfur is burned through; then return to your task, while the stone remains hard, and prepare with the instruments I instructed you about in the removal of stones within you to assist you in your work.
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if you do not find it, and it is that an artery has been cut, apply the powder to the point and hold firm with threads and needles, and do not start again, but leave the stone undisturbed so as not to accidentally kill the patient; then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood has subsided and the limb is restored, then return to your work, while the stone remains hard.
de hernie carnouse	regarding fatty hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Gelatinous mucus is nothing else but a gathering of moisture or white pus, which exists within the coat of the kidneys, that contains the egg; and it's called 'pus', and there isn't any proper time when it's properly in the membrane of the egg if one considers there to be another egg. And this is the skin under the kidney containing the white pus we've mentioned; and it doesn't have its own space no.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the creation of this gelatinous mucus comes from weakness that affects the kidneys, and spreads that substance.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	And it doesn't come at all from hitting the kidneys, and that moisture has many colors: or it becomes yellowish like jaundice, or without redness, or black, or aqueous white, and this happens more frequently.
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, .i. poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And these are the signs to recognize this assembly, for if it is or white and opaque as we have said, then the pus is present, .i.e. long like an egg figure, and does not open through the veins, because there is moisture everywhere inside.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	And if he has moisture in the proper tissue, then the pus is present with part of an egg, and based on this assumption it seems that there's another egg;
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if the moisture is between the skin of the veins and the white as said, you will feel it well; thus when you see the color of the moisture, try it on the entire square inside, from which the form was just described.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	Following this then, who comes after the introduction, judge by what is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	And when we cure it with iron, the patient must be treated according to our ability and the strength of their body; then let them sit on their back, on something slightly elevated, and place wool beneath them;
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des .ij. costelz dou keur des coions;	Then sit to the left side, and command the attendant to sit on the right, stretching their arm out along one of the two ribs towards the kidneys;
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	Then take the spatula and scrape the skin of the kidneys between them from head to tail until past the elbow, making a straight cut along the skin of the kidneys up to the white flesh, and gently burn it with your skill;
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a .i. large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	Then make a hole through the moist skin of one and a half inches wide and remove all the moisture. Then put your fingers in it, and position the wet cloth upstream from that point; but do not touch the hair rootlets, only the moist skin. Carefully scrape everything or piece by piece off his chest until you do so skillfully, otherwise the water will return.
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les .ij. leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the egg jumps over your work, then reset it in its place as soon as you have completed the water treatment; then join together the two halves of the hair rootlets with stitches, and treat it just like any other wound until it heals completely.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the egg corrupted by another disease, then it is necessary that you tie up the vessels that are suspended, in case there's bleeding; then operate on the groin until under the suspension point, and remove the egg, and treat it as we have said before.
Et se aigue est assemblee en .ij. parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont .ij. ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	And if the wound is made up of two joined parts, know that they are two branches; if you handle the other part in the same way as you did the first equally, then let the blood out and place wet wool in the wound smeared with rose oil.
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les .ij. coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	and place another layer of wet wool in wine and oil, and apply it over the two wounds, then cover with folded cloths, and bind them on like this across the entire bandage.
Puis pren .ij. drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les .ij. angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	Then take two cloths, and fold them with rough wool according to this pattern, having them joined by stitching in the waist of breeches, and one of the shoulders lays on the foundation up to the back, and the other at the arm's part; and the other double head on the two angles, and have everything assembled in the loop of the garter.
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes .i. cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	And never is this treatment of cautery with the size of iron, and you should take one fine fire cautery, and peel the skin off the joints, and heat it up as we have said, so that the white fluid contained in the water is revealed;
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Take the cautery according to this shape, and pierce the white fluid at the joints, and burn it with this fine fire cautery:
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	And cut the skin in all manners that you can, until you remove everything; and make sure the fire does not touch the egg; know that this work is more beneficial; and be careful of the bleeding from cuts, and know how to manage the opening of veins;
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And if no obstacle occurs to you, or discharge of pus or bleeding or any other issue, then treat according to what hinders you, as was said previously.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai,	And if the patients are afraid and do not wish to undergo this work because of its horror, then perform a puncture, as I have told you, and it is that when you are well assured by the meanings we have said that watery moisture lies there.
si fai seoir le malaide sus .i. siege leveit; puis perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	And make the patient sit on a raised seat; then pierce the abscess in the part under it at the entire pus-filled area, and make the puncture long across the core; and let the exit of the pus be wide enough so that all the liquid can come out.
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	And place cotton on the site, and secure it, and leave it so that any pus drains out, then treat until the wound heals completely;
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge .i. poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés .vj. mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And if the white cloth does not allow water to escape from the mouth of the wound, then it is necessary for you to insert a feather or the tool used to treat the water of ydropiques, as described previously; and make the wound wider by about an inch. And know that the water returns and gathers after about seven months or eight, and when she has gathered like before, in this way her days will pass.
de l’aposteme des coions	regarding the abscess of the testicles
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	Know that in the section of this branch there are several ways to act, because I believe it's better to leave it alone;
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	And I will tell you about the operation and the appearance of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	So, I will say that many abscesses come from horns or in animals; and this happens by chance.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	This is to know by excess of sharp acidity and fever which spreads in the animal's body or through impact.
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	And the color of the abscess is similar to that of the horn; and there is no pain found, it is an abscess filled with pus.
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	And by chance there may be one abscess filled with blood and pus, and of a reddish hue, and it does not come from the heart or inflame veins.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	When it comes from the heart, if you know by the location of the abscess heat, when you press it with your fingers;
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	And it is not right for you to touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois,	That which is made of swelling veins can be known by its position when touched with your fingers,
et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	And can do very well on this manner, and on other similar cases;
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	And you should make the cut of the cord, then place the egg on top, and press hard with white force at this spot, and release the suspension from all sides of the egg.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	If the egg is already stuck with these newly born ones, then you should remove the egg, and do it like this.
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	And if it's towards the white or in that which is inside the veins, then you should release all this tension, and do it round-like.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the beginning of life is behind or near the tail, it is necessary for you to grasp it completely and remove the egg, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your operations are completed, apply greasy oil and rose water to the wound, then continue other treatments until it heals.
de l’aposteme des coions	regarding the abscesses of the kidneys
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a .i. borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions,	This is an abscess enclosed in an envelopment resembling one and a half loops, with the inflammation of the kidneys,
et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	And if the patient groans when they move;
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant,	And the treatment for this disease is similarly long and arduous.
et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	Yet we will tell you about his work, according to what the old ones did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois,	It is necessary that you make the patient sit on an elevated stool, then support them with the ligament of the kidneys under your hands,
a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	In every part surrounding the penis, and the glands under their control, and stretching them into form;
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert,	Then cut through the deep channel broadly crossing over the veins, until they are exposed,
et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	And then burn from each side, as we have said in the extraction of arteries which are in the temples;
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait .i. fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	Then I stick a needle with two threads attached to it, and tie one end of the thread to the first place where the needle has gone in, and tie the other end to another point immediately;
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	Then cut them directly in the middle, according to the length of the body, and treat the corrupted moieties;
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	Then treat the wound as with others or use a bandage, so that no liquid escapes and allows one of the kidneys to grow.
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	because with this there is no harm, and if all vessels are affected, then it's necessary to treat the kidneys throughout the vessels.
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	so that the kidney does not lose its growth due to cutting of the vessels, and they dry out and cannot assist each other.
de la routure dou syfac	from the rupture of the uterus
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	The events of this branch occur through the division that leads to uterine rupture, or an expansion on the abdomen in the area of the kidneys, because the intestines descend from that rupture towards one of the testicles;
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces .ij. manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	And this rupture is either due to uterine rupture or the expansion of it, and these two methods of animal causes occur: through beating, jumping, barking, lifting the lump with force, or by similar actions;
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	And when it is due to uterine expansion, symptoms occur gradually and over a long time, not coming suddenly;
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	And it is that the pus is even up to around the front, because the syphilitic affects the intestine.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the symptoms are when it's due to the division of the syphilitic disease, causing a sudden pain at the beginning, and there appears pus in various forms near the skin, because of the release from the intestine and the body's response to the syphilis further down.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And the glands often descend with the intestine, and are retained within, causing great pain to the patient, especially when they are pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these iron cures for fear, because one should avoid them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	And the way of operating is that you command the surgeon to guide or lead the knife deep into the wound where the organ resides, if it can fit inside;
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	then sew it up around its neck. With your hands lift the buttocks;
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	then stretch out the belly above, and cut all the skin from the genital area as long;
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	then cut through the waistbands with inches according to how you need to open the wound, and make them such that they can easily come out;
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	Then strip away the scrotum which is under the skin of the testicles, until the white part of the scrotum is exposed completely;
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac,	then insert your index finger into the one that surrounds the testicles, into the one that is between the white scrotum which is under the skin of the egg, and between the second testicle,
et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	and remove the one behind the egg, and between the second testicle; and then move with your right hand inside the pouch of the testicles, and position the white scrotum at the top of your left hand, and lift the egg towards the waist;
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	and command the attendant to extend the egg upwards, and release the one that is behind the connection;
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	And ask about your hands if there is any part of the intestine wrapped or white, thick and hard, and if you find no such thing, hold it back at the stomach;
puis pren une aguille ou il ait .i. gros fil fait de .x. filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait .iiij. filz;	Then take a needle or it be one large thread made of ten threads, and hold it in the posterior part of the white, thick and hard area, which is after the skin of the anus; after cutting, then clip out the parts that appear from the threads, until there are four threads.
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de .ij. pars;	Then join them one above the other in a manner of a cross, and bind the white thick area, as we have said that it is around the skin of the anus, with a strong thread of two parts;
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de .ij. pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	Then wrap the ends of the threads around them and bind them firmly with two parts, so that none of the needles that are threading through cannot enter into them, preventing any abscess formation;
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc .ij. dois de celui, et aprés ces .ij. liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	And place the bandage in a straight line according to the first long length of two fists from that point, and after these two bands allow for some space which is about at the center of your chest near the navel, the size of one fist;
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	And after all else according to the roundness that the egg bears; then cut in the area near the skin of the belly, until the cord and the baby's head do not move, as we said earlier.
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	Then apply wet wool in oil, and place it on the wounds, and apply the bandage that we have described.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And once the white part of the belly mentioned has been incised, after the cut, by concern for bleeding, apply cautery.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	For this happens many times, and let the string hang until it breaks by itself; and if it does not fall in time, then raise it with hot water, and place upon it what we have said, until it breaks.
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	Then continue treating the wound with other remedies, until it heals completely.
de hernie carnouse	of fatty hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this branch I never see anyone who dares to perform the iron treatment.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	And the old ones said that it is done like a branch assembled together with a twist, in such manner that you tie the vessels after trimming them lightly over the spot.
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then cut me too, and treat the abscess of him who works, until the vessels bleed; and treat it in such a way as we have said, while he is still alive.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	Never come to rupture within the abdomen, as we said, and open their insides; and do not allow any of the intestines to escape in the process, and if they do escape a little, repair them immediately;
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	and still, if it stays too long at this point, suspect the wound or the abscess, especially when the intestines start to come out;
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	This happens through the expansion of the sycophant which is at the angles, as we have said, for it has been expanded, then softened and swelled up his limbs and opened.
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	And the treatment is done with cautery, as we have mentioned before; and it is also cured in this way by iron:
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de .iij. dois;	And if the patient lies on their back between your hands, then lift their shoulder from the swelling according to its size as large as two fists;
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	Then remove the sycophant that is under the skin where it follows, then take its place and put it in the open area of the sycophant.
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les .ij. leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	And he presses at the bottom of the belly, then cuts the two that appear from the symphysis above the navel, and cuts each one separately.
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	Then extract the part of the ribs, and do not touch near the symphysis nor stretch the membrane to anything else, just as I have shown you in treating the removal of intestinal worms;
puis le cure par la cure des plaies. Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Then treat it using wound healing methods. And when you clean the wounds, if you cleanse and treat the wound until it heals.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The umbilicus is constrained and does not show up in the incision, and the cauterization is practiced in this area, and closer to salvation.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	from the softening of the skin around the anus
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the skin around the anus becomes soft in some people, due to the softening of the contents inside and it is something to be seen; when you want to treat it, one should let the patient lie on their back, then take off the softened skin from the natural skin. Then join the two flaps together at a suture point, and if necessary, sew the excess softened skin in three or four sutures, or firmly in two. Then cut between the seams, and treat the wound like any other, until it heals, and then remove stitches from the skin that has been treated.
dou chastrement	with chastity
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes. Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc .ij. manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.  En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.  Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a .i. cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Know that chastity is prohibited in our law, and because of this I would prefer not to speak about it in this book; and they are necessary only for two reasons: one being that the master needs to respond when someone asks him about it and how to treat it; and the other because we often need to apply chastity to some animals to help us, such as sheep and goats and cattle and others. Thus, then I say that chastity is done in two ways: either by attraction or by incision. When we do it through attraction, let the animal bathe in hot water until its anus softens and becomes wet; then take hold of it with your hand until it recovers and you no longer feel it. As for the tail whipping, you should mark the animal, press the anus skin with your left hand, then tie the scrotum, and treat each testicle separately when they have been well scraped; and leave no small hole or the subtle hole that is located in the veins; this method of chastity differs from the one done by attraction because there might be something left behind in the anus due to attraction which makes the animal lustful; then cure the wound until it heals.
des hermofrodites	Concerning hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc .ij. manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les .ij. coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.  Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et .ij. coions.  Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	Hermaphrodites can be divided into two ways: one where between the two openings they are as in nature for a woman, having hair, and sometimes excreting urine. And another way is like in women, with something above the wrist resembling a penis and two openings. And in treating them you take all the joined parts, and treat them just like other wounds; in the second way, for men whose urine jumps through the skin of the openings, there's no treatment needed.
de la tentigene	Of the pustule
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure. Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee». Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Tentigene is a joined spot on the natural body, such that it's too ugly to see; and some women have it as large as a hand, and this needs treatment. It is necessary that you color the excess of the tentigene with your thumb or underarms, and remove it gently; and don't clean it too much so that bleeding doesn't occur, then treat it again until it heals; and from another spot that arises at the mouth of saliva, and eat, and by chance burns, and resembles a cow according to its appearance, and for this they called it the old 'cow disease'. It is necessary that you remove it like we said about tentigene, and treat it until it's healed.
de erratique	Of the cautery by fire, command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile. Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait. S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as .ij. leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes .ij. dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les .ij. leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder. Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte. Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.  Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez. Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	Erratic is when the nature of the woman isn't fully known, or if there's an excess or deficiency; it's natural by birth, or as accidents happen through illness that has come upon her; or due to bodily fluids being joined improperly, or owing to subtle or thick syphilis, and this occurs in front during marriage, on the ribs, underneath, wherever it may be; and one must understand its conception, childbirth, and sometimes floral reproduction; knowing this requires knowledge of the midwife. When the abnormalities are noticeable and apparent, they appear near your fingers or thigh area. If it's due to subtle syphilis, and it is close by the two lungs, then hurry, do like this: place your two index fingers together, and have the woman on her back, spread out her legs; then form the two lungs until the subtle syphilis is reduced, covering the abnormalities completely. Then take wool and fat in oil, put them over the area, and let the woman rest each day so that it doesn't bond. And if the syphilis is hard and thick, you must cover its appearance as if it were a leaf of rosemary. If the abnormalities are due to born flesh, then suspend her on her stomach and cover; use bandages with blood-stopping medicines such as arnica, dragon's blood, incense, all together in abundance with eggs; then make a plaster wide enough so that the wound can't bond; do this for an extended period, and cover it with a linen tent; then apply other treatments until healed. And when flesh is born during marriage if you need to cover according to this way, provided they aren't ingrown abscesses. For ingrown abscesses in the marriage area should not be touched by fire.
des emorroides	Of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation. Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer. Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer. Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai .i. emplaustre sus son dos. Et se il estainche, c’est boin. Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.  Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a .i. chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Wound openings are incisions in veins which occur without due caution and skill; when these wounds grow old they turn septic; we have mentioned in our division the signs, symptoms of this, and I will speak about those that heal through treatment. I state that septic wounds and the pus together, when they emerge from the mouth of the wound, do not show externally except for during treatment with iron. Wounds at the opening of the wound can be felt are those you can treat. Therefore, it is necessary to place the woman in a cool house, then make the pus ready on forceps and the root, then cover the area with medicine that restricts blood flow like cattail and dragon's blood and frankincense, among other things; then bind her feet for an hour, then place them in cold water; should there be bleeding from these, have her sit in a decoction of sumac bark, pomegranate peel, gall nuts and similar substances, then take wheat flour and mix it with honey and garlic, then make one plaster on her back. And if it stops bleeding, that is good. Should this not happen, should she develop abscesses on the back and nipples without cutting; then take wool, knead it into aloe juice or elderflower sap with old wine, and apply to her body.
des apostemes de la marris	The abscesses of the womb
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division. Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.  Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege, et ait .ij. petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument. Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés .ij. jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.  Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	Many ways of abscess come in the womb, such as gangrene, puerperal abscesses, herpes, indolent ulcers, fistulas, hemorrhoids and other abscesses I mentioned in our previous discussion. Therefore, it is necessary that I discuss here about the vaginal abscess which occurs in the womb, distinguishing it from those abscesses which harden and persist for a long time; if you see signs of illness in iron operations, observe whether the abscess is hot at the beginning of its appearance, and filled with fever and heat, and whether it turns red when you can see it. So do not rush to pierce it right away, but wait until the pain subsides completely; then have her lie on one side with two small stools under her hips so she is inclined, and support her back and legs together at the sides of her leg; let her knees be spread apart, place her arms under her knees, and bind them well with a bandage; then help the pus spill to the right side of her body, and apply the tool used for opening her womb from which the form comes; it is necessary that when you see this tool applied, make sure it enters about an inch into the womb so that what goes inside does not go too far beyond its place and does not hurt the patient; if the instrument is large, it should be covered with a bandage to prevent it from causing discomfort to the patient; it must hold the nozzle of the instrument above her and cut the instrument. And when the abscess opens up and you can handle it gently by hand, you must cover it with ointment until it dries out; then apply moistened wadding in oil rose or oil green; put the dressing at the bottom of the wound up to the edge of the womb, and place more clean, moistened wool under the womb on her back. Then treat her for another two days with a suitable ointment until she is healed; and every time you lift the womb and wound by enemas of water and honey, or water and cooked roots of lily and long aristolochia, then reapply the ointment. And if the wound has recovered in the womb, it must be treated without iron operations, but treated as we have said in our division.
de l’enfantement	Of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment. Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	The first task for the midwife is to recognize the form of natural childbirth, and the signs indicate when you see the woman's belly enlarge, and desire to smell her: then the child begins to exert force to come out; thus you know that this birth takes place according to its natural form, and occurs from its head, and the second part with it; and when you notice these signs, gently pressing on their abdomen is necessary so that the child comes out soon; for when it descends through its head, the second part accompanies it, and is born free of its excesses by good cleaning; any other birth does not come naturally. For it appears sometimes from its feet, and emerges through force of the body or limbs, or hands, or from her abdomen, or stomach, and is turned by chance around its neck, and by other bad forms; herein it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in these matters, and beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the forms on how they should be assisted.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	When the child comes through its head by natural birthway, and the woman is in severe labor, and her strength is weak, she should be seated on a stool or held by women; then let her rise from this position where fenugreek was cooked, and then have the midwife place between her fingers the small spoon as shown below:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.Et se les .ij. mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus .i. siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And cut the second part, and remove until all the moisture that is within disappears; and pull out the belly of the woman as far as the child descends, and if it doesn't descend, it is necessary to give a woman a catheterization with fenugreek seed oil. Then make her drink and sniff consilium, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: and let the child now come out. And if those two hands force their way out, you should gently pull them in one by one; and if they cannot enter, put the woman on a bench, and lift her feet upwards; then remove the bench from the ground, and cut under the woman so she does not leak during birth. And if the hands cannot enter and the child has died, cut the hands with the knife that was prepared beforehand, extract the child, and pull them out evenly.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piez	from the delivery of the child on her feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	When the child comes down onto her feet, it's best to lift her up.
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	and then turn it slowly, little by little,
puis preigne .i. des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	then place one of the ends and gently extend it little by little.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	Can he jump up to his thighs, if commanded, and make him inhale cautiously with the command;
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	if he can jump, may God will it.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it doesn't agree as we have said, if you turn it gradually and gradually, until it is according to the natural shape.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	Because then make it slightly easier.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons dit, si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en .i. mortier;	And if it does not become easier as we have said, take a little of the high quality, and oil from sesame, and ground gum, and melt all together in a single mortar;
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement,	and place inside and outside the woman's body this ointment,
puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	Then have them sit in hot water up to their ribs;
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai .i. coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	and when they are well moistened up to the waist, give them one spoonful of myrrh, and place it there, letting it sit for an hour;
puis la fai seoir sus .i. siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	then have them sit on a stool, then make them sneeze and restrain their mouth and nose, and gently rub their abdomen, for the child jumps now.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	from the position of the child on his knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	When the child takes this form, if you place its hands slowly and gradually;
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor .i. lit;	then support it on its neck, and have its legs hanging down at the bottom, and let it rest somewhat above the bed;
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	and bend its hands slowly and gradually, then take hold of its hands on the belly, and remove the pillows underneath, until it is hung down below.
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	and if the child jumps, take its legs and move it vigorously, then move its stomach upwards, then put your hands out.
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	And let the child grow slowly; and command the woman to stay pregnant until the child is born.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	from the birth of the child that comes out with a hand突出 during
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	It is necessary to engineer to bring back the hand:
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	If one cannot bring it back, make the woman stand up and walk;
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus .i. lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	If she cannot walk, make her lie on a bed for two days, and let her bend her legs at the knee.
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	then follow the massage I have described;
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus .i. siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	and if she does not give birth, make her sit on a stool, and then try to guide the baby's hand;
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	and direct the child according to natural form, and make her sneeze, and instruct her to pray until the baby comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	From the birth of the child on its neck, it has spread its arms, and its face turned towards the back of its mother's.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	It is necessary to scrape the baby's hand, then turn it slowly and slowly, and hold it gently;
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	And when it is level, place it on the natural muscular movement of elevation and oil, as we have said, then command it to move slowly and slowly.
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus .i. siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	And once you've done this, make her sit on a chair, and command her to pray; and have her sneeze.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	In this same manner for everything in the second half
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	When it comes to proceeding in this way through the second half, if you're dealing with the second part at your nail, as long as the moisture is drained;
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	And if the child begins to suffocate above its face and neck region, start from the belly, ensuring it is not held back, causing the child to die;
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	Then push the child inside, as long as you have placed it in the correct position, and instruct the woman not to give birth spontaneously at any point.
adonques si istra legierement.	Therefore, try to reset it lightly.
de l’issue des gemelz	from the birth of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes three or four; and this is not an unusual occurrence, it just happens.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	Two are extraordinary things, and they do not live long, if ever;
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	I know this, when they are multiplied, and are excised by the surgeon who devises them, who is bound to the boudé;
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	and likewise come out naturally like all beneath, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	And if they come out painfully, as the treatment as we have said, and let the small parts pass easily, then do what she does quickly.
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	Do it this way so that health may be restored.
de plusors enfans	Of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou .iiij. ou .v. ou .vj. ou .vij., ou plusors jusc’a .xv., et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious,	None are formed in marriage once or twice or three times or four times or five times or six times or seven times, and they are all formed like a child according to the measurement of their glory.
et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	and it should be that the maid knows all this, for by chance something similar has happened to her;
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	do so according to what is appropriate.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	When you treat a woman who has lost her unborn child or whose belly is affected, as I explained in the division section, and if it doesn't come out, and you are forced to operate by hand;
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	It is necessary that you know whether the woman is healthy or not, and whether she has experienced any accidents or fears of death;
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	It is necessary that the woman be on her back, with her hips inclined towards the front, and her legs lifted;
et li ministre la teigne de .ij. pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	And the minister applies a cure of two parts, wherever it is bound to the bed so that it isn't treated before the birth of the child;
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	Then rub the mouth of the pregnant woman with oily substances and muskail and fenugreek seeds and flaxseed oil. Then smear her hands with these oils and muskails;
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere .i. leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu,	Then gently massage the pregnant woman, then knead her for about an hour or as long as she can bear it,
et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	and take care that when the child descends to his head;
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez,	If they pierce inside his eyes or near his neck or in his mouth or near the palate or under the beard or on the jawbone or close to the ribs.
et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	And if it descends near the knees, then insert or grasp and hold midway along the sides of the body;
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	It is necessary that you prick the hair with your right hand and place the bend between his forefingers of his left hand, and he pushes with all his hand lightly, and insert the hair into none of these places that we have mentioned until it reaches the empty thing.
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	And this is the form of the hair:
puis fiche encontre .i. autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	Then find another ounce or third one if needed, so that the extractions are equal;
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	And then make them grow equally by moving on one side and the other, so that they can move out, and let it be that the roots of the teeth hold movement, as shown here:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	And if any part remains, if there's a defect in one of his duties where it should be, and you place them in that part, and pull the other part;
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if there's nothing left, place this root or higher up to its place, and do this until it comes out completely.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement,	And if one hand comes in front of the other, and it cannot be returned due to being squeezed,
si covient que tu envoloupes sus .i. drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	It is necessary for you to wrap with one drap (cloth) until it comes completely off;
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as .ij. piés.	then apply the paste at the joint of the sole or cut, and thus you should do with the other hand, and on both feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee,	And if the baby's head is large and it is stuck at the exit, or if its forehead is assembled in an acute angle,
si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	It is necessary for you to push the sharp amniotic sac between your fingers, and make the head and remove the acute angle;
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	when you use the tool which is named 'almidach', its shape comes with the tools or chapter that follows this one;
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	and in the same way, let them grow to a great size naturally;
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles,	and then pull out the bones with tongs,
et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	and if the shoulder pops out and is pulled with strength, until it breaks, as long as there's moisture or worse that comes out;
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	And if she cannot come out, remove it piece by piece as you can.
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	And if the belly is swollen or under the ribs, it is necessary for you to pierce it so that the moisture can flow out.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if it sinks in his feet, it is a light condition, and the opening to the mouth of the mare's leg is also light.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a .i. drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	And if it protrudes in the belly or on the buttocks, it is proper for you to extract it with about one span covered by your hand;
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	And they empty the belly or the buttocks as long as the moisture is inside.
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure,	And if there are other bone-related issues and the head stays in place,
si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	So they pull the hand out from under the wound, and guide it until it reaches the opening of the wound.
puis i boute .i. oncine ou ij., et le trai fuer;	Then he pulls out an ounce or two, and guides it;
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier,	And if the mouth of the mare is narrowed by an abscess that has come there, it doesn't suit to work on it,
ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	then it is appropriate to administer wet and greasy things;
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	and apply plaster to it, and if there are any moistifying and moisture-retaining substances.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	And if the fetus is above the ribs, and you can place it equally, then apply what we have said for the living infant;
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if we cannot do it whole, then cut it into pieces, and leave nothing of the second part.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	And when you have done this, apply what we have said about extracting pus in abscesses that come to the surface;
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And if blood comes out due to this, then place it in water and restrain, and apply other treatments.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman who had borne one child that died, then she gave birth to another from that same womb, and this other also died.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, an abscess came in the belly, and swelled to such an extent that it opened, causing great pain.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called for treatment, and I waited for a long time, and could not tolerate the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I applied strong plaster, and out came a bone, and after some days another one.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was very surprised, for this stomach has no bone.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought it must be the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em miglior point;	I looked into the wound, and by my hands I felt for bones, until the woman was in better condition;
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	And he tended to the woman for a long time like this, and it had improved slightly by her side;
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	And I have recorded this chapter solely because, when the masters find an unfamiliar thing, they must know how to provide aid.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to bring the shoulder back to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	Here comes the method of using the presser, which is described in the books; and for each two tornants (a type of joint) you have four ribs, totaling four joints.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	Otherwise, let the horns be more subtle than the restrainer and make them of ebony or boxwood;
et soit li bouche dou fust .i. doi de large, et li marge des arbres .i. doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	And let the mouth of the fire cauterizer be two inches in width, and the edge of the trees be one inch, and long one and a half palms;
et enmi les .ij. liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	and between the two pieces make them two joints of this same cauterizer, which are firm on each side, about half a palm long or slightly more.
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les .ij. cornes.	And these two joints stay in the edge of the iron by opening when one turns the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	Another form, similar yet more delicate and lighter, should be made of ebony or boxwood according to the shape of the forceps.
et ait as .ij. chiés .ij. ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et .ij. dois de large;	and arrange them at two shoulder joints, like you see, of long length, and two widths;
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor .i. lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes,	and when you observe the opening of the wound with the entire instrument, make the woman sit on one bed, with her arms hanging and her legs spread apart,
puis boute les .ij. ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	then fasten the two joints together when assembled in the wound, and hold the tip of the instrument between her breasts;
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	then work your hand on the entire instrument, just like you would with equal tongs, according to how much you see opening of the wound's mouth, until she delivers what she wishes.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	This instrument is completely covered and multiplied by its appearances; and when you present them to the work, it becomes faster in execution and taller for their quantity towards people.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	If you do not exhaust the instrument that you have equipped, because its necessity is not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	When the second stage of labor is retained during childbirth, it is necessary to command the mother to retain her urine, and then have her inhale through the nose, and you restrain her hands at the mouth and nose;
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	And if she jumps out of this, well done.
Se ceu non, si prent .i. pot, et fai .i. pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	If not that, then take two pots, and make a cover or lid for each. Then put in the pots herbs capable of opening the mouth of the wound, such as calendula, rue, anise, chamomile, cassia, and thyme;
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris,	All these herbs, or none of them, be cooked in water on fire or placed in a pot with water. Then put a stick or edge into one pot, and the other into the wound's mouth,
et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	And let the steam penetrate inside the wound until the fumes come out; then make it to exhale, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If it jumps at the second attempt quickly.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature,	And if it remains after this treatment and is not healed, you should instruct her to moisten her left hand with oil of mustard or rosemary extract, then rub the mixture onto herself.
et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	And seek the second bone; and when she finds it, if you ask her to hold it gently and gradually straighten it out, so that none of the joints are disturbed during extraction;
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	But you must move it lightly to the right and to the left, and then pull; if it comes loose and eases up.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	And if there is constriction in the throat of the patient, we have said the treatment for coughing and the fumigation with herbs;
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	And if it is not of all what we have said, then ensure you do not err in drawing blood;
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	But it is necessary that the one at the mouth of the vagina, you tie to the thigh of the woman, then apply ointment from the four medicines as an enema;
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	If it heals and returns to strength; but still, when she is healed if there comes a bad smell in the stomach and head, and discolours the skin.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	Therefore it is necessary to use fumigations suitable for this: none of the old have proven that the fumigation of mustard and dried figs works.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the instrument with which one fumes a woman during retention of flowers and afterbirth is thus:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	And it looks like an arrow, and one places the subtle head in the fire, and the ends wide over the flame;
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	Let there be fumigation above the coals, and let the treatment continue until it is exhausted, then start another one.
de percier lou fondement	To puncture the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	Newborns are born who do not have immediate perception, instead they perceive through a subtle sense.
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	Therefore, in the dance, she should perceive through that subtle sense to her advantage, and not perceive it with any sharp sensation, and guard the placement so that it does not touch.
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then place on damp wool in wine and oil, then apply salve treatment until it is sound.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it won't reoccur, put or insert a piece of poplar wood, and leave it in the person's mouth for days, and remove it when the child begins to walk around indoors.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And no time comes to these sudden injuries of an open wound or abscess; if that needs to be handled suddenly: if you treat it with the method we spoke of for the elm bark.
de la fistule dou fondement	from the fistula from its base
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des .ij. parties,	Fistulas that come from beneath the foundation are congealed and grow larger; those that come from above the foundation or in the space of two parts,
si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe,	If there is one fistula or multiple; and when that congealed mass is old, it works and absorbs moisture, yielding white or fine pus,
et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	And there are no times these Persian fistulas; and they're known by the fact that there's either discharge or windiness when the patient discharges, and perhaps in jumping from one place to another.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And there are fistulas that penetrate up to the bladder, and up to half of the penis; they reach up to the joint of the knee, and up to the root of the testicles.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	And thus one can recognize a Persian fistula at its base, but not necessarily Persian.
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And you should touch the end of your index finger or base, and insert a slender needle or spider's leg or iron into the fistula when there is no twist.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou .i. poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	And if it is twisted, you should hold up a thread of fine wax or one horsehair until you feel the thread or hair at your hand;
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	And if you don't feel it, and there is no full evacuation of pus, wind, or air, as we have said:
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	Know that it does not harm; if you hasten to heal.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula is close enough to the bladder or where urine leads, if it jumps with urine and cannot be sealed by medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	If it penetrates up to the knee joint, then there is a vein going up to that point;
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	If there is no winding or the cause of pain is within, then it remains inside and cannot be treated with medicine or ointment.
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	And for these Persian fistulas there is no remedy but labor, and vain effort of those who interfere with them.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit,	And in those that are not Persian nor ancient, there is hope for healing through iron, as I have found out.
et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	And when the patient lies on their back in your hands; and raise their legs up to their hips, and have their hips tilted towards their stomach.
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	Then insert an arachnid tentacle, or if there's curvature, a diving bell until you know where the tentacle comes from.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice,	If they feel the pain deep inside, it is necessary for you to push your index finger there,
se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	Then you will sense that the tool has pierced it; and know where its entry or the artery or the vein lies beneath your finger, so you'll understand whether it's in an artery or a vein.
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If there is no disturbance, one cannot examine it.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	Yet still, with a little effort, one can often examine some things, but this happens rarely;
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	And when we assist, if we warm the delicate cautery according to the width of the fistula, as was explained before;
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu .ij. fois ou .iij., tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	and pour heat it entirely in the fistula until it emerges from the foundation; and do this twice or three times, until you know that these heated parts are burnt, which resemble a bird's feather;
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	and then treat the moistened wicks with grease, until this heated part comes out, then apply ointment to bind and fuse it.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien. Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	If it is done like that, it is fine. Otherwise, it cannot be treated in any other way;
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	And if it is attempted to be inserted within, and does not penetrate until the base which is the foundation, and between your thumb and the tent there is a thick covering of flesh or of fat, and you can see the fistula in the one who has created this covering deep inside.
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	if the operation is done at the beginning of the fistula, stops firmly before the tent, and then uses the cautery afterwards, until it reaches the tip of the tent.
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	and removes the tent, and it will fall out; then remove those fat lumps that seem like a bird's feather, and do not leave any remnants.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the wound does not heal, cut between you and the organ, then apply fire or an ointment to treat it.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble .ij. bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	For fire cautery combines two substances: this is to say, the burn of these iron rods arranged together, and the extinguishing of blood and the drying of moisture;
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	Then the treatment of wet tents involves rubbing or grinding them in butter or on objects until the wax flows out, and it releases the burned parts within the wax;
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	Then treat the wound with black soldering operations that harden over time, and use dried medicines as remedies.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	And when it has been restored, if it is healed and does not recur.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes just short of the full bottom, and is removed from the body, you should tap on its base or bottom, and inquire about it.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre .ij. est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des .iii. manieres:	And if you feel the tentacle, and there are two of it or something soft like a string or cord, or it's about to pierce, but there is only a path of entry and hope, by applying one of the three methods:
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	or you apply cautery as we have said, or you cut it up to the bottom, or if you can feel and remove it like the first one does.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	and don't cut too close to the bottom, that you might remove what holds the base, and allow it to be expelled naturally by the body.
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	then the treatment, as we have said;
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	by chance if it is healed, or you remove that covering and clean it since it has been cut from under the root, either by mistake or with another instrument pointed.
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	then cleanse that wound flesh which is in the injury as much as you can.
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	then strive to heal the wound, and keep the hole open in the lower part of the root: if it is easier for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus,	And no way are fistulas according to this manner: and when you pinch the tent in the fistula, and it's where the base touches the skin above,
si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	if you take a tent pierced at the head following this form:
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And tie one twisted thread in a knot, and pinch the tent throughout the whole length of the thread in the fistula until it reaches the head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	If she is passing through the base in the margin inside, then pull out that thread from the twisted one as you pinch your thumb or base.
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les .ij. chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse .i. jor ou .ij.;	And guide the head with thread, and join the two heads together, and hold one against the other, and let it rest for one or two days;
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	And hold them tight every time until the threads reach these parts that are between the two heads, and keep joining them together.
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	Then treat the wound until it is healed and clean.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not burst, make an incision in all ways that you can, as long as it is not too deep.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not fitting to do so by laying the patient flat immediately, and then treating them, as we have said, until they are stabilized.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	The form of the sharp-pointed needle used for making a puncture is much like this, and it involves cutting;
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	And on another side, no, because you should not touch what you should not touch, as you see here:
des emorroydes	of lacerations
Emorrydes sont selonc ij. manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc,	Fatigue occurs in two ways: when they are within the foundation, like a piece of tar, and if there are small and large ones, and blood collects at that spot.
et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor,	and one or more of them are outside the foundation and under the root; but those that are out have little moisture.
et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	and also at that spot a little yellow water or a little blood, and they have the color of the flesh;
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	and for those who have them within the foundation, you instruct the patient to move around in chambers so that the foundations come out and the threads are visible.
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	If you're quick, pinch it with your tweezers, or hold it by your nail, then pull at its roots.
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a .i. drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	And if the ring can't hold onto them due to their moisture, take them at two inches apart, or with cotton, or from a piece of metal;
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	And pull them off with your fingers, then apply it, and dust it with some hot powders that would be used for a cauterizer;
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, puis les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	Or you can cauterize them as it is said or as the chapter on cauterization instructs, then treat with other remedies until they are healed.
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	And if the foundations cannot come out, then direct the patient to perform lithotomy using a sharp and abrasive tool to wash away whatever is on the foundation, so that it can come out smoothly;
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	And if the patient's efforts are not effective in the opening and if the threads are strong at the foundation, then the treatment should be light;
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	And when you grasp them with your finger or tweezers, remove them, then treat in the manner we have described, until it is clean and it dreads iron incision.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren .i. fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les .ij. chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille,	It is necessary for you to suture in this manner: take a twist of thread and put it into a needle, then pull the thread over and make a hole in the needle from another side, and turn the two ends of the thread under the needle.
et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse .i. por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	And if it is broad; and hold the thread in place, then tie the thread, sew with the needle, remove the needle, do this for all others, and leave one out to manage excess blood;
puis met sus le fondement .i. drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	Then place on the base one part of moist lint in olive oil or on a wadding, and place on the base, then instruct the patient to rest.
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And leave it until they heal completely, and when they are settled, perform treatment with ointment and other remedies, as long as they are healing.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	By drying heat or the base.
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times, there is dryness of bile in the intestines, and due to nature's constraint, and when the illness is old and medicine no longer helps.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	It is necessary that you reset at the tip of a spur or on your nail, leaving no moisture;
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	Then apply the heat until it becomes soft as required;
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	And if it doesn't become soft, repeat the operation with more force than before, until some healing occurs and it is scorched;
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat him as long as he remains healthy.
dou fremit	with tremor
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	Ants is a small false appearance on the body, and they move everywhere.
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	And it never lets you feel the vein when pressed, and one also feels its death like a tremor, spreading throughout the body, especially more in the hands than other parts.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	And the treatment is that you take a twig from an goose feather or a strong vulture feather and place this stick over the trembling (area), until the reddish circles cover the whole trembling region.
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	Then turn your hand until you grasp the entire stick as long as you cover all of the trembling (area), and place it forward, and root out the trembling from its source.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see fit, do this with a twig of an araign or iron according to this shape, and make it subtle underneath and taut above:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	Do not pierce it, for you must hold onto the two ends and apply pressure. And if you see fit, cauterize the trembling (area), as is shown or described in the chapter about cauterization.
de la forme dou clistere	of the bladder's structure
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Never use an argentin or archaut bladder, or one made of melted silver or lead; and never use small or large utensils depending on who they are for.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Therefore, those utensils should be used in the treatment of children and those who are weak and painful, as they are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The shape of the bladder is either small or large, just like this:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez .ij. pertus, et en l’autre .i.;	And there is a protrusion where the belly button is sewn closed, as you can see, and feces are inside piercing it; and on one side of the abdomen there are two depressions, and on the other one.
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus,	And let it be that the belly is where I place medications from a beast bladder or parchment, and it should have tiny depressions pierced through it all around.
et ait entre chescun pertus .i. doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus .i. fil fort de fil crut tort en .x. ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	And place exactly one inch between each depression, then insert two strands of strong, twisted thread into these depressions for ten or twelve times around, and bind the belly as tightly as a goat would.
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	And when the medication is inside, tie it with a strong thread in front of the tool, then stitch it; and this forms a circle.
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	And let the medicine neither be too hot nor too cold, and smear the head with oil or yolk of egg ointment, or something similar, then gently rub it in.
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses .ij. mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit,	Then, with the surgeons at his two hands together, until he sees clearly, then remove the lump, and lift the patient's legs onto the table.
et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And if the medicine is to come out, let it escape as much as possible; and if he sleeps through a night, that will be more help.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you administer it during a colicky disease of the stomach, and the medicine rushes to escape, then repeat it as long as he is well.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por .i. enfant;	And if bleeding occurs from its root or its source, or from an abscess, even a cyst as small as one child;
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	and this is the shape of the thin cyst on which the skin is constrained:
des plaies	of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have spoken about the treatment of wounds in our division; now we will speak about treatments for hands and medicine, according to completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are various depending on how they are made, and where the wounds are made, and why they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	The reasons wounds are made include impact from a stone, the size of a sword and a knife, or by a spear or a staff or a mace, or by similar things.
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	or depending on the location of the body, such as a wound inflicted upon the neck, or the head, or the stomach, or the abdomen, or the liver, and similar parts.
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	and I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and start with wounds of the head that are simple, because the memory refers to its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans,	I say that when a single wound occurs or when bone fractures, and the bone is not broken, be cautious if it's due to stone or similar conditions, and the skin has been completely torn and the wound is large,
et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	and you doubt slightly about abscesses: if the surgeon immediately cleans the head wound even if there is a little blood from the wound, and the treatment goes against the part that was removed;
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	and encourage the patient to drink plenty of wine and eat rich meats.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	And if he doesn't want to undergo surgery, then reduce his food intake, and do not drink wine or eat meat.
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	And if there's pus coming out of the wound, when you find an abscess, place a wet cotton ball in oil rose water or just oil; or in vinegar that stops bleeding.
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	And if there's no pus coming out of the wound, when you place it on the wound, if it contains fresh blood throughout and isn't disturbed by air, a powder that I will mention shortly;
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound has been disturbed, apply some ointments until it heals.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large like a cut from a sword and similar injuries, and the edges cannot be brought together by sutures, then join them with stitches, as I will say for abdominal wounds, regarding suture.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir,	If the wound exposes the bone, and there's tenderness, yet it only lasts for a short time when touched, then one must treat; then heal the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh instead of skin.
et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	And instruct the patient to eat large meats, such as kidneys and cooked wheat, like chickens, and similar items.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	And if you find that the skin is rotting, and it doesn't reach to the bone, then cut out the whole rot, and remove the pus, then treat;
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	And if there is an artery in the wound or vein, which cannot be stopped with medicine, then cut off the artery, and if you find it dislocated, tie it with a thread;
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if this does not benefit you, then apply cautery to it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if the wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light: and you should put this powder which joins together like that when the heat of the fire has moved it.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon .ij. parties; chalz vive .iij. parties, et le poudre subtilment,	And here is the way to prepare the powder: take a part of frankincense; dragon's blood two parts; powdered galium three parts, and finely ground it.
et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	Apply the wound, pressing it firmly until it is well aired and joins with all its blood;
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And then it must be properly aligned, and left untouched until it heals, if it doesn't swell; for the medicine is not removed as long as it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And one should only perform this bloodletting procedure once, not just because of the need for charcoal or dragon's blood, but when the surgeon has cleaned the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	And if the surgeon has treated the wound, in that state, one should not apply this powder at all;
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	Instead, apply some digested ointments, or oat flour mixed with water and honey, until the wound starts to heal;
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then continue with other treatments as long as they are healthy.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	And if bone breaking comes with the wound, and it is small, treat it with fine tweezers;
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And I will tell you later about the fractures of the head.
de la plaie dou col	of the wound in the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	This injury comes from the neck, it is simple if there's no distinction between the neck and the head itself, but if the nerves in the neck or an artery has been severed.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	If it's the nerves, then leave the treatment alone and don't put anything that restricts, for it harms the nerves and makes them recede;
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	And don't place anything cold on the wound, for the substance of nerves is cold and they continue with the head which is among the highest parts.
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce,	but use warm medicine instead, such as rose water rinsed with gentle water, and rinse the cabbage leaves also in gentle water,
et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	And other stones within according to this manner, and moist applications.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, one should bend the edges and let it heal until it is clean.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	And if the wounds are deep and filled with pus, one should pierce them or lower further.
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	And if the artery is cut and bleeding ensues, one should open it, bandage it, and then cauterize where necessary;
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va,	And if the throat's flesh is cut, or the kidneys, and the passage is kept maintained, through which the meat goes,
si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	if you make a cut in the kidney over the reed of the throat, and not touch the throat but set it according to its natural form;
et puis l’estrain avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then allow for healing, and leave it for some days, then treat with dried ointments until it heals properly;
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	and if the wound has affected the bone, treat that as well;
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse,	And if there are bone fragments, remove them all thoroughly if you can, and those that you cannot obtain, allow the wound to heal until it is clean.
et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	and make sure the dislocation is corrected and stable.
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wound is fresh, apply the powder I mentioned.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there are bones in the wound and it has a sinus, treat it as described in my chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	From the wound caused by a spear or knife
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	If it's from a spear or knife, and the wound goes deep, if you observe that the air escapes through the wound without any resistance from the body: then you know that the wound is mortal;
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont,	And if it's not deep and all its blood is fresh escaping freely, then don't delay to put the powder at first hour or don't bind it for fear that the blood might stop flowing completely.
et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	And tend to his heart, and rest the patient;
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie .ij. fois le jor;	but apply an attractive ointment, and bind it twice daily;
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor,	and if you don't have an ointment, place old cotton in the wound to absorb the moisture,
et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie .iij. jors, ou .iiij., ou plusors;	let the patient rest on the wound for three days, or four, or more if necessary;
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’es traingnemens d’alainne;	if no convulsions, bad heart tremors, or alone jumps occur;
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	And when you see the good conditions, if you know that the wound is saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then cure it with various remedies and other treatments, as long as it remains healthy;
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	And if it cannot heal properly and heals unevenly, then you will realize that there is an ulcer; treat it accordingly.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	And if the wound is from a sword or knife cut and it's straightforward or worse, or on the back, treat it in accordance with that which comes before.
s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	If it's large, stitch it; and if it's small, use powder, and if it's compressed in the bone, and has fractured pieces, clean the wound, and remove the debris if they are exposed.
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	And if they aren't exposed, leave the wound to heal open, letting ease the extractions;
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	and for other wounds on other limbs, make judgments as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	about the rupture of the abdomen
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	The belly depressions are large and medium-sized and small;
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	From a large wound, once the intestines or the ends of the intestines, through which the invasion occurs;
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans,	And the suture is more difficult, and no time matches worse than a small wound compared to a large one,
por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	Because in this way, we can't place the intestines properly inside, unless we put them back little by little.
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes,	Because when their intestines swell up as soon as they feel the cold, they go back inside more points,
et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres .ij.	And because of this the patient sweats from the wound, for this is when we move their intestines back to where they belong, like in the case of others two.
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc .iiij. manieres:	Know that there are four ways a stomach rupture occurs:
les .ij. costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre,	the two common stitches occur in the abdominal area,
et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et .ij. autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	And the stitching of other wounds on the body, and two other types of stitches for their own purposes, are common to other wounds;
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	And yet, they are more proper with the stitch on the belly, and I will mention each one and explain them.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer,	I say that when the wound is small, and nothing of the intestine sticks out,
et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des .ij. manieres:	and when there is something to remove, this can be done in either of two ways:
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit,	because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said,
ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	or because the intestines are swollen due to cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	And when it is cold, warm him up in this manner:
moillie une esponge ou .i. mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement,	moisten a sponge or make one part of a cloth wet only in water,
ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique,	when you cook with boiling water mixed with soap and thyme,
et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	and let the intestine swell as long as it is perforated;
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	and after doing this with straining wine, and when it has been cooked, allow it to cool so that the swelling may subside.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites,	And when you see the swelling disappear, moisten the intestine with water or broth that has been cooked and flavored.
car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	Because with this there is difficulty at the beginning of things;
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	and if it cannot enter, they make a small incision with the tool that removes the moirants;
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille,	And the first treatment is to have it bruised by the cut,
que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	And we should not cut it without great necessity, nor if there's no alternative;
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	And these are the tools to split them:
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	if you cut inside the bend and not outside, and see this shape:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer,	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines jump out,
si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre,	if you reset it according to its natural form in its proper place,
se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	if you can do so, for this requires movement.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre,	When the wound is wide, and it's in the abdominal area,
si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos,	if necessary, heal the patient on their back,
et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	And place his legs higher than his head;
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre,	and if it is in the abdominal region,
si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz,	then position the head and the buttocks higher than the abdominal area.
et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des .ij. parties	and also if there is a rupture in the abdomen at one of these two parts.
si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	if you understand this, let the part that has been removed be higher than the other;
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	and thus should practice what I say in large and medium-sized wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet,	For small wounds, use what you are equipped for,
puis aies entre tes mains .i. ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main,	Then have in your hands a minister of pity who heals the entire wound with its hand,
et assemble les levres;	And gather the lips;
et c’est la maniere commune de costures,	and this is the common method of stitches,
et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie,	and you take one or more needles, according to the size of the wound's width,
puis laisse des le chief de la plaie .i. doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait .i. boin fil fort;	then leave at the start of the wound an inch in space, and I insert a needle or it has one good thick thread;
et perce les .ij. chiés dou cuir avec les .ij. chiés dou siphac,	and pierces the two skin heads with the two bone heads,
qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie,	who are underneath the skin inside, until you pierce that part of it.
et assemble les .ij. chief dou siphac les .iiij. ensamble;	and connect the two bone heads with the four assembly;
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de .ij. pars,	then tighten a double thread around the needle of those two parts,
puis assemble les .ij. chiés de la plaie avenanment,	then gather together both of the ends of the wound extension,
et puis laisse .i. doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	and then leave an inch of space, and insert another needle;
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille,	then tie the thread in the same way you did with the first needle,
et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles,	and keep doing this according to your skill with the needles,
tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	until all the wound remains restrained;
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses,	and have equal needles, both fine and thick,
car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	because the fine needles cut all the flesh, and the too thick ones cannot enter well:
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	thus they should be of medium thickness;
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir,	And it is not right to pull out the needles too far from the flesh and skin.
k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	And they do not rupture or open the wound before the seam;
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir,	Then remove the heads of the needles, so that they do not irritate the patient at night;
et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir,	And place tents or cloths over the joints of the needles to keep them in place;
et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	And let them grow until the wound has healed;
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies,	And this kind of stitch using needles is more suitable for small wounds,
car il i soffist une aguille ou .ij.	because it involves threading a needle or two.
Li seconde costure si est commune,	The second type of stitch is common,
et est que tu assemble les .ij. chiés dou cuir et les .ij. chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait .i. fort fil moien;	And it is that you assemble the two sides of skin and the two sides of bone together on one needle where there is a strong thread in the middle;
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz .iiij. ensamble,	and when you have pierced these four pieces together,
si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	then remove the needle from where you began, in the way one sews linens;
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	and leave a distance between each stitch equivalent to the size of a small thumb.
ceste costure sevent li home,	This stitch sews up the wound,
et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre,	and I sew a wound where someone had an injury or stomach issue,
qui estoit navrez d’un coutel,	which was caused by a knife cut,
et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant,	and the wound was larger than a palm in size,
et issoit des intestines bien .ij. palmes de grant,	And if they are of intestines well two palms of great size,
et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	And it was a wound in the middle of the belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit .xxiiij. houres fuer,	I returned the intestine to him after it had been out for twenty-four hours.
et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a .xv. jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	And the wound was healed until fifteen days, and I treated it, and he was healthy.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	And when they had judged that he was dying, and this was a miracle;
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en .i. leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	and did not cure him with ointment, for I was in one place where none could be found, nor any medicine;
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel .ij. fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	and changed the gauze on the wound four times a day, and washed it with honey water until it healed.
Or vos dirai les .ij. propres manieres de cousture:	And I will tell you the two proper ways of suturing:
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	Take the needle, and the bottle from the outer part up until it reaches inside.
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille,	When she has pierced straight to the heart in the right place, if it hits the head of the syphilitic sore or causes pain or where you have stuck the needle,
et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	and make her pierce from the inner part outwards until she reaches the outer side;
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz,	and if you hear that stitch, do it in such a way as the leatherworker sews the skin,
et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	And you allow once the stitch on one side, and take it again from another, until the suture is fully completed.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement,	The second method of stitching, as Galen truly described,
si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les .ij. parties ensamble naturelment,	If it is like what everyone does, joining the two parts naturally together,
et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	And they press one end of the stitch to the other, in this manner:
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement,	Prick a needle or take some medicine near the head of the dog, and pierce that spot alone.
et laisse les .ij. chiés dou syfac;	and let both shoulders move smoothly.
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens,	then twist the needle, and pierce it from below up to that inner part,
as .ij. chiés dou syfac;	similarly with both shoulders being in place;
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en .ij. autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	Then pierce both from the lower part up to that within, in two other dislocated shoulders that are on the other side;
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	And this is the way of sewing that is moved and the more common one.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent,	The doctors say this word and none testify to it,
c’on doit coudre le ventre a .ij. aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	One should stitch the abdomen with two needles, or where there is thread in each;
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	And one must push a needle from one side, and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew buttons;
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre,	Know that when the rupture is within the belly,
si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	The stitching there is more dangerous than for any other part of their belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	The judgments about the wound are such as for the judgments of other wounds:
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee,	And it is that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, as soon as the art has mixed it,
si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char,	if it comes back into the intestine, and on the skin; then place the powder stimulating flesh,
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	and if the art has mixed it, apply any available unguent until the wound heals;
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	and clean the thread, and stitch up the cut, and bind it with a cloth.
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then treat the wound as usual, until it stops bleeding;
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel,	and if you don't have medicine, place some, as soon as it starts to ooze pus, old cotton,
et le remue .ij. fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	and move him twice a day until it stops bleeding.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	For you need no other medicines in various preparations for simple wounds;
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz,	And if you doubt whether the wound will spread to the main parts of the body,
si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset,	Then it is necessary for you to moisten fine wool in oil that has been heated to a moderate temperature, or in scented oil,
et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	and place it inside the joints, and over the elbows;
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient,	and if you feel pain or gangrene in your limbs, and such symptoms occur repeatedly,
si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	If you use black wine enemas, and particularly if there is already gangrene reaching to the intestine;
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	And pierce deeply inside, and know that when it comes to the large intestines, it is easier to heal than the smaller ones.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez,	The intestine called 'juvenile' cannot be healed if it is injured,
et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	And this is due to the location of the veins and because of the subtlety of the entire body, and its proximity to its nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	And if the pus jumps out of the wound, then replace it immediately as with an intestine, while it is still fresh;
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne,	and if it is old and turned red or black, then you should bind the part that has become black so that no blood flows there,
car il i a voinnes et arteres;	because there are veins and arteries involved;
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien,	then remove the one between the bandage,
et met les .ij. chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	And have both of those shoulders hanging down from the upper part over the wound up to beyond it for easing the extraction when the thorns pierce through, and the wound heals.
de la routure dou boueil	Of the rupture of the bladder
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite,	When the intestines are involved, and the wound is small,
si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes,	If it can be restored in any way,
por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	For I saw that someone was pierced or stabbed in the belly with a spear;
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac,	and the wound was on the right side of the stomach,
et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	and it became inflamed and turned into a fistula, causing both loss of appetite and nausea;
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	I treated him according to what I knew, and didn't stop refining the treatment until he recovered, and bound his wounds.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	And when I saw it fastened [securely], I doubted whether the patient might have pain in their belly;
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	and there was no harm, but remained in better conditions, eating and drinking;
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	and some experimenters say that when there is a small injury in the intestine, it should be bound in this manner:
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie,	take large thorns, then gather the edges of the wound,
et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les .ij. levres,	And when the bird has opened its mouth, you place it on the two lips,
si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	if it stretches its mouth out;
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier,	and then grasp its head, and this is held so that it cannot escape.
puis met .i. autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	then place another bird in the same manner as before, until the wound has been completely covered.
et cout la plaie.	And at the wound site.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide,	If it burns strongly in the intestine, and causes no harm to the patient,
et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste,	And one can tie the intestine with a thin thread cut from an animal's intestine,
en teil maniere:	in this manner:
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez,	Take the head of this thread-like intestine until you reach the part that is lean,
et puis lie au chief de cest fil .i. fil de lin subtil tort,	and then tie to the head of this thread-like strand, one inch of fine linen string,
puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	then thread the string through a needle and sew the intestine, then reset it in the opening;
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	and this method of sewing like stitches is solely according to the way of joining and expecting;
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	And if the wound is big and wide, especially when it's in one of the bowels, if there's no fetus or health issue, because of subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of a fistula, or where it might be.
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule»,	Know that any wound or abscess, as it matures, is universally called "fistula".
et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	And similarly when it is filled with hair and grows inside.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor,	And fistula is according to the white hard bulge of the improperly removed node, or where no pain can be felt,
et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	and also has hair like the feathers of a bird;
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	nor does it ever have clear vision, and at other times thickened vision.
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	neither is it ever too little, nor is there enough at other times;
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char,	And I have spoken about it in the section on wounds, that any wound that is not healed, and there's no flesh,
ce n’est fuers que par une des .viiij. causes:	This is only due to one of the eight causes:
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	This means, it's because of the weakness or obstruction of blood or pus;
ou por sa malice;	or due to its maleficence;
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	Because there is hard flesh within, and on the lips, which does not allow for hair to grow;
ou il i a trop de bowe;	because there is too much moisture;
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	or the joints are swollen, and the substance is of poor quality;
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	or the medicine is not good in the treatment;
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	because corruption is a manner of pestilence;
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	or because the property in the region is late for digestion, and its restoration is slow, and it escapes by nature;
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	or there are veins or bones:
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	and I have shown all these causes, and the signs, and the treatments with medicine in this section.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	It is necessary for me to inform you about the treatment of fistula, which is performed by manual work.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	Know that a fistula can occur in all limbs and trunk;
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners,	because there are fistulas that come from large veins, and arteries, and nerves,
ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes,	or in the stomach, or in the intestines, or in the bladder, or in any of the ribs,
ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	In the spinal column of the back, or at any joint of the hands or feet;
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	And if it concerns the property of the main limb, and to its various functions.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	And all the fistulas in this manner are difficult to heal, and there is nothing else but hard work, and lack of knowledge;
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure,	and if there is no fistula that does not stop at the point I have said, and you are to complete the treatment,
et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	And you will know it, if you take a spider's tent or iron, if the fistula is straight, then touch it;
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc,	and if the fistula is curved, look for a subtle snail shell to probe it.
car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	for snails bend and move along the curvature;
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes,	and if the fistula has no means of hands and you cannot properly search for it with spider tents,
si la clisterize par l’un des pertus,	if you cleanse using one of the small tubes,
car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	for moisture is limited between one tube and another, and it cleanses;
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont,	then carefully probe with your strength, knowing if there is bone or nerve, and feel it all around,
et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	and ask the patient to describe where they feel pain when you press their hand, and determine the exact location.
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine,	And when you truly know its location, and if it is far from a joint, or a nerve, or an artery or vein,
ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit,	or in any of the joints that I have told you about, if there is pressure according to what I have told you,
et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	and when bone has been excavated and the putrefied flesh that is inside;
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee,	and then continue the treatment until it is healed.
et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues,	And if the fistula is well deeply opened straight ahead, it must be closed completely from top to bottom as much as you can,
puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule,	Then I apply moistened wicks to the ague medicine, and dab until reaching the tip of the fistula,
tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	Until the medicine dissolves what has remained at the bottom;
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And then I cover it with clean bandages until it heals;
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit,	And if one cannot heal him with this, then apply the cautery as we have said.
et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, then treat it.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	If a vein or nerves are being harmed or affecting principal members, as we have said;
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee,	And if the bone is exposed, and there's corruption and darkness, then treat it until all the corruption has been removed, as we have said;
puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then the surgeon cuts away the flesh as long as there is sound tissue;
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant,	and if it is not sound, cut around it in the same way as before,
saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	know that you should stop just at this point:
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons,	if it continues and grows to the bottom, continue cutting until you reach the bottom.
et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	And remove all the corruption, then reset it;
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	And if it is like this healthy, that's well.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	But if not, know that the corruption has gone too far within, and you cannot bring it back;
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	yet there is no other way than to leave it to nature;
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles,	And if there is a tiny bone corrupted, you may pull it out with tongs.
si l’estrai a .i. estrument covenauble a ceu,	if you find an instrument suitable for this task, extract it.
et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	and if there are many bones, remove them all, do not leave any behind;
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour,	and if moisture opposes this, and there is no fear or danger,
si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	If there is heat and moisture and flesh, and frees the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture,	And if you cannot remove them within an hour, then place something that resists putrefaction over the wound,
et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os,	and leave it until the flesh is completely putrid inside the bones,
et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	and then the bones will come out more easily;
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse,	And if it's a large bone, like from the leg or thigh,
si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee,	so remove the corruption for as long as the blackness covers all bones,
puis restoure la plaie;	then heal the wound;
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	and if there is a large part of corruption and it extends up to the bone's surface;
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	If necessary, you should shave and cover it all until decay occurs, and then treat it as long as it is healing;
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint .i. home en sa jambe,	and I will tell you about a fistula that occurred in one's leg.
si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	so that you can take this as an example and find help for your work.
Il fut .i. jovencelz entor .xxx. ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors,	There was once a young person around thirty years old, who experienced pain in their leg due to an issue originating within the body,
tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	Until the substances reached the leg, and was drained of a large abscess, and there was no reason to open further;
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri,	but the doctor due to his zeal opened as much as the abscess allowed,
et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	and did not remove much material, and became a fistula, and a great deal of pus was released that all flowed with the body's moisture;
et maint mire i mirent cure entor .ij. ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains,	and many doctors spent two years treating him, and there was no wise one in the art of hands,
tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit,	While I was called to him, and there came his leg and the remedies we thought would cure him,
et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	and what ran through the veins with great force;
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	and his face turned red like a child's cheek, and it had a yellowish color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus,	I set up my tent in one of these veins, and then searched all the veins,
et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	And I found that one was coming against the other from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os,	So I hurriedly acted, and made a cut on one of the protrusions until I uncovered part of the bone,
et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	and I found it corrupted and perforated; and the corruption was reaching into the bone;
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	I saw what appeared from the corrupted bone, and I thought that there was no other corruption, only this one that I had taken;
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	And began to restore the wound using long-term medicine treatments, and was unable to heal;
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant,	and then restarted, discovering the bone just as before,
et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	I found that the decay had continued in the bone, and I saw it, and then I took out the bone, and I tried to heal the wound;
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole,	but I was unable to do so as long as I copied just one palm of the bone, and I made it go to all its extent,
puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment,	Then he will recover with medicine; and it healed quickly.
et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir,	and there was no need to start the operation again except for the weakness due to the patient's illness, who could not endure it.
et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	and out of fear of death that I had over him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement,	But because of the blood evacuation was frequent, yet he healed completely,
et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	And from within the body of the bone comes forth a tough flesh, and it is well arranged and has no harm or opposite effect at all in any part, neither near nor distant.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	And if the bone breaks anywhere in the body, it should be treated in this manner:
pren .i. liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert,	Take one ligament and stretch it to the tip of the broken bone,
et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	and command him not to stretch it upwards;
et met .i. autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os,	And put another piece of wool cord larger than the first one, and tie it above the flesh that is around the bone,
et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz,	And extend the head, so that you can pull out the decayed flesh from below.
et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	And uncover the tissue at its place where you see silk, making sure the silk does not hurt the tissue;
et met .i. tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	And put a piece of charcoal or a board under the bone to warm up and cover the decayed flesh;
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And it is necessary to know as much as one can see and feel the decay, and know again otherwise.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie,	And if the bone has decayed, and doesn't open, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part of it,
si descuevre la char toute; puis met .i. tison desoz,	then uncover the entire flesh; then place one ember over it.
et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption .i. poc, si com nos avons dit;	and then apply the healing to each part of the corruption, and make sure the hot iron is long enough to cover the length of the corruption, as we have said;
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	And if corruption is at the joint, then fix the corrupted joint, and let bone on the other side contain it;
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des .ij. jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	And if corruption is along the continuity of the two joints, then cope it if there's no other way to do so;
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose,	And if corruption is at the base of the hand or foot, or in that place near the foot, if it's particularly strong that thing,
mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	but still it must be that you inquire about this corrosion, how it has affected you;
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	And clean it in all ways you can, but not if it harms your vein or nerve.
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous,	And know that the saw and chisel are numerous, according to the setting of bones and their appearance,
et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	and their size and their fineness, and their grandness and their smallness, and their hardness;
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	and for that reason it must be equipped with each kind of tool suited to the work of its craft;
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art,	And know that this work will show you the instrument which you will need, according to knowledge of this art.
et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	and it will bear witness to the methods of illnesses;
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	so that you can consider the instrument you need according to what is fitting.
dou feu	with fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	The joints hurt either from within, or from outside;
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie,	And when you have treated that corrosion by the application of medicines, and if they do not benefit at all,
si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient,	So it is necessary to cover that limb up to the joint where the corrosion occurs,
si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	so that the disease does not escape through death, or through malice, which is greater, from the fault of the limb;
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu,	And these are its signs; if the limb becomes black, as though it has been burnt by fire,
et porrist aprés la noiror, puis va celle corrosions de membre em membre,	and after the blackness comes this decay spreading from member to member.
et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper,	it spreads throughout the body; if you hasten with copper,
et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans,	and if it's due to the impact of certain venomous beasts, such as sea spiders and snakes, etc.
se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	If the corrosion is at the head of the two, then treat it, and do not give it space to come up until the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	And if it comes up to the hand, if you treat at the joint, so that the corrosion does not extend up to the arm;
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors,	And if it goes up to the arm, if you treat with a knife; and if it passes the knife, then it's death.
et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	It is not for remedies beyond that of its virtue;
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	And similarly do so when the corrosion comes or piece: if it comes in the first joint, then treat after another joint;
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	And if it comes or piece, then treat the entire piece;
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	And if it ascends to the leg, then treat at the knee joint.
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	And if it comes above the knee, if there is nothing else than for the patient to die;
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz,	And the method for covering or sewing a limb is such that you tie it above and below,
et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont,	and stretch one finger with one of the threads down, and another finger with the other thread up,
et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les .ij. liiens a .i. spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	and you open the flesh that is between the two threads to one inch wide, until the bone is exposed;
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part .i. drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain,	then you sew or use silk, and place one inch strips of linen from each side, so that the thread does not touch the healthy limb,
et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	And to the patient brings another injury and abscess to the feet.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment,	And when blood flow starts as you work, if you quickly cauterize the wound,
ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie,	or you put on some restraining powders; then return to your remedies until the treatment is complete,
puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then bind the injured limb with a reliable bandage and treat it until it heals properly;
et je te conterai k’il avint a .i. home en som piet:	And I will tell you about what happened at one house during my time.
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu,	It had a blackness that seemed like the certainty of fire,
et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	And that corrosion came first to his two feet, until it consumed all of his foot.
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	And when the patient saw the corrosion, they immediately sought to cover their feet, and were saved.
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi,	And long after this happened, I experienced a burning sensation in my hand, and it came to me.
et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	And I began applying counteracting treatments after the purification of the body, yet could not stop the corrosion;
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	and he wanted me to apply my hand to it, but I refused, hoping for a reaction from the substance;
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist,	I also feared that if I cut off his hand, he would die.
car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre,	For the strength of his spirit was weak; and he became despondent everywhere, and returned to his homeland.
et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	and he raised his hands in desperation, and became sane (possibly meaning he came to a state of clarity or sanity).
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	and I have only shared this so that one might perform another part if needed.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	No abscess ever comes in the inner flesh, and stays for such a long time as to cause a great gathering of pus;
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	And then cut and stab, and have the arrow jump out, and remain with the man's eyes, just like some vessels;
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com .i. drapelz deliiez,	And the leather that is above is also as thin as one eighth of a cloth thread.
et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain»,	And they do not reach up to the bone or nerve, and such diseases are called "blind".
et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	And it is not called a "fistula";
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	But if it's so extended that it comes up to the bone exactly, then it is called "fistula";
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	And in the cooking process, if you peel that skin all over, and similarly when it's delicate, like a piece of fabric;
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	and doesn't swell because of its putrefaction.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont,	And if you have made the skin burn and the corruption hasn't reached exactly,
et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	And the skin is thick with flesh, if he treats a catarrh like this:
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor,	Look if his breasts are large, and his belly that contains them has a bad smell,
adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	Then administer an Egyptian cathartic medicine like this:
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en .i. vassel au feu,	Take ash, oil, and litharge, in equal amounts, and cook them together in a single pot on the fire,
tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	While the medicine remains red, and thickens as much as honey;
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel,	And then take of this according to your need, and prepare it in water and honey,
et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	and apply it inside the stomach, and keep the body constrained;
et laisse la medicine ens par .ij. houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	let the medicine remain for 2 hours, then extract it by rubbing;
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	Perform this action multiple times, until the breasts are freed and the milk is released;
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres,	and not once should you use water from ashes,
quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus,	when this medicine is unavailable, and if you use vine wood ash water instead,
puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	then apply it internally, until you know that the breasts have been fully freed;
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres,	And if the patient cannot bear it, neither the Egyptian medicine nor the ash water can help.
si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	if he uses a syringe of water and honey or has a little beryl mixed in;
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver,	or you use a syringe of honey and wine that the honey has properties to cleanse and wash,
et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	and the wine makes it hot inside;
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez,	And when you have done this, and ensured that the chest is well cleaned,
si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li,	if you heat the tool used to cause something to come out in a person's chest,
et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	and when you apply plaster of Paris to it and treat it with oil and wine;
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	or you heat it with some medicines and applications, about which I have discussed the properties or treated of applications;
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer,	And if his chest muscles are small, and his throat cannot enter near the bladder,
si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein,	If the opening of metal (presumably a surgical instrument) is slightly widened, and then an Egyptian ointment tent is inserted,
ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	If it is made wider like the basilicon ointment, as long as it is widened;
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement .i. leu ou li clistere puisse entrer,	And if the wound is too wide, so that only up to half its length or until the bladder can enter,
et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if the point of the arrow is above where it was inserted, then lift it up or down more than it was originally.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	For when the arrow is straight, let there be no further infection;
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues,	and if you cannot cover the chest sufficiently as you see,
si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est,	so arrange it in such a way that the arrow goes to the lowest point as originally.
car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char	For when the bow is perfect, so do not let it become over-stretched.
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues,	and if you cannot cover the breast sufficiently as you see,
si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	so arrange it in such a manner: that the bow moves smoothly downwards, and do not leave anything of the bow hanging;
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sein,	and take consolidative medicines to place under the breast,
et estent sus .i. drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sein;	And they are on two linen cloths that cover the entire breast;
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein .i. poc plus large dou premier,	and then place them at points near the ends of the breast, about a palm's width from the first one,
pues estent oignement souef sus .i. autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus,	then apply some sulfur ointment on another linen cloth according to the size of the area.
et le met sus le pertus dou sein por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	and place it on the breast to alleviate pain, and do not remove the large linen cloth except after several days once.
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe,	And he who is in front of the chest cavity, often removes the bone to remove the organ,
et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	Know this about what comes from the organ, whether it's venom or a bit or enough, or digested, or undigested;
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non,	and take care if the patient feels pain or not, and whether there is an abscess or not,
et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sein,	And when your medicine has spread in this way and you see the character that jumps towards the front of the chest,
si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	If you know that the sickness has already taken root, and approach the health;
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie,	and then release it in the morning, or on the third day, and when you release the wound,
si chainge .i. autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	if you change another bandage, and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if after many days the stomach discharges an undigested substance, know that the sickness is not cured.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit,	And if venomous bites occur after a long period, do not lose hope for recovery of health,
car li santez aproche. Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	But health approaches. For there are people who delay healing of the heart in their wounds, and others do the opposite;
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	And if you experience indigestion for several days after taking a potion from the chest, know that the chest does not agree with you;
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut,	And if the chest takes longer to open or is far away, adjust your remedies by mixing dry and moist substances according to their qualities;
si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	As in transparent softening, because there is a large part of vitriol, and this is the last medicine;
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	Take the ointment diafinit, and apply it with rose oil, and moisten it with old wine of equal strength;
puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez,	then cook it and use it; and do the same thing for cooked honey that has thickened;
quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens,	when the diafinit ointment is not present,
ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	Take myrrh and aloes and incense,
et puis en glue .i. drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe,	Then add it to gum arabic or leather,
et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	and the roots of celestial lily, which is also like cornflour and fennel;
et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	and whether you use simple remedies or compounds: grind them, make into powder, and place it on the honey that I've mentioned, and use it;
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure,	And if the treatment lasts long, and is not treated with this cure,
adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	Therefore know that corruption enters from the front, and makes impression in the bone, or on hard limbs, or on joints;
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	If the treatment of the wound (fistula), as we have said earlier.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the abscess under the nail
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main,	Pus is an abscess that forms under the skin of the hand's palm.
ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	or on the foot, or by chance forms in other parts;
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient .i. aposteme chaus,	and when it has aged, and if no care is taken, it leads to an ankle abscess,
et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	and run and spread as far as the root of the nail, and by chance, it can spread completely;
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	And it comes to corrosion up to the bone, as long as there is painful stench coming out, and the joint pains in both large areas, and shows a fugitive color.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie,	And when you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not benefit at all,
si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle,	Then you must proceed to the second stage: scrape off all the excess that remains of the nail,
puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	Then, after cleansing the wound, apply a cautery to it.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	The cautery tools are very helpful if the bone is healthy, and the joint is sound;
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece,	and when the joint tightens around the muscle, begins to prick it, and irritates it;
si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char,	so you should place the hot tool near the joint so that the heat touches the muscle.
et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement,	and place the candle at the top, gently applying heat to this delicate muscle tissue,
et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	And place on the area to heal from the wound medicaments that are hot and corrosive to remove all;
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cure with ointments until it is healed.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	And if the corrosion is in the bone, cut and treat with force, for as long as the bone is corrupted, it cannot be healed;
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en .i. des nous si com il est devant dit,	And if you see that the thigh bone has decayed, cut and treat it with one or two pieces as was said before,
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	And he heals as long as they are clean;
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	and if it is infected, and swollen, and it causes great pain, then you should first heal it.
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus,	then cut the nail near its root diagonally from above,
et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	and be careful not to cut too deep until you reach the flesh beneath the nail, for it would cause too much pain;
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	And if this happens, place something above what soothes.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the painful throb of the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus,	You must adjust what is born in the hands of some men by chance and are very muscular,
et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle,	and sometimes it has bone or it doesn't have any nail at all,
et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	And none of them are born at the root of the joint, or the birth is in no way due to anything necessary.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet,	Whoever is born from any point other than its true origin will not move,
et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	And he who is born at the true origin of the joint may indeed move;
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	The size of that which is well-muscled is so light, in such a manner:
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	Cut it at its root with a broad spatula.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	The bone that starts at the root of the joint is problematic to cure: hold onto it gently with your fingers.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os,	In the case that arises or should be at the back end, it is necessary for you to prepare the soft tissue up to the bone first.
puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then, cut the bone with a suitable tool, then treat it until it is clean.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The joints that come together are born or they are suddenly wounded by injury, or by the application of fire, or through similar actions.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	If it is necessary that you treat this wound, so that it may be repaired according to its natural forms;
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	Then place between two wet cloths or rags in oil with rose water, so they do not stick together.
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	or you should place between two thin pieces of lead, until their ends are joined, as it should be.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	When we are fusing any of its digits with the palm, if you fuse that seam as it should be.
Des vils	Of low origin
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	Their veins are thick, wavy vessels filled with superfluous melancholic substances, which affect many body parts.
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	And more often occurs in legs of those who walk on foot and work and carry things, compared to others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	It is necessary then for you to administer once a purge of gallstone, and then heal it by basilisk.
Li cure de fer si est selonc .ij. manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	The treatment with iron is according to two methods: one way is that you prick them and draw out the black blood;
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	And the other method is that you open the vein and drain it completely.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez,	The bathing process is as follows: immerse the first leg in very hot water for a long time until the large vein becomes thin.
puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	Then hold the leg against the disease, from above the knee until under the groin;
puis cope la voinne en .i. leu, ou en .ij. ou en .iij., d’une taille large,	Then cut the vein into one part, or two parts, or three parts, with a width that is substantial,
puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	Then lift and lead the black blood to your hand from one end to the other, as long as enough blood can flow out as much as the disease's virtues can endure;
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	And then place it (the treated part), and instruct that it be rubbed with meat juices to stain this blackness.
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	And start evacuating and cleaning when the veins are full, and harm the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil,	The method of treatment for this is as follows: raise the leg near the patient, if there's hair on it,
puis le met ou bain, et li. arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	Then immerse it in water, and raise the leg in hot water until it turns red, and the veins will swell;
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	And if you don't have water, heat it on fire, and then apply it along the vein from its long part at the leg above the knee, or in the ankle area;
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	Then open the skin with an awl, and burn the vein from each side, until you notice it when you touch it;
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	and it appears red and black, and when it enters or seems like a white string under the skin;
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier,	then pull out the thread until it is raised above the skin, and then pull it with the awl gently,
puis le cope en .i. autre leu ensus iij. dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere,	then apply another layer one third above three inches; then burn the skin near the vein until you notice it;
puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	Then lift the bony prominence, just as you did before, and move to another hook, just as you did initially.
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet,	Next choose a different size; or more if needed, then lift it and adjust to the second joint of the foot.
puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	Then guide and lift until you reach the second size; then stretch gradually from one size to the next, as long as it can fully release, then adjust.
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil fort double,	And if you cannot guide and lift it, insert an awl through all one thick doubled thread,
et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz .i. rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	And the practitioner and their assistant prepare for action, and they thrust out a span away, and turn your hand from one side to another, until there's progress;
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	And ensure it doesn't stick, for if it sticks, then one can neither drain nor raise her, which causes harm to the patient;
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have drained it completely, place wet wool in wine and rose oil over the wound area; and treat until it is clean.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit,	And if his body is twisted and tangled together as a whole, and he is not laid straight, just as we have said,
si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary for you to cut it forcefully, but do not cover it; treat it as we have previously described.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	The shape of the iron tool used for drilling has a curved edge, and does not cut, to avoid piercing the vein;
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	And it has a large curve, for if it were slender, it would pierce the vein, but being thick as we have said, this is its form:
De la voinne civile	From the common vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	This vein is found on legs, in warm areas where no herbs or trees grow, and in soil without moisture;
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir,	and may sometimes appear elsewhere than on legs, and this happens due to rot that comes from beneath the skin,
si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	in the same way that it emerges within the body as worms and snakes, penetrating between skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation,	And if there are signs of the beginning of this vein such as a severe inflammation in the leg,
puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	Then it changes the limbs, and begins for blood to start flowing out, like a root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a .ij. З., et la noe,	When the shoulder is separated, it's necessary to wrap around an object of one and a half spans up to two spans in the middle, and tie it.
et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	and let the leather hang down on the leg, and every time it runs out at the front, you should wrap around the remaining leather and tie it.
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	and if it's too long, cut off a part of it and wrap the remaining leather back on itself, and don't cut its root until all of it has been used.
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	Because if you handle it, it enters into the flesh, and brings about pus and decay or infection at the site, and causes a harmful disease;
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	By that thing it must be treated gradually step by step until completion, and nothing should linger or continue afterwards.
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de .v. paumes de lonc, ou de .x.,	And in no case when this vein is treated to the length of one handspan, or even to ten times that length.
et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de .x. paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute .i. rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons,	And one man came to me who had it treated over ten handspans in length, and when you handle it, if it takes up a breadth of one or two fingers or is thinner than that, then pierce it until the bottom.
si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	And let everything come out; and make the material inside empty, and apply to it healing remedies for a day or two, then treat it as with abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet,	And once at this vein apply your hands, and equally when it opens in the joint of the foot, or if the foot,
et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	and much is lost, and which goes away quickly; then treat accordingly as we have instructed previously.
Des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	Worms that are born between the skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués,	This disease is called in our land "Bovine Illness", because it often affects the cows,
et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant,	and a small worm is born between the skin and flesh, and travels throughout the body going up and down,
et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	and it can be felt all over the body when you touch limb by limb, until it reaches the skin where it went, and jumps forth;
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	And is infected with pus from certain fluids, if snakes and worms and roundworms or pinworms come near the abdomen;
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil,	And there is doubt about its illness, for when it travels through the body, and ascends to the head, and comes to the eye,
par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	By chance it enters, and destroys the eye; this happens many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	When you see it being treated and drained, one can only wonder as to when it will end:
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement,	So then, it is necessary for you to tie the arm above and below with a strong bandage very tightly,
puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves,	Then cut upwards and pull forcefully, and if it is correctly aligned in the flesh, you won't find it,
si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	If you apply fire cautery there, until it heals;
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	And the greater discomforts that it causes, are when it goes to the eye, as we have said.
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	And if you see it approaching or its head near the eye, hold steady over it with both hands, then lift up, and apply force.
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries,	It is necessary to use the application of purgative remedies for ailments caused by humoral disorders,
et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	And if there is corruption in meat due to rot.
De la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	Of pain that comes from windiness.
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres,	This illness is called "vakirir" in our land, and it's a pain that comes to any limbs,
et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	and spreads from member to member; and I have seen what I told you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	I was summoned to help a sick woman, and she showed me her arm, where I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm;
et .i. poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule,	and about an inch later, it rose up as high as a worm on its shoulder,
plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	Sooner than any other thing, just like quicksilver when it is cut off from another;
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule,	The pain leaves the affected area and enters the shoulder,
et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	And then a little later spread throughout the entire body, until it reached the other arm;
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	Then I noticed that it was spreading within the body as well, just like when I observed it.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I was marveling greatly how she moved from member to member in such a way, for I had never witnessed this disease in such manner before.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre,	Nevertheless, I have seen many times that well often moved pain from one limb to another,
mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	but I had never experienced it myself, as I see in the case of a woman;
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes,	and I thought that was because women have a wet body and their veins are exposed,
et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	And through this appears that constrained wind;
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	and do not become evident according to this reason in those who are delicious, and have moist bodies and responsive veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit,	And when you see the treatment of this disease, and if the patients feel pain, if it appears to you in the way we have said,
si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	if the wound opens up and down quickly, and then stops until that constrained wind at the body comes out;
et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz,	And apply the cautery to the area; and if you cannot see it at your eyes,
si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	if the treatment for those who dislocate the windpipe, such as stinking pills and pills of sarapin, and similar others.
Des saiettes	From arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	The arrows are diverse, according to their appearance and the location of their impact on the body.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	The variety is such that there are those with large points, and small ones, and spiny, and soldered;
et de celles qui ont .ij. angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	and those with two angles, and those with tongues, and those where there are fragments;
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc .ij. manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit,	and the one that urinates in no member but does so according to two ways: or in the main member, it streams,
si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	or like the brain, heart, liver, kidneys, lungs, intestines, bladder, and similar organs.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	When it happens then, indeed, at no place of these limbs, and the sign of death, which I will tell you later, becomes apparent:
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	it must be that you are cautious about the extraction of this arrow, for death comes afterwards in various conditions;
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	and when that bad sign does not appear and the arrow has not fully exited, then remove it, and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil,	And the sign of the brain when the arrow penetrates through bone and strikes the fluid reservoir above the brain,
est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	When there is a surgical incision and tension and swelling around it, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and convulsions and confusion in understanding, and vomiting of bile;
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	and sometimes affects the nose or ears; and sometimes impairs speech and voice.
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	and there is moisture around the wound that appears white like pus, and it also seems burned like charcoal.
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	And if this sign is seen, hold on to the treatment, and pull out the arrow if it's still there.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	The sign of the arrow when it exits or pierces through the heart is that it's close to the left breast, and also feels as if it has been stuck into something hard, not empty.
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	And by chance the arrow also moves like a pulse, and there is black blood, and coldness comes with cold sweat, and fainting:
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	Therefore, without doubt, know that death approaches.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of an arrow that never pierces is that bubbles do not jump out of the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient's face changes color, and they sigh loudly with coldness.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrow stops in the thigh's covering, it pierces the small bones; and causes great pain and severe suffering and sighing; and moves all limbs from the shoulders.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrow stops in or near the stomach, by chance it jumps out of the wound with any undigested meat.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrow stops in or near the stomach or abdomen, and it jumps out without any meat passing through the intestine, there is no hope for treatment, nor for extracting the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if the arrow stops in the bladder, and the urine jumps out, causing severe pain for the patient: you should know that this wound is fatal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other limbs, such as the arms and the neck and the throat and the shoulder blade and the auxiliary (shoulder) bone and the spine in the back and the ribcage and the hip bones and the legs, and resembling limbs, are protected according to many arrangements.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in the nerve or artery, and it's not venomous, as I will tell you what happened to me, because when you do something else.
Il avint a .i. home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	It happened at one hour that an arrow hit him on the breast near the root of the nose:
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	I tried it and conducted it from there through the fat of the ear, and was without serious harm.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz,	And try to pull an arrow out of a game where it has fallen into the oil grease underneath the paper underneath,
et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust,	and the arrow had been returned, yet one could only reach its tip towards the shaft,
et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout .i. fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	and the arrow was large as a Turkish bow, having a weight of only one feather without any bells; the game was healthy, and it did not come to any bad accidents.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	And try pulling an arrow from the neck of a Christian, and the arrow was Arabian with bells:
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	Cutting the beard, and trimming it as I moved along, left the Christians clean.
Et traï une saiette a .i. home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	And extracted an arrow for about one inch, where it was in the back or belly, and I thought it would kill him;
et puis qu’il ot passez .xxx. jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	And then after he had passed thirty days, if his position did not change;
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	I cut into the arrow, and set it up, and pulled it out forcefully, and there was no bad incident.
Et si vis .i. home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	And if you see one arrow that falls or hits, and there is a wound stitched together;
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez,	and lets the arrow remain inside, without changing its natural position,
ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	nor does it find harm in any of its natural works.
Et vis .i. autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	And observe another person who was hit by an arrow on their face and the wound has been stitched shut;
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And thus he stays suffering great pain; and no other similar phenomena.
Et traï une saiette a .i. home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz,	And took an arrow from one hundred to the king's bodyguards that was embedded in his left side,
et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue	and was leaning slightly towards the right side; and the arrow was fully inserted.
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue .iij. jors. Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I was called to treat the wound after it had been embedded for three days. I found the wound very tight.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	I pursued her all with subtle attempts, and did not feel her;
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	and he would feel a burn and pain around his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette	I thought it was the tip of the arrow causing this.
Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	I put on a plaster that helps in healing and digestion for the sake of the ear not swelling;
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	And I saw the head of the arrow.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens,	I applied the healing ointment for days, and quickly resolved the wound, and so I let the afflicted person rest long enough.
tant qu’il sentit la saiette .i. jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	Until he felt the arrow within his nose; and he told me that.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte,	I applied corrosive aqua regia medicine to the wound for days until it was opened up,
et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	And I tried, and felt the tip of the arrow which was penetrating at its base;
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	then I adjusted during the opening of the wound through that medicinal agent, until the head of the arrow appeared visibly to me;
et trespassa bien li termines entor .iiij. mois,	and pierced deeply into the inner parts for three months,
et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	then I eased it out so that I could grip the tip with my forceps, and pulled from both sides, but couldn't remove it;
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris .i. jor as tenailles bien faites,	Therefore never stop refining and designing ways to construct instruments, until I had one day made good pliers,
selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	Following this manner towards the end of this chapter, as long as I continue to do so and restore the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	And those who judge believe that the cartilage under the nose cannot be restored:
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	I would then heal it, and the wound was joined, and the patient's health was completely restored.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes,	You have been told about the quality of extracting certain arrows,
si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	so that you apply your method to what I do not say, for books cannot take in everything;
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant,	but listen to my master brothers on a few important matters, and those that are current and lacking,
trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	prove nine works, and the ninth instrument, for the expulsion of foreign things that happen in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc .ij. manieres:	I say that arrows do not come from any part of the body where they are stuck, according to two ways:
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	or by their head where they enter, or by another part;
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	And the one that jumps out or enters at its head is an arrow entering the body's flesh, and it jumps out only once now.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	And if it doesn't jump out now, let her stay until the body is cooked internally, and wait for its release;
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	And even if it's embedded in the bone, and it cannot come out, if you leave it like this for several days, and remove a little each day;
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout .i. foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And then it breaks out, and if it does not break out, if you pierce through with a thin needle all the way until the bone is broadened, and then remove it.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil,	And if the arrow is embedded in the head bone, and goes up to one of the brain chambers,
et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors,	and none of the accidents that I have described appear to the patient: if you do not remove it, but let it remain until it becomes equal after a few days,
car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	For if the arrow reaches up to the heart, then it is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac,	And if the arrow only pierces into the bone and does not reach up to the heart,
et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	and the patient experiences no bad accidents for several days, if the wound is properly treated.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it's firmly stuck in that way and cannot come out by itself, then you should apply arrows internally, as I have told you; then treat the wound until it heals properly.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	And if the arrow is returned to its place within the body so that it cannot be seen, then one should seek for it with all their might.
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	And if you feel it, then try to guide it with any suitable tool;
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette,	and if you cannot find it due to the constriction of the wound, and because of the depth of the arrow,
et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	and there is no bone, nerve or vein, so you make it as large as possible;
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient,	and try to pull out the arrow if you can, and if there are ears attached to where it is lodged,
si oste la char qui est ens fichie de .ij. pars au mues que tu pues,	if the bone sticks out from two parts at its tip that you can push,
et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	and then break or bend the ears of the arrow as much as you can pull it out;
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	do so carefully to ensure that you do not break the arrow and make its removal more painful.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot do it in one attempt, until the shoulder is properly aligned within its socket, then move it. For the extraction process is made easy.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	And if the blood flow is against what it should be, then follow what we have said about treatment in our chapter;
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril,	and guard against the incision near the nerve and vein, and use skill to pull out arrows without risk,
ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens,	either quickly or gently, either firmly or moderately; and place the patient according to their form when they were hit by the arrow,
car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	for this is the greatest help that it can be, and if you cannot do so, then lay him according to what the sign shows you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	The arrow that comes from another direction, or if there is no sign of it in the body, or if the skin is swollen at a place where you can see or feel it obviously:
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	Thus raise up high, as long as the tongs can seize, and then grasp: if it jumps now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it's held in the bone, twist your hand round as long as it enters into the bone, and widen the bone, then pull.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	And if it can't come out, leave it still, and then start the extraction again until it comes out;
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	and if it's from the arrowhead that is stuck in him, push it all along the shaft;
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre .i. estrument cheveit,	And if it is closed, and you see the administration of a hot application, then administer one tool heated,
si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer,	and when the tip of the arrow enters the hair of the tool; and then apply force,
et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute .i. estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	and if the arrow is hooked [in], then I use one pointed tool to enter in [the wound], for easing the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues,	And if the arrow is embedded, it is necessary that you remove all the flesh around or where the wound enters, if you can.
puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	Then treat the wound as appropriate.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	And if an arrow enters or pierces the chest or abdomen or bladder or rib area, and it is close to vital organs, you should cover it immediately, assuming one can do so.
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	and beware not to cover the vein and the nerve, then extract it, and afterwards suture the wound; this is a task that requires skill.
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And treat the wound until it heals.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the pincers used for extracting arrows resemble an eagle's beak, and here is how it looks:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And they come in various sizes: large, medium, and small, depending on the size of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel,	The shape of the arrow's tip is also like a bird's feather,
por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	so that it can pierce at the tip of the arrow, as shown by this shape:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The shape of the pliers to use for pressing and extracting is like this:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of veins similar to those common ones
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont .xxxi., de coi il a ou chef xvi.,	The veins from which we cleanse are thirty-one, of which there is a head of sixteen.
c’est a savoir: .ij. batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	This means to say: two small ones that come after the ears, which are called 'the sweet herbs';
et les .ij. arteres qui sont en .ij. temples apparans;	And the two arteries which are in the two temples visible;
et .ij. voines que sont en .ij. larmiers des .ij. eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	and two veins that are in the two eyelids of the two eyes, which are called 'whisks';
et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	and the vein that is within the forehead; and the vein that is on the head below the nose;
et les .ij. guindeges qui sont ou col;	and the two jugulars which are in the neck;
et les .ij. voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	And the two veins that are above the mouth on the lips, and these veins are called "augeherich".
et .ij. voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	And the two veins that are along the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont .v. en chescun bras:	The veins we usually treat are five in each arm:
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	One is the cephalic vein, and it runs along the left rib, and they call it "the head vein";
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique,	And the main is called "blench", and composed of the cephalic and the basilica,
et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit,	And they call them the lay people "vein near the heart"; and the basilica is either on the left side or on the right side.
et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile,	And they call them the lay people "vein near the belly", and it's above the flanks.
et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	And this is the one that heals, which opens clearly over the abdomen.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a .ij. rains;	And the veins are the ones between the thump and ring finger, and if you have two of them;
et en la jambe et ou piet sont .iij. voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit,	And in the leg and at the ankle there are three veins: one is below the bend of the pocket on the left side of the body,
et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	And the second is deep one which is on the anklebone on the right side of the body; and the vein that is called "the knee", it is in the anklebone on the other side.
et en l’autre jambe sont .iij. voinnes desoz celles.	And in the other leg are three veins beneath those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	The care for veins located behind the ears is something the ancient cathartics helped with, and also for migraines;
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide,	And the qualities of a surgeon, as I've told you, and that you release the head of the patient,
et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis,	And rub the neck where the veins are with a rough cloth; then pinch the neck's opening tightly with your fingers.
tant que les .ij. voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en .ij. leus dependens dou chief:	Until you can see both two veins protruding behind the ears in two loops dependent from the head:
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	Guide them to your side, and where you feel the pulse on your side, if you know how to listen;
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont,	then take the scalpel, and press it along the vein towards the bone, then lift your hand all up to the vein upstream;
et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien .ij. dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	and cut and remove the skin and the vein well two inches through, and let blood flow out until you see it;
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	then tighten and hold [the wound] tight, until it heals;
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	And I have already spoken of incision and cauterization, or first book.
Li sainie des .ij. arteres que sont en .ij. temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene,	The health of the two arteries that are in the two temples, if it is akin to ancient inflammation,
et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	and also, and habitual eye pain, and in the body of the weeping fever's eyes;
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	And the quality of the surgeon is such as I say:
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les .ij. voinnes aperent apertement;	And it is because the patient pulls their neck, until the two veins appear clearly;
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	and feels the hair under your hand, and then declares they've found something;
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz,	then lifts the skin over the vein at the top of your hand near your index finger, and holds the scalpel there;
et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en .ij. autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	then lifts the vein at the top, and cut it, just like you did with other veins, and do whatever is necessary according to the amount of blood needed;
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	Then release the patient, place your finger on the vein for an hour, then place it on cotton;
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	and then have the veins healed and leave them until they are cured; and we have spoken about this and their extraction, or where to begin with the book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	The treatment for the veins of the forehead is just as valuable as that for the occipital veins in treating ancient diseases of the face, and migraines, and redness;
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	And its quality is such that the patient tightens his throat by twisting it, until the vein appears;
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	Then take the tool which is called "cautere", as described below:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	And place the tip on the vein, and apply force with your hand or something else, and allow a small amount of blood to flow according to the quantity you see;
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	Then relieve the patient of their collar, and tie the vein until it is tight and healthy, ensuring there are no slippage or wide openings.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	For any vein, it is not proper for the flames to be too close or large; and the healthy tissue should run across rather than down, because the bone is near, and by chance the flames could break when they are delicate.
Li sainie des .ij. voines que sont en .ij. larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	The healing of the two veins that are in the nostrils serves the eyes, and the nose, and the reddening, and at the ear inside the eye, and diseases of the face;
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	And the quality of their healing is that the patient twists their neck by tightening a certain ligament, as before;
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	Then heal it, and let the healing pass through, a bit long like the flame, a little wide, for there is no flesh.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flame is thin, perchance it breaks; then make it correspond to blood flow, as much as you need, and then bind with cotton, and bind it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice,	The treatment of a neck injury near the nose involves an incision, and is separate from surgery, and also deals with diseases of the face,
si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	If it's like migraines or reddening that comes to the face, and similarly when she becomes old;
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre,	And the quality of this treatment is such that the patient narrows their throat, then presses their nose to your left hand,
et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les .ij. narines,	And take the slender flame long, and insert it into the lip at the space which is between the two nostrils,
car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	For the vein does not open properly and the wound is now beginning to heal;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	and does not progress too quickly below the wound, and let it bleed gently according to your need, then give her a night, for she is very soon restored;
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	and that is the form of the flame:
Li sainie des .ij. guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	The health of the two kidneys helps with narrowing of the arteries, and the beginning of infectious diseases, and many illnesses, and in congestion, and corrosion, and herpes, and abscesses;
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	And the quality of health is such that the patient restrains his throat on both sides, as we have said;
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus .i. siege,	And may it be that the master stands above the head of the patient, and the patient lies down on his side,
puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	Then let the blood vessel be opened long but a little wide, then drain off the blood gradually, or as much as is necessary;
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement,	Then sew it up in the other vein, then release the tie, and partially restrain the blood vessels.
que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	That the sick person is not strangled; and let them stay until morning, so that the wound heals.
De la sainie des leivres	About the surgery of the liver
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The surgery for veins above affects the mouth and causes gum decay, and cuts in lips, and nosebleeds and inner cheeks.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	And the quality of this surgery is to have the sick person sit in front of you, and restrain their neck as I've explained;
puis torne la levre, et regarde as .ij. voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre,	Then turn the mouth, and look at these two veins, one is on the right lip and the other on the left,
et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	And one knows them by their being black, and by the fact that inside they have small black veins:
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance,	So then handle both of them, and if you do not know them, and you are in doubt,
si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des .ij. voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	If you take the largest of each part, and do exactly the same with the two veins that are above and below, because it's the same method.
De la sainie desoz la lengue	From the cure around the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	The cure around the veins that are below the tongue aids after the treatment of the head, and this is done near the throat, and for diseases of the lymph nodes, and for diseases in the mouth;
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	And the skill of the healer is that when the patient's condition improves in your hands under the sun, and you lift their tongue, and look underneath on each side, there appears a black vein:
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	Then heal both of them, and do not overdo the treatment, because near the arteries they are.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc .ij. manieres:	The veins in the arm that we commonly heal are treated according to two methods:
ou em poignant a tout .i. flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	They are cauterized either by applying one large hot flame, or by using a subtle olive oil if they resemble the veins of a butcher's knife, and these are called 'anise'.
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	And their width and fineness correspond to the width and narrowness of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The shape of the flame is greatly esteemed, and it appears wide as you see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	And one must open the veins filled with large visible blood, and those containing large blood and disturbance;
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	and it is the shape of the olive-flame:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it is more subtle and pointed; for it aids in cleansing the fine veins or has delicate yellow blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	The healing of the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases that affect the throat, and the neck, and the abdomen,
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	And it's fitting for the surgeon to heal carefully, and he should be aware of the artery that is there.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	And if it cuts the artery, and bleeding occurs, then it's fitting to staunch the bleeding; as I have said.
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And it should not be held by the flame, but cut so like a hare.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	And if it is not clearly seen when the basilic vein opens, then you must extract it and change to another one;
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement;	You want no pain from this, or you sever the vein instead of it in the arm: it opens clearly;
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	and cover the wound with a bandage before, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	And if you know how to find the location of the wound, then it is appropriate that you straighten the arm, touching the place until you feel the pulse;
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	Then mark the place of the elbow, and then bind the arm, and cut open with the flame cautery before it.
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	and be careful not to cut into the artery when you see the elbow inflamed, for that is where the artery is: listen out for it then.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	And if you see it protruding up like the urine of a child, and the veins are red and fine, know that these are veins from the artery:
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	So hurry up, place your finger for a long time, then remove your finger when it has stopped bleeding, as this happens many times.
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	Tie the arm down, and leave it like this, and do not move the patient's limbs; place them under fear, and do not move them until they are healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the bleeding is not stopped, and it takes time, and the medicine is unavailable for you, if you must open an artery when it appears, because the head of the wound retreats; stop the bleeding on the wound.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	And take a bark from a willow tree, and cut it, and take one of the halves and bind it tightly until the other side.
se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	If the wound stops bleeding, that's good; if not, then treat it as we have said, with powders that stop the bleeding.
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	And the dressing is not chosen among many preparations because of the small size of the wound and the strength of the arm's joint.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz,	The healing of the vein in its middle is helped by treatment that reduces blood flow from above and below, and
por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	Because it is composed of the basilica and cephalic veins, as we have said;
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf,	And it is important for the surgeon to be cautious when operating on it because there is a nerve beneath, and if he doesn't go far enough down, and he finds the nerve;
et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	And it inflates and health is harmed, and by chance cannot heal;
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	And this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in any places due to its subtlety, then it is necessary for you to have the organ removed before. And listen carefully as you feel with your finger.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is a vein between the two nerves, cut it long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	The treatment of the forehead helps, since it leads blood to the head, and assists with pain;
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	And it is necessary to treat by fire with olive oil or by the fire of myrtle, for this is the safest of all veins because there is neither injury to the nerve nor artery.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	In every case, it's best to seek the lightest touch and not be discouraged if one fails the first time, and then try again;
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	And perhaps some limbs swell in certain individuals even when one tries for the first time, but it causes no harm.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of treatment depends on your thought or consideration.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit,	The first thing you must know about healing, it is that healing should be practiced only to preserve health,
et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	and to avoid future diseases;
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des .iij. voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	and let the healing be done in one of the three veins that are or cut: this means, the cephalic vein, the femoral vein, and the basilic vein;
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	And it is necessary to start fasting when prayers are recited at the beginning of Lent, and in autumn and after meals during winter, when the sign of fullness becomes evident;
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés .ij. houres ou .iij. dou jor.	And it is necessary to fast on the first or third day, after four hours or five days.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	Fasting for the treatment of diseases does not have a specific time limit, but it is done according to need on any day or at any time;
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a .xiiij. ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	And fasting should not be applied to children up until the age of twelve years, nor to a woman pregnant for only a quarter of her pregnancy duration until seven months.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	No one who has surpassed sixty years of age should undergo surgery.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier,	And when anyone wishes to be healed in any way, if it is necessary that they cleanse their intestines with a gentle catheter,
s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	if he has retained some urine, so that the veins do not draw off the unnecessary substances harmful to the principal members;
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	No one should be healed if they are too full of meat, or if they are drunk, even if they have strength, or if they have dropsy;
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	And if the healer intervenes after colic pain, and vomiting, and stomach emptying, and frequent urination in a woman, and labor, staying awake and working hard, and whatever expels the virtue, or through actions of tools or body injuries;
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	Then refine the bodily fluids. If they are abundant, due to meats and beverages and medications, if you have the means;
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc,	Then take a bath, if no obstruction exists, to refine the blood,
et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	and heal from the vein down to the third part of your buttocks, as we have said;
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	And guard yourself that day of work, and pain, and excess, and similar things;
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras .ij. fois ou .iij.,	And tie yourself tightly and joinably, and let the heal be higher than where it is being healed, and rub the arm twice or three times.
puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	Then gently loosen the bandage in the middle, for when it is too tight or not enough, then it cannot heal properly;
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	And then rub your arm with your hands until the veins swell, and you can feel them;
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier,	Then moisten the wick of a small amount of old oil, then place her duty of her left hand on that vein directly above his shoulder a bit or where she wants to ignite.
que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	so that the vein does not burn and break due to being pierced.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit,	Because there are veins that behave like strings when ignited, and some of them are filled with windiness,
si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	meaning that when you place them over the flame, they draw towards the flame and cannot open the vein, resulting in one being among those.
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	And if it opens the vein, then the wound is too narrow, because in these matters the surgeons need to be knowledgeable.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein is opened for the first time, it's good; and if not, it should be tried again slightly near that place or on the skin quickly, when the limbs are not swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse .i. jor ou .ij., et ne liier mie le bras:	And if the limb is swollen and the body fluids are escaping, then it should be left for one or two days, and do not bind the arm:
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	In case there are pus-filled blisters, do not enter or bathe in water; then try to clean again if it suits.
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	And if the artery is small, or the vein slightly more difficult to identify and you doubt that there isn't as much blood leaving as you see, so pierce it directly within that very same artery all the way through.
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And work a little hastily, so that the veins swell up; for this happens often, when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	If you see the vein swelling, do not restart the treatment immediately, and place a little oil on it, for it eases the body of blood, and heals in this area where the oil is.
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	And apply the oil when you are treating each vein treatment, to stop the flow of blood;
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	And this same thing happens with treacle and wax when you place them on the ear; their subtlety is such that they expand if they are too large.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite,	And when it comes to large abscesses that often occur, this happens even if the person has not been able to bleed enough times or if the opening of the vein is small.
si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	If you are in haste, soak an earthen sponge with water and a little warm wine, and keep it on the ear for an hour;
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	It is necessary that you do this after the bleeding from the vein, and if it remains in the ear for several days without any darkening or discoloration, then it does not harm it;
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if you see it, place on any thing of aloes or of myrrh dissolved in the juice of calamus, monster, or alike.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	Many times there would be pus and appearance at the site of the basilica: so then place your hand on it, and if you find the area soft to the pressure of the hand, this is the sign of an ill condition.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Hear then that you should not apply anything of what we have said, for by chance on the artery; but let him wear one damp plaster until it hardens the area, then treat with another treatment, until he is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And direct each person's blood according to the amount of its virtue, and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the sweat is black, let it drain until it turns red; and if you see that it's large, let it continue until it becomes fine; and if it's too hot, allow it to cool.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	And for the one who is full and lacks, needing blood extraction, let him have a larger wound, and make his flames wide;
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	And for the one who is weak, do the opposite, and suit him with carefulness and often, and he should be treated by being cut across, not straight;
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And this way of treatment saves from the spread of blood and nerve entanglement, and it's better than long cuts over wide ones.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc .iij. fois ou .iiij.	And for the one whose body needs healing, it is fitting to give them a potion made from the juice of pomegranates; if they are heated, let them drink three times or four times this potion.
Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And if they have a cold constitution, let them taste before healing a potion made from molasses in syrup, or with aromatic honey syrup that includes spices like pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, along with a very fragrant syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil,	And if they lose strength during healing, after the release of blood, it is fitting for them to inhale a broth of flesh and a subtle-scented syrup,
et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	and use the other things that we have mentioned in the section or chapter about syncope for the evacuation of veins.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wants to breathe in his arm and heal again, should it be necessary, when he is weakened by extensive healing, that he heals little by little, according to the amount of his strength continuously.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And if one wants to breathe deeply in his arm after the first healing, and they have much strength, then they should heal seven hours after the first healing, or after the new hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And if one wants to be healed on another side, it must be healed on the second day or on the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	For there is much blood within the body that has already heated up, and it causes fever; if one needs to drain a large amount, and expand the wound so it heals properly.
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson,	Since you fulfill all the conditions for health, and place your hand on the pulse when it is normal, so that death does not come to him in lieu of good medicine.
et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	And this happens many times, when the healers are negligent;
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	Nor is it right when you see the arm being pulled outwards, and blood coming out a second time, and the wound is closed, that you press hard upon;
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	Nor if it's twisted, to extend the arm immediately, because that would be badly done;
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer,	but let it grow until it heals for the second time; or you touch its tip to the flame's end, until the ice inside that has frozen off the vein melts.
et met sus .i. poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	and place one pinch of ground salt in water and press it gently.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein has swollen, let it be without pressing it, until the abscess is relieved.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if the need is to draw out blood a second time, let it heal at its original location, or in another vein, or on the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein runs along the arm in its place of the neck due to the fact that it is composed there.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	And the method for treatment involves bathing one's hand in hot water, as long as the pulse is red;
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	Then tie it moderately, so that the vein becomes visible, then now cure through it, neither too wide nor too long;
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	and make them as narrow as possible, and cure well near the wrist joint, and if it cannot be released, then immerse your hand in hot water, and let the blood flow in the water, until you have enough;
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	And if it's like this, you mustn't put your hand into hot water to fix it, because putting it in winter is better than in hot weather;
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the healing of this vein is safer from all other veins, for there are neither artery nor nerve.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	The recovery of the preservation of the right hand is worth more than all illnesses concerning the liver, and this is the method:
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	Stretch the hand, and immerse it in hot water, until the vein appears, if you can see it;
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	And if you align it sideways, and if you touch it from all sides equally, then there is no harm;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char,	and do not press too much downwards either, for the nerves are completely bare of flesh,
et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	Then place the hand in warm water, if the limb was frozen in the wound, and it cannot come out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated the blood as much as necessary, place on the vein where it is cut and seal it quickly, and do so with each case.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The treatment for illness in the left hand is akin to that of mice sickness, and do everything as I've instructed you for the right side.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors,	The cure for scrofula applies to all diseases located within the body,
si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	such as diseases of the breasts, and accumulation of pus, and disease of the kidneys, and those affecting the thighs and old legs, and similar illnesses.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere,	And the quality of this cure is that the sick person bathes in hot water, and rubs over the wound until it heals,
et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	And above the joint of the foot; and if the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot it goes into many veins.
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	Then heal that or more widely in the vein, or at the ankle where it bends.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you heal over the foot, watch for the nerves that are nearby, and heal from across in a similar manner to stitching; let the flames cool afterwards.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if it cannot be removed, place the foot in water and allow the vein to drain properly.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	And if it's the first time treating them, if you start again on the second one a bit above, because the legs are salty;
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	Never doubt about nerves, as we have said, and do similarly with the other side in equal manner.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The leg of the sciatic nerve is at the ankle bone on the side (right), and its pain corresponds to the ache in the hip when it's due to hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville .iiij. dois en tordant,	And its quality is such that the patient sweats or feels hot baths, and tightens above the ankle by three fingers when twisting.
car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	For otherwise the vein does not open; and if it opens, you heal it in all possible ways that you can, and even when crossing through;
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And be sure to take care of it, for the lung is intact, and it responds very well to manual treatment.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	And if you fail to find it, heal none of the lungs that open or at its back foot, and towards the small intestines; be cautious about the nerves;
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And make sure the blood flows as you see fit, and then release the tie, and place cotton on it and tighten; now it is healed.
Des sainies de ventouse	Extracting the blood with suction cups
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Suction cups are made of horns, or spiders, or leeches; and blood extraction is done in two ways: by piercing and drawing out blood, or without piercing.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	And this suction cup method that involves piercing is done in two ways: either hot or not using heat;
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en .xiiij. leus dou cors,	Blood extraction through puncturing and blood removal is performed over the course of twelve months in three quarters of a year,;
de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col;	Because one is completely around the head; and the other is inside the neck;
et .ij. autres en .ij. costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	And the other two are in both sides of the neck; and the windpipe under the chin;
et li ventouse des .ij. espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies;	And the windpipe above both shoulders; and the windpipe at the armpits;
et les ventouses emmi les .ij. bras; et les ventouses des .ij. jambes;	And the windpipes inside both arms; and the windpipes in both legs;
et les ventouses des .ij. chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char,	And the suction cups on the two ankles; and suction therapy does not treat blood, for it deals with small veins that are scattered in the flesh,
et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	And because of this, one doesn't weaken oneself, as one does in the practice of bloodletting;
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And it should not be administered, nor at any fire or without fire, in any disease that comes from excess, until all the body is emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	And if by necessity of the diseases suction is needed, or as a habit, if we administer it every hour at the beginning of her period, or at the end, and during and in each interval;
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	for there are some who, when they have the need to perform suction, if they weigh heavily on the head;
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	and for those who find congestion and redness in their face, and on their head, and at the neck, and dimness in their eyes;
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	and those who find a drop of blood in their mouth, and have swollen tongues, and spit out blood;
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	and there are some who think, and see through the blood and confusion and death-like things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and indeed even during the month, we instruct to suck after three hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	The healing of the mouth helps with the infection in the head ... that comes to the eyes, and it should not be after the evacuation of all through the body;
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique,	And this suction is part of the treatment for the condition in the head,
et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	And it should not be used by someone with a cold constitution, or who has an excess of wind, for this causes a great amount of harm.
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	And because of this it is not suitable for him to use them, nor those who have or suffer from cold diseases.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And the one who uses it frequently becomes forgetful; thus, because of this, it is necessary to place the suction cup somewhat further down due to the forgetfulness.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis,	Lung suction is found in the vicinity of the heart and the basilica, because it's useful for narrowing the heel.
et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	And for cutting in the channel of the ventricles, and at once, and to be full;
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	And it is good to hold lightly, because if you hold too firmly, it can cause paralysis or stomach issues and heart problems.
Li ventosations as .ij. costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens,	The ventilation of two ribs under the collarbone relieves pain in the head and eye area, and earache, and toothache, and in stridor, and pain at the roots of the teeth.
et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	And it's in the location of cleaning the basilica; and you should instruct the surgeon to press his hand upon it when he places it there, so that he doesn't compress the artery, and let no bleeding occur.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	Ventilation around the chin relieves diseases of the mouth, and gum decay, and similar illnesses that affect the mouth; it is in the area for cleaning the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The wind movements of the shoulders correspond to illness that comes from heat and filling.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des .iij. voinnes dou bras,	The wind movements of the elbows equal as many as three veins in the arm,
car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	for they draw blood from these large veins;
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	and orders the soldier not to cut too deep, for the muscles are bare of flesh, and it knows next to nothing about nerves and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The suction device on the back is effective against hemorrhoids from the bottom and various diseases nearby. It is necessary for the suction device to be large and made of iron so that it can handle treatment well; if by chance, they were slender, they would break; I cause great injuries doing this work.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The leg suction cups cleanse effectively because they attract blood from the entire body, and are useful against old pains in the kidneys, bladder, and uterus, and help heal ulcers; they are located at the two shins and ankles, and later weaken the body after long use, causing weakness in various conditions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The method of applying the suction cup is as follows: you should place it first in a state of being empty, and apply steady sucking pressure, and position it quickly, moving it evenly, and keep doing this until you see the area turn red and swell up, then stop when you perceive the color of blood; then remove it, and reapply the suction cups, and take care regarding the disposition of the body parts. Indeed, there are some with thick skin and clear pores: for these, it suffices to pierce once, and create wide wounds, with a bit of depth; and suck lightly.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the clot is large, it's necessary to puncture twice: once to delicately clear out the larger blood clot.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the clot is very thick, it's necessary to puncture three times; and when we wish to delicately drain some blood at a time, then we should only puncture once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement,	And if we wish to remove little blood, then do it often; and if the clot is thick, pierce through completely, and make sure that the vein is punctured sharply.
et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	And it's necessary for those with thick and tough skin who have constricted pores that you apply grease to the sites of the suction cups where stimulant and dissolving substances are seen:
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	If it's in health, from which oil, from almond oil, or from the oil of sweet seeds, or from the oil of cucumber seeds;
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if it's in blood, from mustard seed oil, or from lily, or chamomile, or any similar substance.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the excess is thick and cold, take thyme oil, or balsam, or fir tree oil, and similar substances.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile,	And if the one being treated has tender flesh and large pores, it should not have any oil applied to it at all.
mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	But it is necessary to wash after the evacuation of pink water or cold water or water from a rose, or water from a cucumber, or water from a porcelain dish, or any other similar.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And this person who has some moisture, if they use myrtle water or sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	And those who have large excesses disperse them with old wine or water of wormwood or a decoction of nettle or chamomile, or other similar remedies;
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou .ij.; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion,	and it is not suitable to use the suction cup in a bath or during bathing, but after the bath for one hour or two; and do not sleep afterwards.
et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And it is necessary to know when one must suck and when it has been sucked.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	Watch out for this one who is being cured and has a hot temper, and if they are too fiery and inflamed;
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	It's necessary for them to consume cold things, such as apples, endives, and lettuce with broth, and similar items;
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And eat small pieces, and meat of castrated animals, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	And for the one who has a cold constitution, if they wish syrup made from honey, and fragrant half-way wine which is between old and new, and a small portion of stewed meat, and stewed veal and small birds and baby doves;
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	And on the day they start vomiting, they should drink more than eat;
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	And it is necessary to give some people neither treacle nor muscat wine before or after vomiting, in order to strengthen the main limbs;
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And fowl the broth is suitable, but it's not good for those who are feverish.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz,	The suction cups that are used to pierce are those placed on the liver, and on the lungs, and in gout, and on the stomach and intestines and kidneys, for this limb does not endure being pierced by needles,
et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre,	and it is only done for the purpose of drawing blood from limb to limb,
si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus lou ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	if like we place them on the nipples when the nose is bleeding; to remove the viscosity that is in the limb, or like we place suction cups on the stomach and intestines to reduce the size of the limb.
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	And when there is pain due to an obstruction or stone, if it attracts the obstruction by its attractive power, or removes the stone from its place;
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue,	And thus it acts when placed over the heart and lungs where there is a retained wind.
et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede,	And these suction cups are applied empty solely for the extraction of fluid; and they are never used combined with fire, nor filled with warm water.
si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	In diseases like pleurisy, and in such manner one would fill the suction cup with hot water, or with water that has cooked medicinal herbs useful for this.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The shape of the suction cup used for fire is as follows:
Et ait .ij. dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu .i. petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille,	And have two and a half palms in length by width, and has or lacks at its middle one small notch, as to pierce an awl,
et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	and let it be made of iron, so that when it is placed on the body, it does not burn the skin;
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise,	and have in the middle a rod across from iron or aragonite, so as to put a candle holder on it.
et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	And let them be large or small according to the illnesses and age of those who take them;
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	For the suction cups for children are different from those for adults, and those that are skinny compared to those that are fat.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	And one must place this suction cup on the member:
empren la chandoile de cire ou .i. linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse,	Take a wax plug or one line of thread and put it inside the suction cup, then insert the end of the thread through the penis which is inside the suction cup,
si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	If the clarity of the suction cup is at the bottom, so it does not burn the patient;
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	And then place it on the same limb, and you should either at the spot we have mentioned, so when desired, if the vapor goes along with the suction cup, remove the suction cup;
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And apply the lotion in the same way as before, and repeat it often, if you need to.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	In the suction cup that is administered in the disease of pleurisy, there should be neither a ridge nor any part at all, and it is administered only when it is full of water, and placed on the limb merely;
et c’est li forme:	And it's this form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	Without suction cups are used only in limbs where one cannot put suction cups because of their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar parts;
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	and on the naked areas of meat cuts, like a pig's foot or a dog's, and other similar places;
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	And when you find veins that are clear and sweet water without pus, if you take them;
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	and immerse them in sweet water until they are familiarized, and have nothing in their stomachs;
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	and then bleed and apply suction cup medicine until the limb turns red, and place them on the veins.
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	and when they are full and bleeding, if it's possible to place a suction cup, do so, because that is much better afterwards.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	If not, raise the limb with ease, then water, quite well, and then incision;
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille .i. drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	and if the limb is raised too soon after the body of the abscesses, get wet. Take one and a half yards of linen in cold water, and place it on, until the abscesses are hardened;
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	and if there are multiple abscesses, then put on ground glass or garlic and similar items until they harden;
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	or you place half of peeled beans on the limb, and let them dry on the limb until they stop bleeding now;
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	And if you need more expertise, take other instructions.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse,	And if the veins are not to be taken easily, rub with a fresh blood clot or insert an awl until blood starts flowing.
et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	Then place them, and as soon as they feel the flow of blood, they should start working;
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And when you see that they are bleeding, apply a little aloes and ground oatmeal or ash on them; now they should start healing.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	This begins the book of fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and for restoring fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	Know this, dear son, that the leaves of this chapter were scattered from it, so no one saw any of the old books or read a letter.
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	And for this reason, the knowledge has been removed from our land, because I never found anyone good in it;
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	And I know nothing of it, for by the knowledge of old books, or from which I have studied so much that I dealt with this science, and through experience, and through the custom of my life;
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces .ij. chapistres ci devant.	And I have described in this chapter what is contained, and abbreviated it at the end, and clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are used, just as I did in these two previous chapters.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	Therefore, it is necessary that we outline or introduce this book's contents and chapters where the senses apply their understanding, staying true to reality. This way, those who have experienced it will know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	I say that when fracture or dislocation or twists or sprains occur to any part of the body, it is necessary that you quickly treat the patient from one side and then the other, without causing anything else to happen. This includes things like weakness, children, or elderly people;
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	If the place where you're holding is too tight, or too cold; and eating cold foods, that means cold meats, and liver and buckthorn, and do not drink wine, nor eat any fatty meats, and do not overfill on meat which fills veins with blood, until you have doubt about pus formation in an abscess, or leakage of substance from the body part; if the patient begins to feel better after your initial treatment.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary that you nourish the patient with meats that cause abundant nourishment, or have a viscous quality, such as cooked wheat in water, and onions, and chestnuts, and peas, and beef stomachs, and eggs, and fresh fish, and strong wine, among similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For with this nourishment, the injuries are healed more quickly and the breaking [of bones] is overcome.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	And know that bones broken in old and weak people cannot be healed or sutured according to their nature due to the drying of the limbs, nor those also which are too tender, such as children's bones;
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet .i. gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	but do not hesitate, reset the broken bone. With large thorns which pierce and unite the limb together, until it is as strong as before; and do not finish his work too quickly, for this requires nourishment from large meats, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that fractures come in many different ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For a fracture of the head is different from a fracture of the foot or leg, and in this chapter I will tell you all the ways of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there is breaking that would go to war, and another when sharpening, such as the size of a feather for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if with breaking due to injury, and breaking with a small crack in its entirety.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	And each way has its own tool, and its proper instrument for restoration, according to what memory brings to its place;
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	and by this one knows the breakage of the bone through the fact that the limb is twisted, and opens well outward, and is at the pressure of the hand;
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	And when there is no twisting or curvature in its location, and the patient does not feel great pain, if there is no break;
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	but it can well have twisting, or crack, or a small fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	But if you cannot move it by hand, then apply the remedies that follow next, and then gently manipulate it now.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les .ij. parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	And know that when the bone is broken and the two parts are disjoined, now you should put them at an equal point so that abscesses can form on either side.
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	And if pus forms during this period, if he leaves it for any day, until the abscess subsides;
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	Then place it at the same level as you can slightly and gently squeeze, and know that restoring it is easier than when he has pieces; then you restrain him, just as prescribed below.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de .ij. pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a .ij. cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	And if there are pieces in the bone, if it is split into two parts, whether they be hands or feet, or at your hand if it's a small limb, or into two strings, or one string and your hand;
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	And place the limb according to its natural shape, so that when the parts of the member are healed, you tighten all around using whatever means you can, and guard that in your work no injury or pain befalls the patient;
et ajoste bien les .ij. chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And correctly adjust the two shoulder joints according to the best shapes.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And feel well with your hand if it doesn't seem to be perfectly located: if it is dressed beautifully, and not strained too much, without squeezing as those who bring out abscesses by their work do, just like we have wanted many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	And when the limb is in place, carefully restrain the patient so they do not move it, neither while awake nor asleep, neither upon turning, nor in any other manner;
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And see to it that the limb is secured enough so that there is no feeling of pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	For when he feels no pain, if it is not at the exact spot, and it should be placed in such arrangement that he does not feel any pain;
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	and keep him straight, so no twisting occurs when he is restored;
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	and the quality of the limb broken is according to what I am telling you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that limbs broken are various in size and extent, and in shape.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	For there are small limbs such as arms and legs and alike: it is necessary to envelop them with soft and fine linen cloths;
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	And those that are larger, such as the buttocks and calves: it is necessary to envelop them with a broad and firm bandage; for wide bands wrap around the entire large limb, restraining it evenly from all sides, so no bulge remains;
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, .iij. tours ou iiij. selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	Then wrap in light bandages, three times or four times depending on the limb, and press your hand slightly along the entire bandage, then go over the breakage and tighten it less, so that the breakage moves a little away from the wound.
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren .i. autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	And gradually soften the tie a little by little, until you grasp a large portion of the healthy part, then take another tie, and return to its original position on the broken limb;
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	Then return to the broken part and gently tighten it, neither too hard nor too soft, as we have said in our first instruction above;
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus .i. bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	Then place between the linen straps or bandages evenly, until it is completely even, then tie everything above with two belts, and then put your well-made pins on top, if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	And if there is swelling or an abscess, then place something soothing on it that relieves the abscess and reduces the swelling, leaving it like this for a few days;
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	Then hold onto these poles, and they should be half as wide as a narrow reed bent straightly, or from the shaft used to make darts, or from the branches of a palm tree, and they should follow this shape:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	but it is necessary that the pole which one places at the break be slightly larger and wider than the others;
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	and let it be as long as necessary for small or large limbs;
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	then hold them in place just like you did at the first instance, then tie an additional thread on top of it, similarly to how you tied at the break in the first instance;
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	The cautery should allow the hair to grow long and even; if they prick at their base, hold them steady so they do not move until they grow.
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	For if the threads are thick, like those used in folk works to twist their linen cords, and this is a great mistake, because the twist cannot be uniform if it's too thin, and it doesn't suit having less than one and a half inches of space between each thread.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the limbs are bruised by the joints of the sockets after reduction in their healthy positions, then apply padding with linen or shredded wool on them, so that they do not blister.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is due to piercing (or stab) injury, and the ribs are broken, I will instruct on its treatment thereafter.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	Know that it's not suitable to fully stretch all the broken limbs right from the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés .v. jors ou .vij., ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	For when the limbs are large, it's not suitable to place them in splints straightaway; rather wait for at least five days or seven, or longer according to your judgment as each case arises.
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	And here is the method of the old plaster for restoring fractures, dislocations, and twists: you take flour that remains on the walls of the mill, mix it with enough egg until the mixture isn't too thin or too thick. Use this concoction, and this is the common way of using plaster to restore fractures in various ways, as well as for women and small children, because there's no risk of being too hot or too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another method for setting breaks and dislocations and twists: take three parts of garlic and dill and wormwood and asafetida and Arabic gum and mastic, in total. Use five parts of myrrh and aloes, also in total. Add seven parts of alechil. Grind all these into a powder, then mix them with the yolk of an egg; if the mixture is warm, use this plaster as it has a good composition, and quickly heals broken bones, proving beneficial to many people.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .viiij. З.; acaice vi. З.; bolic armenic .x. З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another plastering method that is good for twists: take mastic and vismarrow, in total ten parts; myrrh and aloes, in total eight parts; acacia six parts; Armenian galbanum ten parts, grind them well together, then mix with water or the yolk of an egg, and apply it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu. Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	Another plastering method for joints and broken bones, to alleviate the pain that comes with them, and to cut away bone fragments: take new wool, cook it in grease and oil until it softens, then apply it onto the affected area. This plaster does not heal completely but is better for soothing abscesses, and properly relieves pains.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another method of plastering that restores broken bones: take dried fig leaves, and terrestrial oak leaves, grind them together, and make a plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme. Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Another method of plastering for restoring bone fractures and facilitating the removal of pus. Take root of valerian, chamomile, violet flowers, flour of beeswax; from each take one part; grind it together, mix with wine, and if your limbs are warm, mix it with moist coriander water or just water, and then use it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre. Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Another more effective method of plastering when pus is being restored in the limb. Take roots of valerian, linseed, balm, linden and thyme, as well as violet and chamomile flowers; from each take one part; grind it together, mix with salt water, or sweet water, or wine according to the warmth of the limb and its rest period.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	In his book, Hippocrates instructs that one should apply to the broken limb for strength restoration using a paste made of wax and oil, and nothing else, more. He says it should be neither too soft nor too hard between two states.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems that Galen suggests one should apply to the broken limb for restoration dry things slightly warm, such as mire, aloe, incense, and similar items, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another way to make plaster useful for injury and pain: take mussels and pigeon meat or bird feathers, and basil leaves, and equal parts of wine vinegar, grind them together, and then make a plaster with it and use it.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors	And then after a little while, take care to ensure that the patient does not feel any pain and that there is no movement of their bone in its place; or if the injury is treated by hand during the day.
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	And if pain comes to the arm, or itching, without rest or swelling, you should act quickly, and release it, and apply plaster now; and take light cloth and a moistened sponge from the sea, immerse them in water, and cool down the arm until the itching stops, and the pain is alleviated.
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	Then let the member rest for an hour, then place it on dry wool, moistened in water or oil from the rose bush, and secure it with a bandage, until you are sure of removing any pus.
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let the inflammation settle on the member, and relieve the pain, then resume gentle treatment, and a little plaster, but do not strain it as much as before; and be gentle until it heals.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that pus and redness, pain and swelling are present throughout the bone, and you need to plaster and bind it, then repeat as you did initially.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés .iij. jors ou .iiij. ou .v. ou .vij.; et aucune fois le laisse .xx. jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	And if there is nothing of what we have said on the limb, or if it's released only after three days, four days, five days, or seven; and leave it for twenty days each time, according to this until healing progresses, and approaches bone setting in place;
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	Then increase the bandaging more than at first, and let it grow its flesh, just as I said previously. And if you see that the body dries excessively beyond what is necessary, know that there will be no improvement;
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	The first sentence translates as:
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	Through this work then correct the deformities in the limb, and remedy it quickly as what men do, that restore the member forcibly: this is bad, and such actions lead to useless procedures, and I see nothing else but to leave them and treat them correctly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	Of various methods of fracturing
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	Many ways of breaking exist, and various forms, and the causes are destined;
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	For it involves injuries caused by striking with a sword, and the neck bone all the way to the syfac which is under the bone, just like in an axe or staff; and because of this, this kind of injury is called 'axe break' in this manner.
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	When the sword cuts through the bone from above without piercing it, this kind of injury is called 'absolute break'; and it refers to the wounds resulting from these two types of breaks, whether large or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is sequential striking, or crack, or from the stone itself, or impact on the stone, or other similar incidents.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a partial break, which approaches until it reaches the tissue under the bone, or above the bone, and this injury can be large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	And if there is a wound that has healed within the bone as thin as a hair, and has a small crack, and because of this it is called this kind of fracture "hairline";
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if there is a wound made or by piercing of stone, or by falling, or by similar things, and it lets the piece of bone in from below, and has cuts next to each other like candle makers when they make holes on the candles; so that the stone enters inside.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	This happens more with those who have wet bones below, such as children's bones;
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	It occurs in all these ways of fracture where small pieces are dismembered, like fowl's bones; and I will speak about this in its proper place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we know all methods of fractures through their dislocation upon them, and the examination by prodding, and through the decayed flesh that is on them.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	Hair loss is known by those who when an osseous fragment has been revealed and rubbed together, if it exposes black fracture.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of fractures, be cautious about malaise incidents, and if you do not see any ill-omened accidents such as vomiting, loss of understanding, expansion, paleness, fever, or if the eyes start to come out and turn red, or show other symptoms in various conditions, there is no certainty that it can heal.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see any alarming accidents, and you hope for salvation, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the bone comes to you first, and it's in winter, if you must remove the bone before the fourteenth day after your arrival that you can.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it's in summer, you should remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the flesh around the bone becomes rotten, and accidents as we've said occur.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues,	And if the fracture reaches to the membrane that covers the brain, it is necessary for you to split the fractured part like this: and take hold of the bone from the patient's arm, uncover over the bone in all manners that you can, and expose more of the wound according to its shape as much as you can,
et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	And if blood flow starts to reveal the bone, or an abscess appears, assist with what is necessary, and make sure you fill the wound with wet cloths in oil rose.
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc .ij. manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And have the wound rest until the pus discharge is calmed and the blood can freely flow; then begin working inside the bone, and this is done according to two methods of work: one method is that you cut at a narrow angle in front, and it's called:
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then make another cut, which is larger than the first one.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second method is that you have several different cuts, some narrow and others wide, all sharp, and made of iron; and work with light hands, making sure not to pierce the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is hard and beyond piercing, you should pierce it through, ensuring that you make cuts with steady hands, not all the way through so as not to penetrate beyond the bone by mistake, and there should be a margin or circle of about an inch above the tip, preventing the tip from passing through the bone; and you should have several of them, so each touches its length of the bone, ensuring that there are tines for both sides; this is the form of the three methods of piercing.
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The quality to pierce inside the broken bone is that you place one wick on the bone and turn with your fingers until you know that the bone has been pierced. Then put the wick elsewhere a little after, and do this throughout, then cut in between the roots of the teeth where the bone exists, and do this more subtly than you can, gently, just as we have said, till you pull the bone to your hand or to none of the instruments that you have such as pliers, forceps; and make sure not to touch the brain nor the spinal cord.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout .i. autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	And when you have pierced and removed the bone, it is necessary that you prepare what was left of the bone with another tool similar to a tooth, but this tool should be more sturdy and more subtle than the other tooth;
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a .i. des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And if there is nothing of the small bones or no scales left, you should gently scrape them with an instrument. Then dress and treat the wound as we have said earlier.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And another way of treatment is this as Galien said, which is more safe; and the needle is very strong, and it's his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	Firstly, you must expose a part of the bone where the fracture opens and moves. So when you have exposed that part, place underneath the edge of this lens-shaped incision, as depicted here:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en .ij. costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	And do not cut from one side alone, and make the incision halfway through two ribs so that when you cut it is towards the bone. Then strike with a small hammer from above, gently removing all of the bone and being careful not to damage the membrane which is underneath;
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	If she presses against the bone, gently remove it because you will feel no harm and little fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the break in the bone does not penetrate to the membrane, and the bone is cut only from above, and there are small pieces, then after that roughness, it's necessary to remove the scales with a sharp shaver of which you should have various quantities. To administer each one as most appropriate according to the manual and the appearance of the break.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you appear before great shavers, and then even finer ones, and don't stop doing this until it is well done.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other hair-cutting and finer breaks, you must administer care according to its direction; and this matter is not resolved for whoever has devoted their study to this craft.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes .i. drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	And if the shoulder's wound is revealed, it is necessary that you take one and a half linen cloths according to the size of the injury, soak them in rose oil, and place them on the wound;
puis pren .i. autre drapeil doublé en .ij. ou en .iij., et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus .i. autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	Then take another double linen cloth or two, and soak them in wine and rose oil, place it on the first linen cloth; do this more lightly than you can, so as not to burden the shoulder blade, then apply with a second bandage, but don't strain it too hard that it only touches the wound.
et le laisse ensi .i. jor ou .ij., tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	And leave it like this for one or two days until the abscess softens, then remove the bandage and apply remedies such as lily roots, flour of myrrh, incense powder, and aristolochia, among other things; prepare a powder from these and apply it to the wound, then continue applying gentle healing medicines without causing irritation.
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	And ensure that the wound is clean right away, do not leave pus behind, and do not allow any fluid to assemble there either, because when fluid assembles on the brain's membrane, it circulates and spreads, causing great harm to the patient; for when one places something biting on the tongue, it bites from above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Therefore take care, if nothing happens to the patient, as we have said, it is doubtful without doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et .iij. parties d’oile roset et en glue .i. drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	And if only that happened because of the medicine we put on, assuming it has such a virtue, then you should take one part of honey and three parts of rose oil and mix them in a spoonful, and put this on the tongue;
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then follow the method of treatment until they become healthy.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Know that neither of the two parts under the nose or even just one, because these are two bones; and this lower part is made of cartilage, it does not break, nor will it take to bend or twist, and then heals.
Et se l’une des .ij. parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	And if one of the two parts is broken, you must bend your little finger or over the nose, and make an equal break inside to your second finger, and through the tip outward, until the nose revives according to its natural shape;
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And do this gently, and beware that the patient does not feel pain through your operation.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the fracture is in the area above the nose, and cannot reach the nostril from below, it should be positioned evenly to the top of a small stick that's a bit thick.
Et se li brisure est de .ij. pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	And if the fracture is in two parts, redo the procedure and try to restore on the first day, if you can;
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	If not, after the seventh or eighth day when the abscess has subsided, apply to the top of the nose a bundle made from linen cloth, if the fracture is in one part.
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Or you should apply a bundle on the other side as well, if the fracture is there too; and make them large enough to fill out the hollows of the nose.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor. Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	And it's said that one should moisten the tents with butter and change them each day. I do not think this is correct but rather they should be moistened during the preparation of a mixture of egg white and powder of grinding stone; then leave the tent until the bone is hard and the cartilage tough.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And sometimes one uses goose feathers instead of tents, and if it's mixed with one egg white, and if there is a wind, and the air goes among them; then do whatever you see fit.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if abscesses appear near the nose as you do them, then put wadding or moistened cotton in oil of rose, or a pinch of salt.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	And if abscesses do not appear, then apply a plaster outside, made of ash powder and incense powder, mixed with yolk butter. Place it on light bandages, don't tie them tightly around the nose;
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	And if the nose breaks into small pieces and it is broken into many parts, then use tools suitable for this task, then cut along the wound, and clean all the fragments of cartilage and suture them. If there are applicable plasters or ointments for this situation, use them;
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there is no wound within the nose, then treat with tinctures and apply linseed oil until it heals.
de la routure de la mandibule	Of the rupture of the jawbone
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jawbone is fractured internally and there is no external wound,
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	It is necessary; if the fracture is in the right part, you bend your index finger into the patient's mouth towards the side of the injury. And if the fracture is in the left jawbone, then bend your index finger of the right hand towards it, and gently apply pressure on the fracture internally, and perform this action with the other hand externally, making sure to do so evenly.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the fracture of the jawbone is separated into two parts, then it's necessary to administer an extension for each part until they are even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if the movements of the teeth occur, or rupture, then restrain them with a thread of gold or silver or silk. Place it on the broken mandible and place one double piece of cloth; and put another large tent on the cloth well made, or an equal piece of leather long and wide according to the length of the mandible, and bind it up as tight as you can, and command the patient to rest, and eat light meats.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	And if you notice that the figure changes, let it shift to its position on the third day and then adjust what has changed; cover with plaster, using powder from a mill combined with plenty of egg or ground oyster flour after removing the bandage; place a layer of wool on top, and when the plaster hardens, and the patient's condition doesn't change, let it be until they recover. Many times recovery occurs within three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if pus-filled sores appear, then apply what we have instructed many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a fracture combined with a wound, it's rewarded by none of the bone being extracted; if the extraction requires instruments suitable for this task.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, widen it with fire according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all these pieces and there is nothing left, if the wound is wide, place one layer of plasters suitable for it to accelerate healing until it heals.
de la forcele	By the power.
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The strength breaks many times before, around the shoulder, and the breaking happens in three ways: when it breaks and divides into two parts, with fragments, and is easier to restore; or when there's a break accompanied by an injury.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the treatments are as follows when there's breaking without an injury, where you have two assistants, so one marks the shoulder that feels the broken strength; and the other stretches up to the neck towards the affected area; then equalize the break with your hands, so that the shape is as it should be, and there's no visible or movement.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you need to extend further, then place a round piece of cloth or wool under the shoulder towards the body; and make it as large as your need requires; stretch and lift the strength, hold the sphere in your hand so that you can equalize the break, as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot draw the head of the strength away from the front due to its presence in front, it is necessary that the patient lie with their face towards their shoulder and place a half-collar under the shoulder. Then you should press the shoulder down, while supporting it, until the bone of the strength is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then use the break at your hands, and if you find debris there, it is necessary that you cut it up; and gently pull the pieces, and if the bone cannot join through any pressure, cut into one of the incisions you have made. But place this instrument on the strength, to prevent fluid from flowing out:
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait .ij. chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	and make it resemble a spoon, and not be present in any way, and be as wide as it needs to be, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the work; and have two points if you see fit, with one being wider and the other narrower, similar to the cut made on the wound when treating the bones;
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	And when you are certain of the extraction of pus, if you stitch up the wound, and if the rupture is small, or if you doubt about the extraction of pus, then cover the wound with bandages and tents, according to its size.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if there is pus being extracted, then moisten it with oil, rose water and honey, and place it on the affected area.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	The grinding of the bone, when it's related to wounds and cutting procedures, involves applying a plaster made from powder of mill grind and egg yolk on the bone, and place light bandages over it. If needed, put an iron spatula underneath for support.
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met .i. drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de .iij. dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	Then take a very large bandage that's about the size of your palm in width. Place two layers of bandages on top of the bandage and plaster it over them. Then take a slender stick around three inches wide and long, wrap it around this bandage piece such that the edge of the bandage hangs down below it.
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	And place the needle at the wound, and turn the bandage around the neck, and over the healthy armpit, and over the diseased armpit; and adjust it from each part, and when you see that the blood flow meets with the wound addition, and you clearly see that the needle does not move above the broken bone, then reward him each day, and when he takes off his shirt, then restrain him;
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort .i. petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a .xx. jors;	And let the disease heal on his back, and apply it when he sleeps, a small pillow under the armpit to lift the shoulder up; so it eases the strain of the wound through the strength of the shoulder blade, or you tie his arm around the neck, and do not untie him from any bad accidents for twenty days;
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en .xxviij. jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	Then redo the plaster bandage if you see that he needs it, and bind him tightly but leave him like this until he is restored; and she will be restored at most within 26 days, and less in some cases.
de la brisure de l’espaule	Of the breaking of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus .i. drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en .xx. jors ou en xxv,  Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	Sometimes the shoulder breaks or fractures either at its ends or in the middle, not just externally but also internally; if it is handled according to the shape of the fracture and its natural form, then you can reset it accordingly. Try all possible ways that suit your needs for this.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a bone piece sticks out before, and there's no opening in the skin, then cut it open and operate on the bone as we've instructed in handling injuries to the thigh for soothing abscesses.
de la brisure dou pis	On the breaking of the heel
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer. Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	The heel is often broken at the midpoint, but this happens rarely; it breaks more frequently at the front. And when it breaks in the middle, it descends below, causing great pain for the patient, loss of consciousness, and vomiting, and suddenly blood appears from the ankle bone, and one can feel this well.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration should be such that the body lies on its back and you place one and a half cushions between the shoulders, then press the shoulders, and assemble the ribs of two ribs with your hands, and delicately put them equal in all ways that you can, until the shape of the bone is as it should be; then lay bandages and wadding above the delicate salt draft or another lightweight substance, and wrap it tightly with a blanket, and fix it to the broken bone so that it doesn't move; and turn the bandage around the back smoothly, and compress it evenly, and reward each hour the injured person, and if it heals, then tighten; and if it needs to be released due to corrosion or itching in the body, or pain or abscess, you should act quickly, release it, remove the bandages, and treat the one who has come seeking remedies in ways of treatment; then replace the bandage again and compress until it is healed.
de la brisure des costes	Of bone fracture
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	Know that the fracture of ribs occurs only after a large hit on the back, and within the chest cavity, and they can bend due to being brittle; and one feels this well during examination at the bedside.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient. Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And for the treatment if it is to equalize the fracture, just like it should. Then apply plaster and bind it with a bandage, if necessary.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the fracture of the ribs is occurring inside, then the patient feels intense pain and cramps, like crying, because the bone punctures the skin; and they have spots, and are hot and vomit large amounts of blood, and this is a sick health state, and the elderly often suffered great suffering.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if there are those who say it is suitable to administer meat that inflates the belly, in order to relieve the nausea outside.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not follow this rule, as pus and ointments do not come from within, if they have not already appeared.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it has appeared, then heal it.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And it is said by none of us to apply suction cups over the skin, in order to suck out the contents, and this seems reasonable; nevertheless, there is doubt that the suction cup draws away excesses from the body due to the weakness's positioning.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And it is said that when one must cover the body with moist wool in hot oil, and they place wicks between the ribs to make the heat even everywhere inside, then apply the treatment for pleurisy, meat and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz .i. estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez. Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient experiences intense pain that cannot be tolerated by the broken bone piercing the skin, there is doubt for the patient as to whether one should cut through their broken part of the body, and it must be covered with a tool among .i. instruments to protect the wound; then the bone must be cut open, drained gently, and then the wounds stitched together if they are large, and treated with plasters until healed. And if abscesses form, put moist cloths in oil on top of them and cover their body; treat while letting the wound take care according to what is suitable for the abscess, and be attentive on the affected side or where it must be, until it heals.
de la brisure dou col	Of the breakage of the neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	In no instance does the breaking of bones at the neck occur, and there is no bending; similarly with the spine in the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent. Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	And when this happens to anyone and you need to know if it's alive or not, take heed: if you see his hands softened, swollen, and dead, unable to move or stretch them out; and when you prick them with a needle, he doesn't feel. Know that it is in multiple states of death, and if they can remain motionless and well when restrained, know that the joint of the bone has been saved, and that the injury has healed, if care was taken in treatment.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit. Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet. Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	And when this happens to the spine in the back, and you need to know if it's alive or not, take heed: if you see that its joints are softened, and those anomalies akin to limbs exist on his back, along with gustatory and loss of appetite against will; and when you have observed him on his abdomen, he does lose appetite against will. And when they've treated him on his back and he wants to sit up, he can't. Know that it is in multiple states of death: if no labor were found in her cure.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if such an event does not happen to him, then it is a lighter thing.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the treatment is this: if there is pus at the site, apply a poultice of sulfur or oil from an egg, until it eases; then place on one of the reinforcing plasters and drying ones, and bind with a bandage, and command the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that part where they feel pain, until they recover.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any bone becomes exposed, you must cover it with your hand; and remove the bone, then bring together the two edges of the wound if it's large, with stitches, then treat with an ointment that hardens in a couple days until they heal; and if the bone chip is broken, which is called 'the chip from the knee', you should hold your left hand pouch against your right hand at your power, then place the plaster and heating on it as needed; then press it down, and if there's any exposed bone, you apply it over it, remove the bone, and treat the wound until it heals.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	Regarding the breaking of the hip bone's fracture
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	It happens that the hip bone is broken, and if it does happen, there might be a slight discomfort at the thigh; and it stretches long, declines towards the knees, and brings pain to the patient at the thigh, bruising, and swells up the one that breaks.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is that you extend your hand upwards as long as you are at the site of the fracture. And know which bone is broken and its shape; and if the break is only in the thigh, put the break even as it is, until it reaches its natural shape.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the break is along the length or it declines towards the inside, have the patient lie on their stomach, as long as your restoration of this break becomes apparent.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have made it even, place it on the plaster, then put onto a charcoal or coal grate, and keep it warm so that it does not move. And apply the heat across their back until the wound is even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on his sound side, or on his back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if abscesses appear under the skin, do not touch them until the abscesses are alleviated and placed as we have said before; then return to the restoration process, apply pressure as is necessary, without any bad incident occurring. This is the manner.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of dislocation of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The assistants are those that are between the knife and the shoulder cap, and if it is broken, one must restore it according to either of two methods: where one would take a full rod of medium thickness, as per this shape:
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And tie the two joints with two bands, and bend them upwards, placing the skin on one site; then let the broken arm rest on the rod, until it reaches the armpit, having formed half of a rod curve, then place them under any heavy object or have those serving to hold them in place downwards; then position the eyes (apparently referring to the hands) so that the break is evenly aligned with their combined width, until the broken limb returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other method is as follows: have the skin resting on his elbow and tie the hand to his neck, then instruct two servants that one should shave off the area where there's the break at his hands, and the other should cut along both sides of each inch mark, spreading out each person according to their own part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint .i. liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part. Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes .i. liien moien desoz l’assele, et .i. autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre .i. liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if you see that the extraction is more forceful, hold one strap over the wound and above it, and extend each minister to his part. And if the wound is close to the head of the shoulder, it is necessary to place one strap midway between the joint and the edge, and another towards the knife, near the wound; and likewise if the wound is opposite the knife, you must put a light strap without effort until the wound is even on the upper part and on the knife; then make an even incision as necessary, and hold it tight, unless there are discharges from the wound.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if pus comes out, do not tighten for more than seven days, and place it on greased wool in a comfortable position and in oil rose; until the pus coming out is relieved. Then hold tight, using this method of holding: you should put the plaster on the wound, then join the arm to the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the breast; and apply the cloth, tighten it both on the shoulder joint and on the arm, so that the arm rests in its natural position, without any obstruction, or if the bone is not moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone does not move, use braces, and place an extra large and strong brace above the wound, keeping one inch of space between each brace. Each brace should be so wide that it passes three inches on either side of the wound; then hold tight with these braces, as I explained at the beginning of this chapter about the wound, more firmly and not by pulling away.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns .iij. jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois. Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	And if you see the base of the bone and its narrowing, as we have said, in your effort to restore a broken limb, and you're unsure about removing the clot, if you let it heal for up until seven days, as we have said; then look each day after three days at the bandage, ensuring that no itching spreads around it or any pus comes to the bone because it's too tight. If there's an issue, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés .iij. jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire .i. cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse. Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en .xl. jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.  Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier .l. jors ou .ij. mois.	And if no such incidents occur, or if the dislocation is not relieved until two days later or more, let the pain remain on their back and keep their hands on their stomach; then place under the shoulder one clean cloth of equal wool for each hour of the day or night, watching that the figure of the broken limb does not move or that the ligaments do not soften; if it heals through the power of medicine, and gives them the meat we placed before in such a way that the meat becomes as fine as possible; and when they start to recover, let it be large. And it is customary for the shoulder and leg to take recovery for forty days total; then you should remove and administer baths and medications for treating the area effectively. If the dislocation is ugly or twisted, let it remain in relief for two days or a month.
de la brisure du bras	"Of the breaking of the arm"
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is made up of two bones, which are called the pair 'foscile'. One bone is small, and it's this one that covers the elbow; and the other bone is large, and it's this one that lies underneath, towards the little finger. By chance, only the larger foscile breaks or both could break, or they might come together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble. Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	When the small bones break, the restoration is light and the healing; and when the large ones break, then the healing goes badly, and worse than when they broke together. If it's only the small bone that breaks, then slight stretching should be done, and make it even.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus .i. cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et .i. cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a .i. liien, et uns autres ministres a .i. autre au desus. Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And if it's the larger bone that breaks, then one needs to strain harder; and stretch it on two cushions, and raise the hand of the patient higher than the others, and place the small finger lower than the other fingers, and have the limb cross over itself, with another cushion in front higher than necessary so no discomfort is felt; then extend his assistant's arm up to where their elbow lies beneath their hand or at one's wrist, and a helper at one's other side above. And then place the arm of the patient level according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if during the breaking into pieces, you place each in its place, and if there is none that sticks to the bone when you grasp it, and you cannot restore it to its place, then do on and with the bone, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if during the healing process, I mentioned it in a separate chapter; if take the treatment.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue .i. drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie .i. drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez. Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir vj. esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en .ij.; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit. Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And if during the beginning of the restoration process wounds occur, apply this: take a plaster made from rosin and white beeswax, ensuring it is neither too hard nor too soft; then place one sheet of plaster carefully above each other until all the wounds have calmed. After that remove the plaster, and then apply the paste made from mill-ground powder with enough egg. Place the splints, making sure they are further up in the healing process than elsewhere, slightly wider than on other parts, and note that there should be seven or eight splint positions: either if it's within one bone, or two bones; keep them higher around the healing process rather than other places, and every day move less far away from their original position as I have mentioned at the beginning of this chapter. Ensure that all materials covering the healing process are soft and moistened, neither too hard nor abrasive; use threads made from linen, not too thick or thin, as we've discussed. Lastly, care for the limb and its wound over several days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer. Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And if any bad incidents come to the member, for example itchiness coming to the member, it is necessary that you immerse the member in hot water until the itch subsides; and leave the member not moved to rest. And then start tightening again, and if the band has been broken and the bone uncovered, doing something similar, then place it correctly.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if precautions are taken so that no stiffness comes to the member, because it is too tight, it is necessary that you soften it by rubbing, and let it rest for a few days, until the stiffness passes, and then tighten it again.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a .xx. jors. ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en .xxx. jors ou en .xxxv., et par aventure en .xx. jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	And if none of the things we have said comes to the patient or it's healing doesn't progress up to twenty days, then you can undo the bandage. Afterwards, place your hands on their neck and ensure that both sides are equal, while guarding against movement and strain, and let them sleep on their back; and know that this healing is restored in thirty days or forty days, and sometimes in twenty days, depending on the nature of the remedies and their individual constitution.
de la brisure de la main	Of the breaking of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	You should know that on the back of the hand and around our thumbs there are few injuries, and it only causes many plagues.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	And when the sole of the hand is broken or swelled, it is necessary for the patient to lie with their palm facing up and straight ahead as well; then they should place their hand on an extended surface, extend their fingers over the broken bones, and align them evenly until they are properly connected; and they should apply bandages and splints, if no abscesses develop, then they should place a splint according to the size of their hand; and it should be wrapped in one linen sheet.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the injury is located at or near the belly of the sole, then make a bundle with cloths, and instruct the patient to place this on their broken foot; and then apply a long cloth wrap, and have them wear a splint that fits as well as possible for the size of their hand, just like they would for their entire hand.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the break is at the front, it should be that you place one pin above and another under in the foot, so that the hands are open and straight, then tie them altogether under the hand, and seal off the connection between the fingers.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the break comes to any of our fingers, if it is in the middle, as it should be; and bind with the foot, and if you see that place a small pin upright to lift the break, and do not move; and if the break is at another finger, such as in the index or one of the others, then place it evenly, and tie with the healthy finger which comes after; or you tie all together holding them, so they don't move, or you put a pin there as for when we fix it. And take care in the restoration and positioning of each abscess, and apply what comes to that person, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	Of the broken foot
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	The bone of the knee is broken many times, and one can see it often when it turns forward and backward; and its repair consists in joining .1 above the breakage, and another .1 below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the limbs lie on their face, then extend each minister his link to its equal part; and this is when the breakage is inside the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure. Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses .ij. mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And if the breakage is near the knee joint, then have one of the links towards the foot, and the other links below the breakage. And likewise if it's near the hip, then put the joints in front of the hip, and thus make the extension upwards; then place the eyes on the bone equally with its two hands, until it is according to its natural figure, and then apply plaster, and the link, so that no abscesses come about.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is pus at the site, let it heal then return to your work and treatment; the operation has been performed in such manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure .i. bendeil dur doublé en .ij. ou .iij., et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute .i. fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment .iij. tors ou iiij. sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as .ij. chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie .iij. esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is necessary that you envelop around the wound; i.e., bind it with a bandage doubled in two or three parts, and retain excess material. Then lift the leg so that the heel reaches to the base of the shinbone, and insert one thread long between the skin and the leg, down through the knee, and guide the end of the thread upwards; then begin enveloping around the leg and the thigh with the bandage, place a stake at the wound site, and put a stake at the bone of the leg; then place four pieces of cloth under the leg and the thigh to maintain even pressure. Begin binding around the wound in three or four turns; and as you go above the wound, bind less tightly; then attach two thread ends that you have inserted between the leg and the thigh, and bind them with three stakes that are up there, then return below to where the thread end is, until you reach under the foot; and tighten, so it does not move from its place, then leave it like this, then if there is pus or swelling or any other symptoms.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if it happens, set it free, and address whatever comes up, just as we have said many times. And if there are pieces of bone that catch hold, it's right to remove them, provided they can be removed; and if you cannot, then it's right to cut the wound open, and drain the pus; and treat it in such a way as we have said, until it heals completely.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And never is the wrist broken when one places them like this, as in the shoulder and arm; still, no complaint from the patient follows such a restoration.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	Know that the wrist is restored in one or two days, or perhaps less or perhaps more, depending on the variety of physiques.
de la ruelle dou genoil	from the alley of the gallbladder
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois. Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou .i. pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	Know that in the gallbladder alley there is little breaking, but it bends many times. And if it breaks, it's usually just a crack, or a small tear of about an inch, and occurs with or without injury, and one feels it well.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is this: if you place it evenly with what's round at its ends until they are assembled and moveable, then apply plaster. And put an oval piece on top if you need to, and tighten it according to how it should be done, then redo all the arrangements we've talked about in other injuries, like pus and similar; for each condition put what suits it, as long as it's sound.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the breaking of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait .ij. os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i.	You know that in the leg there are two bones. One of them is called 'right non' which means 'tibia', and the other one is called 'foscile' meaning 'fibula'. And any kind of injury or breakage can happen to it just like with the arm, and for this, the restoration process is similar to that of an arm, equally, and all the procedures are exactly the same.
Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	And if the two bones are broken together, then turn the leg from every side.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the delicate bones are broken, then turn in front.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz. Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	And if the large bones are broken, one feels intense pain and sees it clearly; then turn immediately. Therefore apply extension, place them equally, and tie the ligaments equally; but still, when the break is irregular and consists of several pieces, make sure that the extension is less extensive and lighter; and align them according to your skill.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed your work, take two lengths of checked wood that bend the leg on one side and the other, and let them be as long as half the length of the leg from the knee to below; then wrap these in two layers of twine over and under, and tie them in the middle so that the leg cannot lean to the right or left; thus it is well; and no one should apply a single strip this length made of wood for the leg, and place it on guard against any movement. It must be properly done at the break where there is injury; and move the leg each day, to see if there is any pus or other incident; continue the cure until it is sane.
de la brisure des os dou piet	of bone fracture due to impact
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle there is no breakage, but with bone impact breakage occurs and in the lower leg bones, it only results from shaking under various positions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if there is an impact breakage at the bones in the leg, and you see these bones press one against another, place them like bones on the ground, just as if they wanted to go, and then put your foot on his ankle, where the bones are raised, push them as much as it takes for them to return to their sockets; then apply plaster and bandages around this side of the leg, and place a small table under both ankles, each filled with about two inches. Then press against the leg up to its bending point, then when you have wrapped cloths around them, and other things that you need.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days have passed, if you remove the bandage, because you will find that the bones are even, whether broken or re-aligned.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if any of the ribs are broken, repair them as we said about the ribs of the hand. Then put a splint on the broken rib according to its length, and make it slightly wider than that, then place under the foot this board I spoke of, and apply even pressure; and if there are two or three, or more, break them, put one splint on each rib according to their size, wrapped in one linen sheet, and hold the table against the foot. And being on the head of the table facing towards the belly of the foot, make sure it is well positioned.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And you must not forget the other things I've said about other injuries, just as we have discussed; and assist each case according to how it should be.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	Regarding the breaking of the bone in the hand.
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com .i. sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice .vij. jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bone of its nature in a woman is broken, have her sit with it swollen and enlarged. Then incline her to the lower part of her backside and hold her at the rear. Next fill up the gap of nature with cotton, placing equal quantities as would be about one hand. After that take out the woman and lift her bottom gradually and little by little; then let the cotton fall until it reaches the entrance of nature, bringing the bone with it. And when she wishes to urinate, remove the cotton; upon her finishing, return her to normal again; thus repeat this process for seven days or more: if restoration has occurred, take a kid's bladder and tie onto its tip a stick; fill up the whole bladder in nature. Then inflate into the stick forcefully until the bladder swells internally; this will help restore the breakage. Next, fill with cotton and let it stay like that for some more days till it heals.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre. Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	And when the bone of the elbow in a man is broken, or for a woman, restore it as we have said about the thigh bone; and these broken bones are not to be overlooked by those who apply their skill and use them, and heed my book. For breaking indicates in various positions the correct path of restoration: thus understand it.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the case of the penis if it is broken, take a goose’s throat and fill the penis with it; then wrap bandages around it, and let it be for three days or as long as needed, and it will heal quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	From fracture with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for the person with a fracture that also has a wound, even if it's large, like in the case of bones in the elbow or shoulder or similar, to be now cleaned, so that the cleanings which we have mentioned bear witness.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is clean, you can fumigate it with vitriol (sulfuric acid), and if you don't have anything else, then start restoring the fracture in that same hour or day; or when abscesses do not appear.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if the abscesses start appearing, let the restoration continue for another day or two, until the abscess subsides, and don't touch it on the third or fourth day, because you might provoke a harmful incident.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if bone is broken and visible at the site of the open wound, it is necessary to place your hands on it gently, in a small extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extensions are not present for you to align evenly with your hands, take this iron instrument that is made of steel, which is seven inches or six inches long, and the width should match the size of the wound; and for this purpose, the surgeon must choose three or four (depending on what he needs for each treatment of bone fracture), and it should be round and a bit large so that it doesn't bend under compression against your limb during surgery, and it should have points at the front, and be thick in the middle forward.
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre. Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And call it "palainche", because it is necessary that the curved bones be placed on the top of the visible bone; and strike once with it, until it returns, and make them equal one against another. And if the fracture is thin, and the instruments cannot properly grasp the bone, it is necessary that you hold the tip of the bone, as long as the instrument has the ability to do so.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot return the bone to its place, as we have said, if you have an appropriate tool for this purpose, such as a scalpel or a fine awl, then with your strength; then reposition that which is staying in the hard part of the bone and small cuts.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil. Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille .i. drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	And when the bone has been put back in place, and if there is intense pain from the patient afterwards, know that it hasn't returned to its natural position. Do not force it into position, instead moisten it with one part of alcohol mixed with black laudanum, and properly if it's in its original state; and do not apply any ointment or other substances where there is pus, so as to prevent the development of putrefaction and decay; then administer these measures when you have set the bone, and leave the wound exposed, and cover it entirely according to the size of the wound, and take care that the wound is not strained by pressure; many times this has been done, leading to death or corrosion in some cases; and let the straining be softer and more gentle than other injuries; and thus, many have seen the patient recover.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie. Et quant tu vois aprés .i. jor ou .ij. enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And if the wound is deep or large, and you doubt that any adverse events will occur there, as we have said, and you find pain at the site, it should not be treated with these measures; but cover it entirely instead, in place of these measures, with hard cloths and bind them. And when after one or two days you see an improvement or some healing on the wound, then remove whatever you had placed over it with all the wine, and apply a healing ointment for wounds, such as the four-formula ointment and similar treatments.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary for you to dislocate the limb twice a day, in the morning and at evening, until it is united and healthy.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it should be so that the joints of the limb are put together in such a way that the bone slips down slightly.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if this continues day after day, and it cannot be joined but stays like that, know that there are small bone pieces causing pain due to which you should cover the wound with a tent, and remove all these pieces of dead tissue that cause the pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant. Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés .xx. jors ou .xxx., puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And if a fistula comes about in the body, or any other form of decay, it must be treated according to what he instructs in his previous chapter. And when bone is broken and exposed within the limb, such as in the case of bones in the foot or shoulder, or similar large limb bones, they should not be treated immediately because death may occur from them many times; however, leave them until they heal, perhaps after 20 to 30 days, then treat the wound if possible; and if you cannot, let it be.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	The burns that come from sweat
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	The burns come many times after the healing of the burn wound, even when it's close to the joint. A strange thing is to see the shape of the limb; and by chance it cannot perform its natural acts on the limb.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Take care therefore when this thing is fresh: if you administer stiffening medicines such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, along with sarsaparilla, licorice, and other similar things, do so according to your preference or combine them all, mixing them with stictic wine or with plenty of egg or with garlic; then apply them on the wound in poultices, apply them well, and don't remove it by hand for days; then remove it, and start another poultice as long as the pustules are removed; or you can apply over a piece of plaster that has been made properly; because the properties of plaster allow to remove all swellings from the limbs; and if the pustule has hardened like stone and needs removal, cut through it from above, revealing excess fluid; or have it sanded by someone until it is removed, and continue treatment until healed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	The limb which becomes weak after the siege (or after a period of confinement or hard work)
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the breaking of the bone is restored, and afterwards the limbs remain weak and delicate, this can happen for various reasons: due to which it was bound too tightly and wasn't bound as it should have been; or due to there being too many bindings, and not being able to bring the respiration to the limb; or due to excessive bleeding; or due to too large movements, not in its time; or due to having little blood in his body, if it is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is that you make the patient eat well, and make the body soft until the healing spreads in him; then give them baths, and provide them joy and comfort. Then apply grease on the limb so that the grease attracts to the main respiration, and washes it with water often, until the respiration matches the limb. And restore its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	If the member is twisted after healing
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limbs are twisted after restoration, and the bones are broken openly, and the shape of the limb is ugly, yet it does not lose its natural function: nor should one believe those who say that we must break the entire limb anew. And many foolish people have done this in our land; these procedures are criticized, and they bring great harms, even causing death at times. However, if the dislocations and pains are still fresh, you should heat them with hot water or cook soothing herbs such as leaves of comfrey, roots, and mallow, among others; and apply a moistening plaster, like well-made yarrow. You take the comfrey sap and mix it with lard or oil from saffron, and make a plaster from that; or you take greased figs, grind them with bran, and other medicines that are made soothing by heating.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes. Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And never stop to moisten the dislocation and keep rubbing it for a long time with wet hands. And allow the limb to move every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the dislocation has become old and hardened like bone, requiring treatment with an iron instrument, so it should be cut up to the bone at a subtle incision lightly; and place supervision and diligence in the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	This begins the book on dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing great pain and injury to the body.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation affects no particular area but now requires immediate restoration without hesitation.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	For if one delays, the limbs swell up, and by chance it might be set back to its original position in pain; because you should not move it at the moment when it is swollen: many times it brings on pus and other pains;
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	If this happens, if you have a surgeon for the patient, then let him stay until all abscesses are subdued; then immerse the limb in hot water and oil, then reset it gently, and treat each limb according to where treatment comes naturally.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have arranged the chapters on shoulder dislocations up until here.
des mandibules	of the jaws
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	It happens that the jaws are dislocated and downwards, and the dislocations of both occur in two ways: either they are somewhat ossified at their joints and slightly softened; or they are completely dislocated and hang towards the feet, causing saliva from the mouth to spill out, and preventing them from closing their mouths, as well as wrapping their tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When a dislocation is small, it can return through various positions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	And if it's complete and has been fully displaced, then you should reset it quickly without hesitation;
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de .ij. pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And in this manner, have the assistants cut at the head's place where there are hairs, and with one hand push her cheekbones into the root of the jaw dislocation inside the mouth; if it's a dislocation of two parts; and let the other hand be out to match. And instruct the patient to soften and move their jaws in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And keep pushing until she wakes up in her place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if returning it causes pain, in the same way, if they are two jaws together, then use hot water and oil, as long as you gently reset them; don't overly force the return, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	And when they are returned evenly, and the mouth of the patient closes properly after being made milder, then place moist cloths in a poultice made from olive oil and beeswax, then bind them gently with moist threads.
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre .ij. cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	And let the patient sleep on their back, and have their head resting between two cushions, so that they do not move to either side or force themselves to turn, but consume light food until the pains are reduced, and ensure that their jaws are closed.
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And then taste this so that it can be eaten lightly, and does not cause the opening of the mouth during eating or drinking until the jaw is well set and healed.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jaws cannot be set properly within an hour and are not returned to their original position, this results in fevers and recurrent illnesses, as well as occasional abdominal discomfort or vomiting.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	And when you see this, then know that it is loss; and many times, death befalls the one who experiences it within eight days.
de la forcelle	from the forcefulness
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The strength cannot relieve the pain from within or below, it relieves only when outside, and one certainly feels this.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	And the process is that when the patient lies on their back and extends their arms; and then presses them into your palm, they will return. Then place them on a plaster and wrap the bandage around, and keep it tight;
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	And the shoulder that is towards the knife cannot relieve itself; if it does not and if it relieves once, then reset it to its place as we have said; then place it on a plaster and wrap the bandage around, and keep it tight, and instruct the patient to rest until they are healed;
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And similarly, bring back the shoulder of the spine when it is freed from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	On the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc .iij. manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	Know that the shoulder is dislocated only in two ways: one way is when it dislocates towards the side of the armpit downwards; and the second way is at the part below the buttocks; and by chance it dislocates upwards, which happens less often;
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	And it does not dislocate behind the shoulder, nor inside through the nerves; and many times dislocates towards the armpit for those who have little flesh, because when they jump, the shoulder goes in quickly; for those who have enough flesh, it jumps to the elbow bone and then returns to it.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And by chance happens in some men due to impact or bruising, and the shoulder swells up with an abscess and they think it is dislocated because of this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	So then you must verify it as long as you are sure about it; and only after that start the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	And recognize dislocations when they are directed towards the shoulder blade, and make a distinction between the diseased shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find among them an evident diversity.
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	And you will find a hollow at the head of the shoulder, and from the shoulder blade to the armpit, as if it were a hole; and the patient cannot bring his hand back to his nose, nor move in any way.
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	And also, if it is dislocated upwards and not hidden, you find it clearly at the armpit;
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And this method of dislocation must be to reset it when it's new or if it affects the child.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the method is that the minister lifts his hand from the ailment up top, then places his fingers on the surface, and lifts the joint up forcefully to its original position; and the minister lifts his hand, extends it upwards, placing it onto [the affected area]; if it moves too quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	And if it doesn't come like we have said within days afterwards, then the patient should be bathed in hot water; and the minister should administer a soothing treatment, as with decoctions of marjoram, fenugreek, and chamomile in hot water, and apply it.
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	Then cover the patient's back with a cloth, and place on the surface a padding of equal thickness, neither too soft nor too hard, then put the heel of the foot on the padding, and raise the head of the shoulder gently, and guide the hand towards the ailment.
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	And another servant cuts the neck of the patient so it doesn't move forward; this shoulder comes back right now, and if you see that you reset it according to this method:
et est que tu faices estre present .i. home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	And you should have someone present at your home who is bigger than the patient; and be upright towards the side, and push the shoulder under the collarbone of the patient, and lift up the collarbone, so that the head hangs vertically.
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre. Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And another servant pulls the hand of the patient backward towards the belly. And if the head is too light, and nothing heavy is placed on him, then the dislocation comes back now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche .i. lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com .i. pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	And you also reset it in another way: and one sticks a long stick into the ground, so that the head of the shoulder is placed as with a bullet, and not too large nor too slippery;
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	Then place some over the hair, but have a shield underneath it, and let the hair stay as long as that of the stick. Then extend her hand down on the other side diagonally, and the joint will return to its place quickly.
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren .i. tison de .ij. bras de grant et .iiij. dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	and if she doesn't return with all these things that we have said, do this treatment: take one rod of two strong and four thick, which allows the head to fit in by force from below at an angle, according to this shape:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	then bind the head to the stick under a shield so that the stick doesn't hurt the hair, then place the stick on the shoulder at an angle with the hair; and extend your arm up along the stick as long as possible, then tie the support on the stick, and the arm below the head, then put the arm on one of two thick rods, about four inches wide, and have your hand extended downwards, and let the body hang from the other side: the joint will return to its place right now.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is so, in whatever manner, if you need to place an equal thread on the shoulder joint, then apply plaster powder mixed with mill dust, along with incense and yolk butter, all over the shoulder and around it, then remove from the shoulder area, and retie above the plaster dressing, and secure the bandage again on top of the plaster, and hold hands to their necks, and keep the hands in this manner.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is necessary that he eat a little, until the body parts are strengthened, because he will heal faster; and then increase his intake after about 5 days or 10 days, and move him; and if it is firm and not softened, then he is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a iij. pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is loose due to moisture that has caused it, or for another reason, you should administer three applications of cauterization to it, as was described in the section on cauterizations before this chapter.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this, and it dislocates after seven days, and the joint does not hold, and cannot lift your arm up, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder has been stretched or weakened; and know that the joint would never be fixed in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Dislocations near the buttocks, breasts, or behind, are caused by hand thrust and stretching, and occur elsewhere too; treat until it becomes clear.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after healing there's pain in the limb, and delays in movement, then immerse the patient in warm baths repeatedly, until this pain subsides, and returns to their original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	From the dislocation of the shoulder bone.
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	Know that the shoulder joint is dislocated at several points and returns to them; it has been dislocated from all sides, as well as in front and behind. And dislocation isn't resolved because one can clearly see and feel it very well; and it dislocates according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement. Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	And when you join the shoulder bone with good health, if you can see it clearly. For the joint is bony, and cannot bend the arm or touch his shoulder to any extent.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it is necessary that you reset it in this way for abscesses to be extracted completely, because if they were extracted partially and left behind, it would be difficult to remove them; and by chance, it may not be able to be removed entirely, even when it's at the back. It is worse than other dislocations, and causes more pain, and by chance it can lead to death.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And for its restoration if it can be returned to this condition, you should extend his hand with both of your hands; and his arms shall be spread outwards, downwards and upwards, and place the fingers towards the elbow along the inside, outside and underneath, then press the joint onto his shoulder blades or at the root of his palm until it regains its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if there is a dislocation at the front, it returns when he doubles his hand against itself, and places the cut on the root of the palm that was dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	And if it doesn't return to its place, apply strong extension; and have both of you extend the arm, and do this with both hands so that it does not move during extension. Then turn the arm in each direction, then take hold of a long and wide double cloak;
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	And when you touch the joint to the joint with your hand, if you smear some oil to soften the joint, then push the joint together until it heals;
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And when it's at the head, if you place dry plaster with egg yolk on it and push it together, then allow the limb to be in this position near the wound for some days, then remove the bandage.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firmly in its place, remove the bandage and leave it alone; and if you see that the joint does not heal well, reapply the plaster and the bandage again, and leave it like this for a few days until it is firmly placed; then remove the bandage.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse .i. jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	And if it feels painful after setting the joint back in place and it moves again, bathe and thoroughly rub it, pressing until it is relieved; or you apply a piece of fat sheepskin to the joint, then leave it for one day and a night, then give the patient a bath.
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai .ij. fois ou .iij., tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And when it sweats, rub the joint gently, then set the bone back in place, and afterwards into a bath; and do this twice or three times until it feels better; and if you can see that it helps, apply moist cow fat heated with butter to it, and leave it on; it will return to its position.
li dislocation de la main	the dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The hand dislocation recovers easily, more so than other joints, across the board. It is fitting to return it to its place as soon as possible, while it's still dislocated, in this very moment that it has been dislocated, so that the fingers swell up, or if there comes pus exudation hot.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	And the process involves placing your hand on the afflicted area as if it were on a table, and stretching out the minister's hand, then you inspect it to make sure it is even, thus that their palm touches the appearance of the joint, and you hold it until it returns to its position.
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	Always, it must be that you inspect if it is properly in place; then have the afflicted person lay their hand's back on a table during extension and retraction.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele aparance de la jointure. S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, have them place their hand's back on the table, and inspect by having their hand touch the appearance of the joint. If it returns to its position now, that is well.
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If not, if the application of plaster to heal abscesses is too painful, then let it rest as such without beginning anew.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	And if he cannot bear it, and you can't put him back in place after some days, then the joint will remain twisted;
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	And it does no harm to the patient so long as his hands are bound, and he cannot strain anything in any way: thus you will know that the nerve has been cut, or the artery; if there is no other means except cauterizing for straining in this case, then by chance there is no better option.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hands are in place, then apply plaster as we have said, strain it and leave it for five days, then remove it and let it stay like that.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it cannot be moved well, and there is no dislocation, with hot water, and rub until it becomes clean.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	Of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	Neither once are the fingers of the hand separated from their place, neither once on the back of the palm or the belly;
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	Therefore hold the fingers and keep the dislocation away from your ears until it heals, then support the head of the finger, and bend it towards the part where it is disconnected;
et le laisse .ij. jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit,	And let it two days, and then make him equal on that day; and without tying him up, as we have said, and release him from the noose of the day, and make him move, and tie him back at noon; and do this often until he is restricted.
et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	And do the same if it is dislocated at the back of the hand and do as you did above until it's cured; and do this similarly when it is dislocated on the other side.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	With the relief treatment for the heel, with the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the heel or the neck is dislocated, or there are multiple dislocations, if there is no treatment, because time speeds up the disease.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les .ij. cuixes ou li dui bras ou .j.	And the signs are that the discharges escape involuntarily, cannot be held back, and often soften various limbs or both wrists or elbows or shoulders.
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a iiij. pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	And it softens the knees into four parts; the one that softens at the back is called 'gibbosity':
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	The treatment is that you should heal when the gibbosity has come from childhood: if there is no cure or healing in general.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	And the one that comes from falling or impacts or similar things, according to old medical practices using large words, it doesn't provide any significant benefit in all cases;
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	But I have abbreviated it according to my intention, and formed instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	I say that in the gynecological condition which occurs before the anus, there is none nor any remedy;
et ausi cele que vient droitement en .ij. costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	And also in the chest issue that comes straight to the two ribs, and one cannot cure anything else than what directly affects the back, as I say;
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en .i. leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	And that if any disease spreads up to the belly bone equally for one length and has strain on him from within, it does not cause blisters;
puis fiche .i. tison au chief en terre forment, et .i. autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et .i. autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	Then stick one point in the head in the earth, and another at the heels, and tie a bandage around the knee joints, and another at the hips, and knees, and ankles;
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les .ij. tisons;	and let two people know about the bandages, one by the head and the others at the heels, among the two points;
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	and make sure they are well closed, the point as we have said, and the person lying down places their palms on the earth formation, until they regain consciousness.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de .iij. bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	And if she does not recover from this treatment, take a board of three arm lengths long, and place it under the back, and if the patient is on their side, place the head of the board under the back. Then put the middle of the board on the earth formation;
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	Place the eyes of his feet on the other head of the table, and press well, until he comes to himself at the head; and if you see it, do it to the wrist that turns in the hand.
Et est que tu fiches .ij. tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez .ij. autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	And when you place two spurs on the head of one arm of great length, and towards the feet also two others, each with an inch long space in between them;
et ait en chescun tison .i. pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns .ij. tisons ait .i. tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en .ij. tornans .ij. petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	Place one small piece in each spike or where the wrist bends, and ensure that the spikes are firmly in the ground so they don't move. Between every two spikes place another turning spike at which the bone turns, and between the two turners place two other short spikes of an inch long for the purpose of turning the wrist;
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	Then tie the ligament that is between the heels at the wrist to one of the bones, and the other end towards the feet for the other bone, and each servant rotates their wrist fully along the ligament, and the master makes sure the spine is equal as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de .iij. dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when they are even, place them under drying plaster with abundant eggs, and then oil it up, and then apply the ash of a tablet of one and three quarters inches long, which purges the gilbositis site and the healthy part of the spine, then tie it with a bandage as we have said, and let the patient undergo subtle nourishment until they are healed.
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc,	And if anything comes at the end of healing, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines, with the ash that we have mentioned previously; and each time it is administered, one piece of plaster should be given.
et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	And if the appearance comes at the end of the back spine in the back, and you should watch for whether it is dislocation; and this bone opens, so one should not have any presumption about it: otherwise it might bring death.
des dislocations de la hainche	On the dislocations of the hip
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	Know that the joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder only produce dislocations, not sprains; unlike other joints which can be sprained. The hip joint is dislocated in four ways: internally and externally, forwards and backwards; more internally than externally, less so in front and behind.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	And the knowledge of internal dislocations is that when one joins the diseased leg with the healthy one, it becomes longer, and the diseased knee opens more than the healthy one, and the diseased knee cannot bend to reach fire.
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And it is where the limbs are swollen due to an abscess, because the head of the thigh bone comes into play.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the indication for him who is coming to danger, it means that this event is contrary to these before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs for him who is coming to what lies ahead, it means that his leg is well according to completion; however, neither doubles nor stretches his knee without pain, and if one tries to make him move forward, he cannot before and retains his urine, and swells his ankle, and when he walks, he does so on the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs for him who is coming behind, it means that he cannot extend his knee, nor double it, and this leg is more bent than the other one, and the ankle becomes softened, and the shoulder of the arm is at its head under the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The correction of this appearance of dislocation means that you should recognize if the dislocation is old and remains in its position, without any treatment; and it's not appropriate to assume anything.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And concerning those where the dislocation is recent, and there are four ways of dislocation, if you hasten to restore the joint, and stretch it inwards and outwards, and move it right and left; by chance if it returns, and no other treatment is needed.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles .i. ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a .ij. mains, ou a .i. liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	And if it does not return in this way, then you should apply one strong remedy and stretch the leg strongly with both hands, or with one band where they are tied above the knee;
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	and another remedy should be applied with one's hand above in such a way that they push his hands under his armpits, then he pulls it with one strong pull on the thigh; and another holds the head against the band.
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And it extends upstream and downstream at once, until the patient is lifted from the ground at once, and remains hanging.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of extension applies to four similar cases, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is correct.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance. Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	But if not, treatment should be given according to its appearance. If the dislocation is in the pardedens, it would be fitting to set the patient's side against a healthy one, then tie him near the heel, and above the armpit, then place the bandage at the top towards the armpit, and toward the backside;
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	Then hold another minister's arms and encircle the large side of the bad heel, and extend it upwards in this form: if it returns to its place now; and this kind of dislocation is lighter than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les .ij. piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les .ij. talons, et sus les .ij. genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue .ij. dois plus que li autres;	And if you cannot squeeze it in this way as we have said, then it is necessary that you bind the two feet of the patient together with a strong rope or string under the two heels, and under the knees, and make sure the diseased leg extends one foot more than the other;
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre .ij. bras de lonc; puis comande a .j. ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	Then have them hung by the head from a post, and be two feet above ground; then instruct one of your assistants to hold the head of the thigh bone, and have other assistants with the patient, who will hold around the thigh firmly, for the joint is now returning quickly.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne .i. liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	And when the dislocation is at back, if you place the thigh bone as we said in someone who has elasticity, and pull one rope properly on the diseased leg and also on the foot.
puis met .ij. tisons, .i. au chief et .i. autre as piez, puis fiche .i. tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	Then place two thorns, one on the head and one elsewhere. Then stick a thorn between the armpits of the patient at the right angle;
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	and have wet cloths placed around him, so he doesn't burn the patient, then extend each minister towards himself, and place the vision of the dislocation evenly with his hand.
S’elle revient, c’est boin. Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If it comes back, that's good. If not, place him on a table and press him in such a way as we have said for the gilbositis treatment, and let the patient lie on the healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when dislocations are in front, it is necessary to extend the diseased leg promptly, and according to what I have said; and place the pain of being on the bad side, then press with the other hand, and pull forward towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les .ij. hainches;	And if the dislocations are at the back, it is not necessary to extend the leg behind or lift onto the ground, but rather the limb should be in the same position as when the hip was dislocated at the back, just like we said about lying on the two hips.
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	And lie on their face, and extend the joint like we have said before, and one must press at the joint on the table;
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	And it will be ready when the patient extends their legs and they are of equal length. Then adjust their hips and apply a plaster, and bind them with a bandage so that they do not move;
et se repose .iij. jors ou .iiij., puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse. iij. jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And they rest for three or four days, then release them and apply the plaster. And if you see that they are of equal length, bind them as before, and leave them for another three days. Then release them again and let them move well, until the limbs have become strong.
de la dislocation dou genoil	From shoulder dislocation
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The knees can be dislocated in two ways: this means, internally and externally, and behind; and they do not dislocate forward.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	And the signs are that you instruct the patient to bend their leg at their knee, and if they cannot reach their knee, you know they are dislocated;
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	and the restoration of everything is that you make the patient stand straight, and extend their leg if they can, and place your back against their thigh, and set their foot on your feet;
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les .ij. costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	then take their kneecap in your palms, and pull between your fingers, then bend the two sides of the knee together; and another attendant extends their foot until the knee returns to its place. And the signs are that they nicely move their leg at the knee gently.
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort .iij. jors ou iiij., puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	put the bandage on, and allow the leg to rest at the knee, then join them tightly for three or four days, then release. And do not move the injured limbs until they are healed, as long as the body parts have been strengthened.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the limb is not yet at all, administer strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the hip joint, until it is healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the ankle dislocation
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heels are never properly set and never fully released, both inside and outside.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	And the signs for this are that the ankle swells up, and tends forward to the part where it was dislocated:
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	The movement should be swift; one must gently extend their hands when they are merely stretched out.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne .i. ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	And when it has come back to its place entirely, it is necessary that you make the patient sit up straight, and hold him with two attendants behind by his leg, above the ankle;
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre .ij. fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	Then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and then again with your left hand, four times, then lift up and firmly hold the foot high;
et fai ce .ij. fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	And do this twice, as we have said, while holding and pulling the foot; if it returns, that is well; if not, begin the process again, for it will return.
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche .i. passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	And if it cannot return like this, then release the patient's back towards the ground, and place a stick, and push it firmly into the earth between its buttocks, and tie cloths around it, so that it does not bruise the patient.
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a .i. liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	then scrape his thighs, and other attendants spread his feet to his hands or under one tie, so they are bound around the neck of the foot;
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	then extend each attendant evenly, and let the stick stay between the thighs of the patient to hold the thigh in place when one extends it.
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	then position both shoulders evenly at the patient's hands, and other attendants scrape the healthy leg up to the knee, and the dislocated shoulder will return quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	And when it is at its point, place the plaster and apply hot iron over it, hold it in place firmly, and tie the stick to the leg, guard against the nerves that are behind the ankle, so they are not too tight;
puis le laisse .ij. jors ou .iij., et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par .iiij. jors;	Then leave it for two or three days, and if the bandage comes loose, hold it in place again; then release it on the third day or fourth, and gently guide the patient for four days;
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And if he moves beyond this period, it is not secure that he will not dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the pus comes out, you should soothe it, as we have said elsewhere, until it is healed.
des dois	From these two
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When both shoulders are dislocated, if they suit well to extend them by work, and this is a slight matter.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus .i. leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	And if the dislocations are in neither back nor seat bones, you should have the patient sit on or on the end of their back, making sure it is perfectly flat or on a table completely upright, and place your foot on what opens from these joints, then press with your foot firmly until they regain consciousness;
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a .ij. chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse .iij. jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when they are level and there is nothing open, place a bench of two stools under the foot's sole, then press firmly, and let it stay for three days, then release him; and have him rest until he recovers.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	Regarding wounds and dislocations combined
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	When a wound comes with a dislocation, and one seeks to restore it, many times the patient dies:
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	if you are not presumptuous in the treatment, if you are wise in the art and have used it for a long time, and if you are compassionate and merciful but not hasty;
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	and begin with soothing things for the abscess to drain, and leave the patient in God's hands if you do not see hope of recovery;
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	And when you see hope, reset the limb back to its place immediately, so that the abscesses can drain and heal.
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	And when the limb is back in place, apply soothing ointments to the abscesses and treat the wound as it should be treated, using dried healing substances.
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	And if there is breaking with dislocation and small fractures, set the bones, and do as we have instructed for simple diseases.
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors. Amen	And beware not to fall into the path of fear, as I have said, for this is what your Creator commands you to do, and through knowledge protect yourself and your body. Amen.
Explicit le romen de fisique	Here comes the first sentence to translate.
