O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	You dear children, I have completed this book which is the culmination of medical knowledge collection and compilation, finishing it through its explanations and declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And in my vision, I thought of completing it with this manual tool, which is part of the work of hands, that is to say "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is highly practiced in our region and spread everywhere, if the science has been lost or abandoned, there are no longer any remnants from it other than small descriptions found in books written by the ancients that were used with the hands.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And because of this, errors and vanity have arisen, and closed minds occur, causing the loss of knowledge.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation;	It seems to me that I can revive this treatise together with its arrangement, according to the path of exposition and declaration, and abbreviation;
et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	And I will bring together the forms of the metal cauteries and other tools of surgery, along with their appropriate arrangement and preparation for use, as is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because no skilled physicians can be found in our times, the art of medicine has been lost.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	It is necessary that one who interferes in this matter become proficient in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so long as they understand the position of the limbs, their shapes and connections and separations, have knowledge of bones and nerves and muscles, know the number of bones, the movement and location of mobile and stationary veins, and the origin of their exit.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc;	And this is what Hippocrates said: we lack nothing with knowledge, and yet we are poor with work;
et meismement en l’art de main.	In the art of manual skills as well.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes;	We tell you at the beginning of this book that if someone is unaware of what has been said before, they may fall into error and misuse others;
ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	Just as I have seen many who interfere with this science and abandon their studies without experimenting;
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col;	For I saw a foolish doctor who treated a lymph node or sore throat on a woman's neck, and also cut her arteries from the neck;
por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	because so much blood flowed out that the woman died in her hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans;	And saw another doctor treating a stone in an old man's kidney, and the stone was large;
si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	he took out with it a piece of the bladder, and he died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I have already been called to draw blood, and saw the arrangement of the body part and the size of the stone, and if he had let me cut him it would have led to his death.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie;	And saw another doctor who treated our local duke whose leg was broken, and with the breaking there was an injury;
et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine;	and the doctors, full of ignorance, allowed the breaking to occur on the wound like it was done by strong joy, and did not allow any healing for the injury, and let this end.
et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie;	And he commands not to dislocate it;
et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And wait like the leg was fully grown and the feet, leading to destruction.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe;	I hurry to come to him, and quickly rush to dislocate the leg;
et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	And when I hear it dislocated so smoothly without any pain being felt.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner;	But all the corruption was already confirmed or member, and could not be cured;
et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	And the corruption continued to spread through the member until the limb was completely lost.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And there is another mark that collapses an abscess, then inflames it due to the wickedness of its lordship.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For a gangrene, when it is full of melancholic humours, it should not be touched with iron if it has not been cut in such a way that all that is corrupted can be removed.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions:	And for this reason, dear children, you need to know that the art of surgery is divided into two parts:
c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions;	that means, surgery where there is danger in multiple positions;
et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And I will show you in each part of this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	Because it is necessary that you keep them, so that the foolish might not speak ill of you.
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez;	If you take your weapons in caution, and treat your ailments lightly yet firmly, and employ the best means so that through the grace of God you come to salvation and remain healthy;
et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit;	and leave the terrifying diseases without relief for health;
et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	Remove your weapons from those who make you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you may come from this world to the other with glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens:	Galien declares in none of these admonishments:
«Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Never take a remedy for an illness when you're not called crazy by your fellow villagers.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have composed this treatise according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez;	The first chapters deal with fire cautery and medicinal cautery, and are arranged from the head down to the feet;
et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	and the shapes of the instruments, and the tools for cautery, and everything else that is necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses;	The second chapters are about cutting and piercing, and suction cups and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things;
et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	and these chapters are arranged with the shapes of the instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses;	The third chapters deal with restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things;
et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	And it is organized according to the location of the head up to the elbow, and regarding the shapes of the instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Just as we remind ourselves of the work, it is fitting that I describe the quality of each remedy and its harm for each constitution.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus;	I say that the qualities of help, and harm, is the longest speech and subtlest science and the hidden answers;
et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu;	And many wise ones spoke about this, agreeing with it;
et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	And they find my words insufficient, for I fear the length of it.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions:	I say that the cautery helps universally in all constitutions where there is matter, for there are two types of constitutions:
c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	This means knowing that the hot constitution has matter and the dry constitution also has matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide;	In the combination of hot and dry constitutions with matter, they devised something and said that the cautery is great help;
et li autre dirent le contraire:	And the other said otherwise:
que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	that the cautery is only good for illness that comes from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour;	For the nature of fire is so hot, and should not be treated with hot illnesses by heat or dryness;
et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	And this person who said the opposite states that the cautery provides great help to hot and dry illnesses that come from within the body.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the body of the person and their moisture to the condition of fire, you find that the body is cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this word.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it true every time by experimentation.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens;	And through any means, do not interfere except for the one who has experienced it, and who knows from long use of the chapter on cauteries, and the variety of human complexions, and the dispositions and causes of their illnesses, and the occurrences and duration;
des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	For other complexions we have nothing more to say, especially in matters of cold and wet illnesses.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all of them gathered together with the fire cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, my children, that the assembly of a fire cautery has secrets in healing, and brings more benefit than a burning medical cautery.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and it only affects the limb that is being treated, not harming any other limbs if properly done.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation;	The hot medicines spread from one body part to another upon application, causing diseases if not properly treated;
et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	and by chance they bring the injury to the patient.
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	The fire for its height and due to the goodness of its substance does not do this thing if there is no excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses;	And I have found this through experimentation and the length of my service and study in the art, it was based on the truth of things;
et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant;	And for this I apologize for the length of my words, because it does not please me to disclose the secret which is revealed by fire and the quality of the work, how it removes diseases from the body, as the philosopher explains in demonstrating;
or le recevez en vos pensees.	Receive it in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, child, that they agreed on what times the cauterizations should be made, and set fire to them.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere;	And I say that the cautery is suitable in all circumstances, for the nuisances arising are greatly mitigated by the aid of the cautery;
et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And indeed, if the cautery is for necessary pains beyond and after which cannot wait until a greater mischief befalls the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire;	And never think it, dear boy, as do those foolish lookers-on;
car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue;	for the disease that is cured by cautery does not recur;
et il le dient ensi;	and he says it thus;
mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	But it is not as they think, for the cautery is but a medicine that modifies the complexion and dries out the fluids causing pain. It is worth more than medicines due to its speed in enhancing its value and the virtue of its work and authority.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut;	And things that can happen is that the disease will come at any time according to the composition of the patient's body and the location of the illness and its nature;
et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie;	And it happens that excesses accumulate in him through the acquisition of meats and similar things; if this is not treated with a cautery where there's excess moisture or dampness, such as hot cauterizations for pain, and similar things, then such pain does not return.
mais ce avient poc.	But this happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir;	And few understand why cauterizations are called the last of medicine; it's something to be seen.
mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	But they don't believe that cauterizations are to be used after medicine; their understanding is false. Cauterizations are the last resort in medicine because when our methods of treatment fail in any illness and do not work, then we administer a cauterization, and it proves effective.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore it's clear that cauterization is part of medicine, not according to the thoughts of ignorant people though.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance;	The old ones said that cauteries of gold instruments are more effective than those made of iron, and they stated this because of the quality of gold and due to its high quality substance;
et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes;	and they said that the metal of the cautery does not cause putrefaction, but this is not visible; it's just a statement because I have experimented with it and found out that indeed it becomes visible in some individuals.
et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	Gold cauteries are better than iron ones, as they said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez;	And yet, when you heat an iron instrument, you may not notice it being heated by the color of the gold, and then suddenly it cools down.
et s’on le chaufe trop;	and if it is overheated;
si font au feu;	if they use the fire;
et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And thus I have enough obstruction.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And that is why we use iron cauterization tools that we have adapted to our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	And you have ordered this chapter on the animal's head up to the nose, because its visibility is easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	For the olive cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	The olive cautery is effective against moisture and cold in the brain, and there are two ways to do it due to an illness called 'soda', and due to many humors that descend from the head to the eyes, ears, and for a multitude of dreams and toothaches, throat pain, and especially all diseases caused by cold such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir;	The form of this cautery is such that the patient should be cleansed with a solvent medicine, altering the body's three humors or four, depending on how well the properties and heat and habit of the patient can endure it;
et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	and then restore the head of the patient.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis;	And then make them sit cross-legged between your hands, and place their feet on a hard surface;
aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz;	after place the root of your palm over the root of his nose between his second fingers;
et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	and when your thumbs reach there, if blood flows from the nose then warm the cautery called "olive" which has this form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant;	And place it at its proper position with ink as a mark, and make your way down and hold your hand gently and gradually while adjusting.
puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit;	Then ease your hand slightly, and check if you can see the bone when it moves a little;
et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit;	And if you do not see it, start the cautery again until you see the bone as I have instructed;
aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors;	After taking some wool, prepare and make it soft inside, then place it at its proper position, and let it be for three days;
aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre;	After put butter on moist cotton;
et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	And leave it until the scab is completely dried off;
aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treat the wound with ointment known as 'tetrafarmac', until it heals properly.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge;	And those who were of old would say, that when a wound is left open longer, more purges out;
et por ce si aide mues.	and because of this, the help moves.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And they say none of these that we must let the cautery burn until part of the bone is burned, and then reset the one that has been burnt by the bone, and treat it.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors;	And those who say otherwise state that the cautery should be applied and pressed as long as necessary, and push so hard on it until you can displace bone like a finger that women use when they are pregnant; because fluids should flow out from this.
et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte;	And must the wound be left open for a long time;
aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	After that, one should clean and dry it.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor;	And these two methods of cauterization do not seem to be good for all purposes, except in certain cases where there is a risk of infection;
et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier;	And it seems to me that I should let it alone;
car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres;	because the head of the shoulder is weakened by continuous exposure to nature's substances, as we testify regarding other members.
et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And indeed when the shoulder head is weak due to nature, and the first sign of a cautery is more healing for me, and from this I work thus assembling together a cure.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	From old age pain of the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres;	When chronic pain in the head occurs and lasts for a long time, one should use the patient's ears and pills which are called "couchie," and also perform cleansing of the head and ears and apply bandages;
et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	And if one performs the cautery as we have previously mentioned, it does not work.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit;	Take care that the shoulder of the sick person is of strong constitution, and do not let it be too cold;
adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Therefore, treat with a small fire cautery as we have described above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»;	After you perform the cautery on each hoof up to the bone, as we said before, and do the cautery where the bone is called 'vessel';
et est I leus en coi on met ventouses;	and place there what one uses for suction cups;
et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os:	Move your hand so that you do not see until the bone:
li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors;	The patient feels too much greater pain in this cautery compared to others, and I will speak about it elsewhere;
et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	It is necessary that the cauterizations of the horns be more subtle than that of the middle part of the head, and this is the form:
dou cautere dou chief	The fire cautery commands the patient to let his hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie:	When pain suddenly comes in part of the head, and extends to the eye, and the shoulder is cleared by purifying medicines, and other treatments have been done as I said in the section on diseases, and nothing benefits:
adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	Therefore apply cautery according to two methods, namely using medicinal heat and fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir;	The cauteries using medicinal heat involve taking a dose of oil, and removing the bark and coating it over the two heads, then apply it around where the pain is located in such a way that you can place the oil right under the skin.
et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres;	And when it has been placed, if it adheres well and you keep it in place for twelve hours;
et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III;	Then remove the oil bandage and remove the garlic oil, and leave the wound for two days or three;
puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	Then place a butter poultice on it until heat comes out.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	After the ointment treatment as long as it is effective;
et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	And if you see it necessary to use some of the burning medicines that I have written about or described in the tenth treatise on burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The iron cautery follows this method.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cautery of which I have described:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance;	And it is called "closed" because the head takes on the shape of an oxen horn where there is a slight curvature at the beginning and a small appearance in the middle;
et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse;	and place it in the painful area, hold your hand and gently twist the iron, until half of the tip of the key is burned;
et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	and let your hand rest so that no artery burns and it opens, allowing an abundance of blood to flow.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors;	After placing cotton in a sailcloth, place it on the wound for three days;
puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	then put moistened cotton in butter, and then apply ointment to the wound until it is clean;
et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	And if you wish to cauterize this migraine with the fire cautery called 'cultellare', do it across its entire tip, and be careful not to cover the artery in this migraine which is not old.
de emigraine	Of the headache
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans;	When you treat a migraine as we have previously discussed in the divisions of diseases, and if it doesn't improve, and you observe that the cauterizations mentioned earlier from medical knowledge do not affect this migraine, then you should heat up the cautery called 'cultellare' until it becomes white.
et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os;	And so begin in such a way that along the length there is half an inch line, and hold your hand once, making sure you do not cover the artery and go up to the bone.
et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez;	And be wary of the jaw that clamps shut when chewing, and ensure there is only silence in the mouth, with no spasms affecting the patient. And beware of bleeding from the artery when it's covered, or if the covering causes great fear and similarly for those who are unaware of this practice, and have not studied nor experienced it;
et laisse l’uevre em mi voie;	and let the work continue within my path;
mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	but I will tell you how to stop bleeding when an artery is cut, and I will show you where it happens in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	And if you see that this cautery does not heal the disease, and the patient is suffering, then apply it to the middle of the head as we said, and treat the wound until it heals;
et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz;	And if you see this, apply the cautery that we said or from the chapter of artery extraction, with the cautery that has two knives;
et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	and these cauterizations are better and more helpful than others.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of the pain of the ears due to cold
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When cold causes pain in the ear, and we have applied remedies that dissolve it as well as other treatments that we have mentioned in this division, and if the pain does not subside, then apply this cautery which is called "points", its use is as follows:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche;	After pointing out the whole area around the diseased ear, or around both places where pain is felt, and then moves away slightly from the base of the ear after you have indicated its place.
et ait X poins entor chescune oreille;	And has X points within each ear;
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	after the treatment until it becomes healthy.
de la torture de la bouche	of the torment/pain in the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie;	Treatments that should be cured with cauterization are not limited to those that move with the bloodstream, as we have said in our divisions of diseases;
et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	and do not apply cauterization to swellings that come from seborrhea and pus of nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres:	When you treat this type of treatment that moves with the urine and bodily discharges and gargling, if it doesn't respond, then it's necessary for you to cauterize the patient with three applications.
l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres;	One in the root of the ear, and the other slightly outside the temple, and the third at the adjustment of the two lips;
et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce;	And place the cautery on the healthy part that opens, and apply heat at the head of the ear somewhat below the horn of the head, and another near the temple as long as a hand.
et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse;	And leave the cautery in place until half of the ear is burnt.
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And that is the shape of the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros;	And it resembles the scissoring instrument that we placed before, but it's a bit more refined, and you should use scissors that are slightly thicker;
aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treating the wound as I've explained previously, do so until it is healed.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres:	When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, and if it doesn't benefit, and the patient doesn't get fever, then apply four cauterizations:
II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac;	On the second horns of the head, and at the base of the head, and where the neck is called 'wattles' as we have previously mentioned, and at the back, the cautery on the mouth of the stomach;
et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	And so treat it in the way that we have said before.
de litargie	of liturgy
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil;	For this illness, you should give the patient large years and almond pills to clear the brain;
aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres;	After rinsing the head of the patient thoroughly, and place the plaster of saffron on the back of the head as is written or as a treatment for plasters;
et c’est li maniere dou cautere:	and this is the way to perform the cautery:
si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	do it as I have told you.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est;	If they do so thus, well done;
et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros;	And if it is not so, have three fire cauteries applied halfway down the neck until reaching the collarbone, and leave an interval of about two fingers between each cautery.
et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu;	And treat it in the same manner as the others; if you find that it is fitting, and the patient is suffering, then apply a fire cautery halfway through.
et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if further treatment is needed, two more on the two horns (likely referring to areas or parts), and treat until it has healed;
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	And let the cauterizations known as "olivar" be those that I have described earlier.
de la froidor dou chief	from cold of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit;	It is necessary for the head to be cleaned of years and what we have mentioned before.
aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col;	After removing the head of the disease, then apply a fire cauterization halfway down the head and on each horn, and once at the back and three times near the spine of the neck;
et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos;	And if you need more expertise, and the body is moist and the patient suffers, and the disease has been expelled, then perform four cauterizations on the spine at the back;
et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main;	And let it be as gentle as possible until the best warmth remains, and lift your hand;
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	After the cure as long as it is clean, and let it be the cauterization which is called "the olive" that we have mentioned before.
de l’epilempsie	From the cautery
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	The epileptics should only use the cautery for those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary to first modify the brain with years and other treatments that we have mentioned in the section where the body parts suffer from medicine's effects.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes;	And if it's an infant who cannot endure pain, then perform gargling and chewing, often mixing the brain with good meats;
aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne;	After the king in the middle, and I perform a cauterization as we have said before, and one cauterization on the vessel, and on each horn;
et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if the patient is in pain and suffering outside their body, apply cauteries as I have instructed for those with paralysis and softening of limbs, on the spine in the back and neck area. Follow the olive-shaped cautery method according to the way I've described it.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is young, apply a fine cautery according to this method:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When it is due to melancholy that the excesses or fluids are corrupted and thickened, then apply a partial cautery as we have described for the person who has paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if it is due to melancholy that the excesses decline into melancholy and the body is wet with malaise, then let them drink something so that the brain might be purified, as described in the section before on purification.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide;	After the head of the disease;
aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief;	Afterwards, make me a linen thread well done, like a circle, if you place it around the head;
et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars;	And let the patient lie still, and ensure that all parts are well supported;
aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien;	Afterward apply the liniment, and rub in with old beeswax;
et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir;	And heat it on fire moderately, so that the warmth can be tolerated by the patient or the pot can be placed comfortably;
aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier;	After emptying the cavity from within through the mouth, and leaving it to cool.
et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And do this to the patient once every week with another form of governance until it has healed.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	Or if you wish to cauterize him, do by making points on all parts of the cautery.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument;	This method of cautery moistens the brain more significantly;
et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	Then place damp cotton, butter, and grease from gelatine on it.
de l’awe des eulz	regarding the treatment of eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the eyes start moving according to the signs I have mentioned in division, then begin and continue to give something purifying to the patient for their head, protecting them from all moisture. Have them sweat or take baths several times on an empty stomach.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I;	After instructing it to raise its head, and have it apply the cautery to the head, and apply two cauterizations on the two temples where the decrease in awareness is at the two eyes together, or if the decrease occurs in one.
et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple;	And apply the entire cautery to all veins and arteries that are around the core, and make sure to apply the cautery long enough according to the width of the temples;
et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	And you must know of bloodletting, and if you see too much blood coming out, then stop it by pressing with your hand as you can.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras;	And I will teach you about the extraction of arteries and how to apply cautery, and how to stop its bleeding;
et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	And never do you apply cautery or heat near the two bones behind.
dou cors des larmes	of the streams of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors;	When the eyes' tears are old and accustomed, and located above the veins, or near the arteries that are outwardly visible;
et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz:	And it's seen that they are cold damp excesses, so I have him apply the cautery that I mentioned at the start when descending on the eyes:
I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os;	I apply cautery to the forehead, and two applications of cautery on each temple, and two near the two bones;
et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	And if need arises for more, cauterize him wisely above the eyebrow with every small cautery.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	of the streams of tears from within the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies;	When you treat him according to what we have said in the division, and if he does not benefit from it, then give him three large pots of water.
aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire;	After the king (presumably referring to the patient), and I make him cauterize or midway between the cauterization with olive oil;
et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous;	and do two cauterizations of the cauterization which is called "claw" on the two eyebrows, a little above the hair;
et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	and be careful not to cover the artery as you do this.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the cautery which is called "claw":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the paper of the oil has been softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize it with this type of cautery called "olive".
de coi ci est li forme:	of which I have described:
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont;	And if you see that two cauterizations on the two eyebrows as long as they reach the eyebrows;
et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And do not let your hand rest until a third of the paper is burned, according to the method that I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	of the hair that touches the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres:	No time has it happened that the hair of the oils turns into fat and grabs the oil, and then one performs cauteries according to two ways:
c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	This means knowing either fire or burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals;	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even;
et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	And if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain;	When they have grown and are even, then instruct the patient into their healthy position;
aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz;	After writing about the eyes on a piece of paper, there should be a figure that looks like a leaf of myrtle, and this is where the beginning of the sign indicates the presence of hairs.
puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Then I place moist cotton and quail's egg mucus with garlic oil on the eye, then heat up the cautery which is in this shape:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit;	After cauterizing on the figure you have indicated slowly and slowly just a few times, so that the scars are at the exact spot;
et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil;	And the signs of the health of the work are that you see the paper retreat, and the hairs stand up at the edge of the eye;
adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	Then lift your hand and leave it like this for three days, then put moist cotton in butter until the scab is removed;
aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the oil cure while it is still ointment-like.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers;	And when this has been done and the hairs appear, and the skin is softened then proceed with the cautery over that same area, just like you did at first;
et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if the hairs have fallen out, apply the cautery until the skin rises to its natural position and evenly, not prickling the hairs with the tool.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte;	The hot medical cautery you instructs the patient to let the hairs grow until they are large and even; then make of parchment the shape of the bay leaf.
puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien;	Then take French soap and fresh lye, from each one use half spoonfuls, and grind them together well;
et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz;	And make haste, so that it does not cool, then blow upon the shape you have made as if it were a leaf of myrtle, and place it on the paper with the eyes.
et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi;	And if the illness lasts only in one oil [a unit of measurement], then one should open it there, and if it affects both similarly;
et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef;	And place damp cotton over the oil as you would an egg;
et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	And the head of the disease be in your health and place your hand on the medicine, and press the paste onto it every time that the disease feels the medicine's bite, for it feels the bite as if from fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for some time, apply the medicine to your finger.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision;	And when the bite is gone, lift up the arm from there, and reward you if you see the paper lifted just as it was lifted by the constraint of fire or through an incision;
et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And if this is the case, then do well.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point;	If not, then try applying more medicine to the affected area or wait for the medicine to take effect, until your operations are equal and your eyes set right;
puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then apply moistened cotton with butter until the oil in your ears is absorbed. After that, scrape off the ointment from the affected area which is called 'dyafenis' and other substances, while keeping it clean.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if this requires that you keep well to your work by great care so that no medicine leaks into your eyes.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant;	And if the paper becomes oily and the hair sticks in the oil after that, if you have to apply medicine again on the area that has been properly softened by clean paper, do it in the same way as before;
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	After scraping until it is clean.
et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And this is the shape of the leaf of myrtle:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens;	Know that eyes in humans vary greatly in size and smallness, and according to this, your instructions should be made.
et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And do not let the right way be answered by him who studies this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	On the treatment of fistula by cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have described in the divisions of diseases, and your treatments are not beneficial, then it is necessary for you to apply cautery according to this manner.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain;	Instruct the patient to place their head in your good health;
et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief;	and guide the surgeons' heads between your hands in such a manner that they do not move and do not lose their heads;
aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil;	after this, put in an egg or myrrh juice on the eye;
aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz:	after heat up the cautery which is made of metal:
et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere;	and place it on the head just like the shape of a feather from a rooster, ensure that you apply the cautery;
se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente;	If you see, it may appear from one side head to the other, and if you see, it may also look like a tent;
mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	but still, this is what should be done for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche;	After pressing the fistula if it's opened, and treat the putrefaction, and dry it;
et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe;	and if it's closed, let the work proceed, and remove it from the bowel;
aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie;	after placing the fire cautery in position, hold your hand on the fire cautery at the part close to the nose above the eye, so that your hands do not do anything foolish;
et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	and place the cautery in the oil's fat, and corrupt it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you proceed to the beginning of the cautery up to the bone, it would be well.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors;	If not, then apply the fire cautery again once or if needed, and leave it for three days.
aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers;	After placing damp cotton on butter, and apply the ointment remover cure until it is clean. If more than thirty days have passed without improvement, then apply an astringent liquid medicine until the bone is exposed;
et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	And follow this according to whatever comes in his chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a method for cauterizing fistulas that none of the old ones mentioned.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu;	Understand the fistula, and let it heal;
aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	After that, place inside the cut a finely sliced piece of the substance shown here:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc;	and do it in quantity of three spoonfuls of honey;
et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil;	Hold your hand or the substance firmly, and do not allow the patient to move, ensuring that the honey melts properly into their mouth;
et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe:	And it is necessary to place on the eye of the patient a moistened cotton ball, like an egg or an oval shape:
li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	The surgeon operates on the diseased area, while preserving healthy parts marvelously through surgery.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healed by the cautery method we have described, it's good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	And if not, then it is necessary to apply petasite to the nose, and bring the fistula back into the body under the nose according to what should be done in its own proper place.
des crevaices en levres	of cuts in lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times, cuts occur in the lips that are called "whiskers", and also in children's lips.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cuts using the method we've discussed in sections, and if the treatment doesn't work, then use this: apply a small surgical torch on the size of this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font;	And he quickly places them in those cuts until they grow to the full size;
aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment of the area, until it is fully healed.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess on the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule;	When an abscess comes to the root of the throat or in the kidney, or under the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, after causing gangrene and swelling and becoming infected, it develops into a fistula;
et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie:	And you treat it as we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit at all:
adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule;	So, it is necessary for you to have the cautery according to the size of the ulcer;
aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu;	after the mouth or recess of the ulcer, and hold your hand until the iron turns red at its bottom, and onwards;
et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do this once or twice, after the treatment of what we have said in treatments, as long as it is clean;
et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin;	and if it is treated like this, it's good;
et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	and if it is not treated like that, then you must expose the bone and remove the decayed bone, according to what you will find in your chapter.
dou movement des dens	of the movement of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain;	When the gums become soft due to moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicine but it doesn't work, then apply the head of the patient in your healthy state;
aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent;	After heating the cautery until its form comes thereafter as follows, you place a stick near the tooth;
et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent;	and place inside the cautery until it's hot quickly, and hold your hand so that the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth;
aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit;	after you slightly lift your hand, and continue with the cautery according to your desire.
aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	after you fill the patient's mouth with salty water, and leave it there for an hour, then remove it.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this manner the tooth which was moving is now fixed, and the softened gums are held back, and the moisture that caused damage becomes dried.
de la dolor des dens	from the pain of teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres:	When tooth pain comes from coldness, or there is coldness or fever, and medical treatments are ineffective, then it requires cautery according to two methods:
et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	and butter cautery and fire cautery.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain;	The fire cautery made from butter is such that you take cow's butter, and at the tip use a spoon made of iron or anointing stick;
aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez;	Take cotton and wrap it on the tip of a tent, soak in butter until it's saturated, then place it over the painful tooth quickly and hold until it cools down.
et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	And do this often until the butter's properties reach the root of the tooth. If you see wet wool and cotton saturated in cold butter, place them over the aching tooth, and hold it on hot iron until the heat reaches the gum around the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide;	The fire cautery made from iron or anointing stick is such that you take it, and make it large enough so the heat does not reach the skin of the patient;
aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez;	After heating the cautery, from which its form will come afterwards, place it on the teeth and hold your hand until the cautery is cooled.
fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	Do this often, for the pain will be alleviated either that same day or the next.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer;	And it is necessary that the patients fill their mouths with good butter in anticipation of the heat of the cautery, and then quickly remove it.
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	and this is the shape of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir;	And make the cautery according to how much you desire, and according to what you can do;
et c’est li forme de la caine:	and this is the form of the cane:
des scrophules	regarding the pock marks
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie;	When the scrophules are of cold phlegm and moisture and do not respond to digestion by medicines, then heat the cautery with that which comes after in form, and have it open two openings for the steam to exit from the other side of the cautery;
et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume;	And apply the fire cautery to the abscess once, or twice as necessary, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess;
et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors;	And if the abscess is small, apply the cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it in place for about three days;
et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee;	And cover with damp cotton saturated in oil until the splinter is extracted;
aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treatment of local inflammation and tenderness until it heals.
Li forme de la cainne:	The shape of the cane:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives;	When the moistures overcome in the channels of the heart, and especially when it comes from a cold constitution, then it is necessary that the body be purged first with diuretic medicines;
aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	After applying the cautery to the base of the throat, and be careful not to come all the way up to the throat, and don't burn too deeply but just a little.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant;	Afterwards perform another cautery at the joint of the neck with respect to the base of the spine, and it should be understood that this type of cautery is known as "the clavicle", from which we have a depiction before us.
et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat the shoulder in accordance with what I have previously stated until it becomes healthy.
de la toust	Of cautery by fire, command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai .II cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis;	When all and the diseases of the womb are due to cold moisture, and the patient does not have fever or dryness, and it's an old disease, then perform two cauterizations on their legs at their knee joints;
et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles;	and do another cautery right between the two breasts near the buttocks.
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	And make sure that you use the cautery known as "the clavicle" according to the form described beforehand.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles;	And if you see, make the cautery by touching with all the point of the fire tool which is named 'point' as it was described in the disease of ears;
et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	and let there be points up to XXX, or at least that many.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After treating the area according to what has been described, perform three rounds of cautery following this pattern:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And because of this they are performed with a lighter cautery, for you do it three times over each area.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit;	Afterwards, wrap the patient's back and sides;
aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre;	Afterward, lift the stone inside the prostate with your left hand;
et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	and if the joint is dislocated inside, rub the fire tool which has two prongs as shown here:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres;	and apply the cautery to the stone until it touches the side, and make a shape with four cauterizations together.
et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres;	and for this, use the fire tool that has three prongs, so there are six cauterizations in total.
et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	And the nerves are arranged like the subtlety of a tent and it is the form of the cautery which has three nerves:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And fix it on this one nerve because there are seven burns in relation to this.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil;	After placing the cautery on, grind with twigs;
aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After having him rest, do not let the patient's limbs be strained for too long until they are well supported.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it has been dislocated there, with very little happening, then perform a cautery on the thickness of the clavicle cautery, or do a few cauterizations.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joint is closed, and the moisture is expelled from it, and the patient's injuries are treated.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	For when colds and moisture reach the stomach while it is in harmony with its constitution, they increase the production of phlegm within him. These conditions are multiplied by over-indulgence in certain treatments that he follows without benefit. Therefore, it's necessary for the patient to wear a cloak on his back, extend his legs and arms.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture;	From that on, I apply three cauterizations over the heel area by the quantity of two, for each cautery at the wrist, and two cauterizations below the two sides as long as the pattern of cauterizations forms three angles, and they have space between them so they do not stick together when they develop ulcers;
et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	And let the cauterization be done sufficiently that it reddens the two parts of the knee, and let the pattern of the cauterizations follow this form without adjustment:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme;	And if you see it being cauterized with a large cautery in the stomach according to this form;
et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche;	And the one who feels fear from this cautery, apply it firmly and strongly to the stomach I point number 1 according to the amount you see of its application;
puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	Then cauterize with all the cautery which is called 'points'.
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment we have discussed previously, as long as it remains clear.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez;	As for the liver, it experiences pain due to coldness, moisture, and excessive wind; until its natural constitution is reduced by excesses.
et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil;	And the patients are treated with what we have discussed in divisions; but if it doesn't help them, it is necessary that the disease be surgically removed from their belly.
et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient;	And the sign of its application is three cauteries according to this form and this figure and this quantity on the liver, between the hipbones, where the stomach's pain originates.
et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi;	And let there be space between each cautery as large as two fingers;
et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere;	And have the cautery as long as your arm, and do not press too much with your hand on the entire cautery;
et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez;	And let only half of the coal be heated, and have the patient lie straight on its feet;
et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais;	And if they cannot, let them sit up, and extend their legs, and lift their arms;
et c’est li forme:	And this is the position:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors;	And if you wish to, apply these cauteries with a surgical knife, if you are skillful and careful in the art, take care not to burn all of the coal, for you would dry up the whole body;
et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	And let it not come all the way to boiling, for their ears are very delicate in that place, and you need knowledge to see.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile:	When it has advanced to the liver, and you know how to determine if it is in the liver tissue or within the membrane:
s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort;	If it's in the tissue, the patient feels moderate pain;
et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	And if it's within the membrane, the pain is more intense.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste;	And when this treatment affects the nodes, it is necessary for the patient to rest with their head elevated;
et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	and then guide your hand over the place where the node is located, and then heat the cautery which resembles a reed, as this is its form:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers;	And apply the cautery to it until the roots are blackened, and go up to the groin, until the pus is completely out.
aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez;	after the treatment following the treatment of boils as long as it remains clean;
et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	And it is not proper to use any other cautery except the one who has studied extensively in the art of medicine, and through these hands such diseases have never been corrected.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Therefore it can be boldly opened, and every time I think that movement is worth leaving to.
dou cautere de pleuresin	A cautery of rue oil
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere:	The old ones said that one must make hot irons from the roots of aristolochia, and in this manner:
pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois;	Take a long root of aristolochia, the longest that you can find, let it be dry, and also make it as thick and long as your forearms;
et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe;	And the moisture in the air, and it catches fire, and burns the cautery between the strength and your neck, and two small cauterizations a little lower in the part that is under the beard;
et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc;	And two more cauterizations between the fifth and sixth ribs, behind slightly.
et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules;	And one cauterization on the belly button, and another on the stomach, and one between the shoulders, and two below the ribs at the location of the cauterization which is between the shoulders.
et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	And do not squeeze your hand, instead perform it openly as when smelling.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme;	And it was said by some old men that no one uses a fiery cauterization halfway through shaving, and they heat it up and place it between the ribs, until it reaches that abscess;
et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And when the pain jumps out, as we have said about the abscess on the liver.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this chapter is fear or the illness has now ended, or there appears a fistula which cannot be cured.
de la mice	from the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease 'la mice' in those whom we have spoken about with regards to our treatments and nothing benefits them, then they try three methods of cautery which are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant;	From which there is a method such that you make three or four cauteries, according to the length of the mouse, according to the shape of the liver cautery as we have said before;
et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	and do not rush your hand over the entire cautery, and may the patient be accustomed on their back;
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule;	and another way to perform the cautery is to heat the cautery with two rods as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder;
et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	and gently heat the part of the mouse where the disease originates from the left side, and may the elevations that you heat the part according to the area, according to the length of the body, and the cautery should be according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII.	After heating the two wicks until they are felt on the other side, and then remove the cautery tool, and thus there will be four.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	And if you see, apply to the entire cautery with three wicks.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the treatment when it has eradicated the putrefaction for a long time, and this is equivalent to changing other treatments as were mentioned previously.
de ydropisie	Regarding dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	The cautery does not work in dry conditions, except for the method that is called "asclytes".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis;	When you treat it according to the methods we have discussed in sections, and if your treatment doesn't benefit, then it is necessary for you to make four cauteries inside the belly, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one under the spleen, and two behind the back on the spine, and one place in the buttocks;
et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	and make sure that the cauteries are very close to the internal organs of the knee.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere;	Afterwards leave the cautery open to promote healing for a long period, and do not cease the treatment of the illness after the cautery.
et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	And healing would hasten, and both intentions together with God's help.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit;	The shape of the cautery for the belly is the cleaver that we have demonstrated before;
et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	And for the back it's like an olive, as was shown previously.
de l’enfleure des piez	regarding the swelling of bones
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire;	When the joints are inflamed in someone with dropsy and filled with yellow bile, it is necessary to apply the cautery on the back of the joint between the thumb and the index finger;
et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	And gently move your hand with the cautery without turning.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter too deep through this part, so it would be like leaving the liver, and thus follow this form for the cauterization:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire;	After that, do two cauterizations on each leg at the tip of the knife blade;
et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe;	And make the cauterizations long, one over the knee joint in front and the other behind, midway along the leg;
et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse;	And let the cauterizations burn for a long time without treating them, until the disease comes out.
aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	after the treatments of other treatments that we have mentioned.
de la menoison	Of the memory
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures;	When the belly remedy comes from cold and moisture, as long as the restorative and digesting properties that are in the stomach and intestines are being released, and cannot be treated by methods of treatment;
et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule;	and you see the disease very suffering and of great virtue, if you make a large cauterization on the stomach according to what he spoke about previously or the stomach cauterizer, in the circulating cauterization;
et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	and four cauterizations in the center of the navel for each subtle cauterization at the knee, and two cauterizations on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see abundant moisture and the patient suffering, apply a cautery to the wrist, and one cautery on each knee, and two small cauterizations on the stomach below the large ones, because the treatment benefits when there is good help.
de la cure des emorroydes	Of treatments for hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres:	When the tumors are at their origin or in one or more locations, and they are old with large cold fluids that are moist and corrupted, and if they are treated as we have said in divisions, but no benefit is gained, apply cauteries.
III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois;	At the spine of the back, choose an area entirely removed from beneath the ribs with a little by little process in triangular pattern, and place the cautery at the spot where the back is divided into two.
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile;	And if you believe that the stomach has cooled down and the meat is not cooking well, and you notice swelling in the abdominal area, then apply a large cautery to the stomach as was explained previously, and another one on the liver, and yet another on the spleen with all the other parts being treated using the same cautery technique.
et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	And leave the application of the cautery until it is fully done.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treatment until it is healed.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	Regarding the disease called "thelul".
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit;	When you are working with the metal tool, if it appears to be a fire cautery, and then set it completely ablaze and place it directly on the metal tool being worked.
et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort;	and let your hand remain as long as the fire goes to the base of the vein, from which blood flows;
fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit;	Do this once or twice, and if there is much metal, apply the fire to each one as we have said;
aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez;	after the use of poultices until they are healed;
et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	and if you cauterize with a large fire instrument, it will provide more help.
de plaie mal curee	of improperly treated wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot endure surgery or opening (operation), which we will describe in its proper place, should such a disease occur that cannot be cured except by cauterization.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	If there is no瘘管, it becomes old and festers with corrupted moisture, so you should thoroughly inspect the area for any sign of a subtle change. And remember that you need to know precisely how far up the test needs to go.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing;	After applying the fire instrument that seems to be a rasier, place it along the fistula according to the amount that fits into the opening and repeat the process until the inflamed and rotten parts are burned out. Do this once, or twice, or three times, depending on how much you need.
et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	And you must avoid burning the nerves which are sensitive, and large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans;	If the fistula goes to the bladder or the intestine, if you encounter these situations, and do not perform this elsewhere but in its normal place, and consider that it is not in a sensitive area;
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement;	After the treatment until it's clean, and if the area is swollen, and the contents are solid for a long time, then you can be sure that the area is completely healed;
et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font;	And if the contents aren't hardened, know that the area is diseased, and the bone has corrupted at its root;
et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	And thus like one of those we will mention in its proper place.
de la maladie des reins	Of kidney disease
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit;	When abdominal pain comes from the lungs and large winds affect a woman, then it is necessary for you to apply the cautery on both sides of the lungs and also to the wrist, as we previously mentioned;
et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	And if we burn it in the middle, there will be three cauterizations in a line, and they will provide more help.
de la vessie	From the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce;	When the bladder is thick and moist and has poor heating and moisture, so that the kidneys retain urine, then you should cauterize in the lower part of the bladder, where the pubic hair begins, both on the right and left sides. Each cauterization should be as long as one inch that we give.
et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing;	And make me cauterize behind the back, or two if you need them;
et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	Let the cauterizations be in the shape of a clavel (a small metal loop or hook) as was described before.
de la marris	From the mare's milk
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde;	When the womb is cold and moist, and does not allow for conception, and the flowers are decayed and their ends are delayed;
et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor:	And when they come, one feels great pain:
adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos;	And thus, it's necessary to do three cauteries in the mouth region, as we have said or a bladder cauterization, and two outside the back;
et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	And let the cauterizations be on the clavicle, as we have said.
de la hainche	From the thigh
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble;	When the mucusy fluids descend into the buttocks area, and for this reason it moves out of its place, and the signs are that one limb is longer than the other when measured together;
et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle;	And you will find the bones at the start of the buttocks region, so it's necessary to cauterize the hair on the buttocks area with one cauterization resembling a circle, and mark in front of the bones inside the buttocks area where it turns, so that the buttocks are within the circle;
et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	And if so, let the cauterizers be such as those which have been used to cauterize the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs;	And if such cauterizers are not at your disposal, make three olive oil cauterizers large, and let the cauterizers be well made just like all the rest;
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let the cure as long as it is clean.
de la dolor de la hainche	From thigh pain
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene:	When pain comes in the thigh region, and it is due to cold and moisture, and the patient's condition has been treated as we have described in the division of diseases and treatment does not work, and the illness is old:
adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	Therefore, it is necessary that you cleanse the patient of large excesses with putrid pills, or other good-looking pills.
Aprés li fai cautere;	Afterwards, make the cauterization;
et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres:	And the method of the cautery is according to two methods:
c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	Here is what you need to know, it consists of hot remedies and fire cautery.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz:	Fire cautery has several methods, of which some are like this:
que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire;	You should apply the cautery on the hip's bony prominence with three triangular cauterizations following this shape. Make sure they are well deep and large, with an area of about two between each cauterization, and use olive oil as the cauterizing substance;
aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Do not apply the cautery in the middle of the hipbone, because there are four cauterizations according to this shape:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche;	And if you see, apply the circle-cautery that we mentioned earlier in relation to hip dislocation;
mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	But do it in this manner so that the circles contain all the hip, and all the nerves leading to the heart be cut.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	This is the way it's done in sciatica, when pain stays in the buttocks and doesn't reach up to the thigh or leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc;	And if it comes up to the thigh and leg, make two cauterizations there or where the patient says the pain is held by the disease, and one cauterization above the ankle four times, at the left part a bit.
et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur;	and let them be made with an excision knife cauterization, or burn away the fat leading to the heart;
et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	and if the disease feels that the pain extends up to two feet or near the knee, cauterize there where he feels the pain three points or four in the cauterization which is called "points".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus;	And if more work is needed, do it as necessary;
et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if the pain is around the knee towards the thigh, then you do the cautery with a cutaneous or circular fire iron and make sure to take great care in all your cauteries that you do not allow the heat for too long, burning nerves and major arteries, and that you cause no more harm and contraction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I myself have seen many who performed a cautery on the ankle up to the knee, and they only allowed it until the leg was completely swollen, and also all the feet, causing them to be pierced and corrupted throughout.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After an abdominal treatment that led to their death.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pains are in two parts together, make a cautery on each one, according to this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce;	And the surgeon said about the cautery of the hip, as follows: make it such a device and have its head as thick as a finger joint, or slightly less, and let there be crosspieces and place them from one crosspiece to the other distance equivalent to the size of a small handful.
et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait;	And let the crosspieces be made in two parts and also be like knots, and it should have a well-made iron handle;
et c’est li forme:	And this is its form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit;	And heat it until it becomes a deep red and starts emitting smoke, then place it over the affected area of the buttock flesh, and twist it towards the healthy side.
et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors;	and apply the cautery once when the fire has heated up and leave it for three days;
et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens;	then cover it with butter bandages, and keep the wound open as long as necessary;
aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	after the ointment treatment until it is healthy.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent;	Albucus states that we use little of this cautery due to our fear of his doctrine, and few people actually use it;
et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	yet this is considered to be a good cautery, which one can tolerate, and applies where it becomes effective.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi;	The medical hot irons are such that you make an instrument of interweavings in which descends the edge of the door, and may be of iron or steel with one long surface, and at its height have two holes, and between each have the size increase of a finger;
et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	And let them extend forward and upwards, and join together in this form:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche;	After placing on the hip of the lying patient near his intact side, press your hand quite onto the hip bone;
aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After heating the second circle of the hot ash to the fire's first point for an hour continuously, and allow the patient to endure the heat and burn.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu;	For it finds burning akin to that of fire;
et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit;	And when the mordications have passed, raise your hand with the tool and lift the buttock gently from awe, and leave it thus for three days, and apply butter until the blackness of the scalding is over.
et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait;	And let him lie for three days that decay may take place;
et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	This would be the last aid after the removal of ointments until he is well.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument;	And if the pain has spread up to the thigh or even down to the leg, you should do the same with this tool on that area as you did on the buttocks.
et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	This is the way of hot application, and I have written it down as an appendix to this medical treatise.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take ashes and quicklime in equal amounts of one to the other, grind them together, and put them into a new jar.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir;	If there is a small notch out where, so that the tip of a razor might be able to enter;
et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main;	and put another pot well leaded under it, and place an alkaline and salt and sweet water above, as long as there are two layers of the powders on top; then you will have grasped it well in your hand.
et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	and leave it like this until the water and slime or grease comes out under where the lead was, then take all that water, and pour it onto the salt and the alkaline as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres.	And then there will be plenty of water and administered in motion of medical operations and in cauterizations of other limbs.
Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	And it performs equal work as fire, and for other medicines which are used in cauterizations of the hip like mustard oil and resin with soap, all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galen tells us of a treatment in which an honored person was treated for the pain in the hip and sciatic vein, and with great relief. He says that no other treatment was done, and that it cured him completely in one fell swoop when this treatment was performed, and he bathed himself as he instructs hereafter.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie;	And instruct them in this manner that you take green, fresh and dry lead tar, grind it very finely with a little fat, and spread it on the hip and thigh and leg where the pain is located, and bind it;
et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	and leave it for three hours, and by the quantity that the disease no longer feels the burn.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then make them enter into a bath as long as their body becomes somewhat refreshed, and make them enter onto bed, and the pain will disappear completely and they shall be healed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	Know that no one should use such medicines as a cautery, if it isn't after the removal of flesh.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout;	And Dioscorides states that when the sciatic vein is treated with donkey's bile, then it helps greatly;
et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	and the fire cautery should be done in this manner.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take lard and mix it with old oil, and place it on the hollow area between the base of the thumb and the other that is called a flexor.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains;	After taking dry donkey bile, immerse it in fire until it turns into charcoal, and place it on the wool, and leave it until it becomes soot.
et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee;	And do it again this way, and never stop doing it until you think by sense that it will reach the hip, and the pain be gone.
et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	And this method of cautery is called "goat cautery".
de la dolor dou dos	The pain of the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether by falling or impact, or due to too much evacuation, or because of cold matter spread out, none of these occurrences warrants cauterization, rather it is for someone who has come from an infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir;	After that, when the patient is void of foul pills or other similar things, one should perform this on their back, at the spot where the pain resides, three lines indicating across, and in each line V cauterizations or more according to the virtue and quantity the illness can withstand;
et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»;	And the cauterizations should be done according to the method called "points" for the cauterization.
et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	And if you see fit, perform three or four cauterizations at the middle of the wrist cauterization in this manner:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor;	This illness often befalls young children, and the symptoms of its onset are that they have pale skin when they stand up, and fear.
et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	and you find in the last spinal vertebra of the back and with us the appearance that comes over other vertebrae.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and observe it being treated, if you apply the fire cautery according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	If the fire cautery is applied to each part of the spine equally.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see fit, apply the fire cautery to each side of the spine with two or three lines of heat, and ensure the points are close together.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After the treatment until it is clean according to what we have said, and be careful not to apply heat in a state of fever where there might be nerve inflammation.
de la dolor des jointes	of joint pain
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere:	When joint pain is due to moistures that spread throughout each body part, and when pain comes in the feet, which they call 'gout' properly, and when it's caused by cold and cannot be cured by medicine alone, but must be treated with cauteries in this manner:
fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	Make the mouth of the cautery at the joint of the foot, and apply the olive oil in this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if there's need that you touch the back of the foot, if it is heated to the full heat of what we call 'a point'.
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire;	And if the pains extend up to the knees and other joints, and this happens many times, then apply cautery on each knee for three or four of them, using all olive oil;
et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you need to do more, then do so, but don't let your hand stray beyond the point until the wound's healing is complete.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains go down to the knees and back, then administer the cautery as we have said in our chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes;	And if the pains are in the hands, then do points within the inner forearm lines;
et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main;	And if there remains any pain in the elbows, then do points on each joint and on the back of the hand;
et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	And if the pains come up to the shoulders or down to the elbows, then cauterize each part, and give good guidance to the patient and prescribe medicine.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	And if you take good care of him and cleanse the humor, he will be helped by God to recovery.
de la routure dou syfac	Of the rupture of the spleen
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor;	When the stomach is upset and the bile descends into the kidneys (indicating dyspepsia), if it's a new case, you must ensure that when you see them to cure, they should not fast on that day;
et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre;	And when he eats things that ease his stomach, so that his insides descend from his belly;
aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors;	After you have him sit on his back between your hands, and instruct him to mark his armpit until the hair is repaired, then pinch it with your fingers, and watch for signs beneath the wound on the bone, and at every sign make it resemble half of a circle above the chest;
puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Then prepare the cautery as described:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	Until it is white and emits pus.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu;	Then pinch the hairs at their base;
et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier;	And have the attendants mark his hand so that it does not turn back;
et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains;	And work well on the thighs with the assistant, and place wool and surgeon on the thighs, and another near his anus so that he marks his hands;
puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os;	Then place the cautery at the sign on every part of your hand, and keep it straight and hold it until you touch the bone, and if you don't reach it the first time, try again several times until you arrive at the bone.
et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere;	and remember that the oil should not spill when you apply the heat of the cautery;
que tu ne le brulasses;	so as not to burn it;
et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	and that through this the patient does not die, or suffer from any other ailments.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And know that when you do not reach bone with the cautery, your operations are worthless.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure;	It is necessary that the cauterization for children be subtle according to their size, and likewise for adults as large as their size allows.
aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	After three days, cure the wound with butter until the scab is removed;
aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee;	After performing other treatments until he is well, let the patient rest for forty days on his back so that the wound heals properly.
et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And it is necessary that these purges be taken for a long time, so that the urine does not overflow when he wishes to go into chambers.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors;	And after forty days, when he wants to stand up, have him wear a well-made bandage, and let him do this for another forty days;
et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire;	And have him get good rest, so that he does not overwork himself and avoids excessive drinking or eating, as well as shouting too loudly;
et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	And when he follows this instruction, he will be completely healed.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will say after about the treatment of tailoring in this chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	Of the rupture of the abdomen
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur;	When abscesses occur in other bellies and are known, and you see that they do not grow anymore, apply the fire cautery gently according to its quantity, and make it heat for one third of the cup.
aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit;	After the treatment according to what we have said;
et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	And none of the old ones said that one should use the cautery at three angles according to this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	But the first sign is the beginning of an infection and draw a line across the width above the incision, and another below, and hold your hand in contact with the entire length of the cauterized area.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cauterizations are lighter and more moist.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	from old pain in no limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes to any limb, or due to falling or being hit, and this pain lasts for a long time, and medical treatment does not help, then it must be cauterized with the cautery called "points", and apply the cauterizations according to the length of the limb, its smallness, its weakness, its utility, and its location of twists and its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien;	If it is correctly done with the first cautery, it's well;
se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If it's named, start with another cautery on that one, because such injuries are accustomed to cause movement in the body part closest to them, so you should apply the cauterizations as long as the patient is still.
de meselerie	In mixture
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The remedies are administered once per heat treatment by great help, and similarly, the disease comes from the putrefaction of blood and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief:	Can't you see the cauterization? Take care that the disease is at the beginning, and if it is treated according to what we have said in this section, without spreading or remaining, and you fear that the infection will spread throughout the patient's body, then apply five cauterizations on its head:
I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous;	I lead the head to nine, and the other towards the forehead at the end of the hair.
et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel;	and II above II horns, and I behind on the hinder part;
et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir;	and I let my hand remain as the cautery comes until it reaches the bone, and as long as the scabs come out so that the vapors of the large fluids can escape;
et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	and apply cautery to the mouse according to how it is in front.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse;	And if the infection is spread everywhere;
et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules;	And when it is clearly spreading, it is necessary that you apply these cauterizations with the cautery as we have described: first to the head and then on the neck spine, two on each shoulder blade, six on the back spine, one large on the rump and another behind, and two on each of the two shoulders;
et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains;	And on the heels, and on the tendons beneath the foot, and in each joint of hands and feet, and in the hollows of the hands;
et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler;	And guard against the nerves that lie under the heel part, so as not to burn them;
et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	And never apply the cautery to the bone of the hand, and once on the bone of the stomach, and another time on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite;	And know that with every application of the cautery, I am aiding it more, and it gains from that use;
et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And know that the patients do not feel pain during the cautery as those who are healthy would, because their body is already thoroughly corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is necessary that the size of the cautery be large and small according to the limbs and joints, as you will find in methods for metalworking.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After treatment, wash the wound with flour mixed with honey and other remedies until it heals properly.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre;	When any part swells and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters but does not improve, then I make cauterizations to the limb according to its size and the extent of the swelling;
et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur;	And let the cauterizing fire slightly penetrate the skin of the scrotum;
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then apply the salve until it heals properly.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure;	And one should cauterize with the hand and foot and back, at the exit of the nerve that makes the limb move. In this way, the swelling is released;
et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And yet, do not interfere with it unless you are knowledgeable about the limbs and the exits of the moving nerves in the body.
de albaras	From galls
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color;	When the disease called "albaras" is advanced, and medicine does not help, then cauterize with a slightly intense fire according to the amount of scrotum skin, until the swelling is released, and its color changes.
puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie;	Then apply a paste of flour and lentils mixed with rose oil and leaves of plantain, and blood from hog and blood from dove, using equal parts of each.
et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And mix all together, and bind it with a bandage, and let it air on the wound until it heals.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The treatment for a pustule by cauterization
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When the gangrene begins and you see it stop, if you notice it, then apply the cautery to the point that seems like a circle, all around the edge of the gangrene.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre;	And indeed, they advised that one should also cauterize in the middle of the ulcer;
et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois;	And indeed, I do not think this is good either, for fear that it might become ulcerated and decayed, and I have already decided never to try this method;
et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And more correct is to cauterize internally, with the cautery that is called "circular", as we have said in the context of various cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the swelling which cannot die
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens;	When some have a disease that is called "adubelati", and it delays death or due to the excess it makes or because of age during illness (that means too old), when there is little blood, or due to the weak health;
et tu la vues haster de meurer:	and you see it hastening towards death:
adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant;	therefore, apply the cautery around that area with small fires and pressing on them;
aprés le laisse ensi.	afterwards let it be this way.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For it will hasten to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it being pierced through the entire cauterization, then heat the cauterizing instrument as described here:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And place your hand in the middle of this disease that is called 'adubelati' until the cauterizations penetrate the body, and make the cauterizations such that the patient feels an escape in this manner that the process of decomposition be relieved.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the treatment until it is completely healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	The cure using fire through a iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another way of disease is called 'corrodens', and it's not another thing but a member infirmity, for it causes members to behave as if they were dry branches that the fire has burnt.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est;	If you see this disease in them that can endure a combined fire cautery, then apply small and large fire cauteries like a chain link, according to what is needed for the area or where the illness is;
aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	After applying the cautery from all sides until you remove all the corruption, and leave nothing of it, that every part which is corrupted be removed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	And let it rest for three days, and apply soothing ointment with oil on the burned areas until the scabs from the fire have healed, and ensure all the corruption is gone.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the cure of ointments that produce pus.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin;	And if after three days you see that there is no sign of health emerging, this is good;
et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if not, reapply the cautery to what remains of the ear that is decayed.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu;	And this cure has been treated with medical remedies instead of a fire cautery;
mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division:	However, the fire cautery is much more effective, and I have already discussed the use of medical remedies in that section.
pren la quant tu en as mestier.	Take what you need when you need it.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	Of ulcers that come on bones
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Sometimes, when there is an opening in the foot, it leads to a disease that we call "closed" according to our understanding, and it is a large hard lump that causes pain in the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cauterizations for this disease can be done in two ways.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	This is to know about fire cautery, and hot water cautery.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges;	A fire cautery if you're using it should be shaped like a needle, just as one would draw with feathers. Make sure it's well made of iron to the size that it can accommodate nails in every direction, and ensure it has small edges;
aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou;	After warming it all up on the hot iron, and turn your hand completely around the iron rod until it reaches to the very end of the rod.
et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture;	and let it like this for three days until signs of putrefaction begin;
puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	then make him a poultice of powdered wild mustard with vinegar, and let the poultice on overnight, and nail it firmly so that it is uprooted from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the wound with greasing until it is clean.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude;	And if they turn from the back of the heart, and it happens many times in both hands and knees, then you should bring them a hot water cautery;
et est en teil maniere:	and is done like this:
pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues;	take an arnica stick or a iron rod, or a feather of a goose, and place it on the stake and the althelul, meaning for warts;
et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine;	And place the torch on it until it blackens all around, then I put a little hot ash, and keep your hand firmly, press your hand as you turn that the edge of the torch turns towards the base of the nail, and then find the hot water's deep passage to the root;
et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre;	And let the patient endure a little bit of the hot water's burn for an hour;
puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	Then leave it like that, and it will uproot completely from all its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Do this for one after the other, until you have cleared all those that are in your body, then treat the sores that generate pus.
li cure dou trembler	The treatment involves shaking it off.
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee;	When there's a trembling due to cold or nerves, or a fever of the fourth kind or other maladies, it is necessary that you perform four or four cauterizations on the spinal column of the back, one cautery between each vertebra.
et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire;	And for the fire cautery, place it on the stomach with the olive cautery;
si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	If it causes trembling, and hasten the cure of the cold illness.
des pustules puans	The pus-filled lesions
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	In every instance where a dead body is exposed or oozing sores, or pus-filled bumps appear, these come from large putrid materials.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule:	It is necessary at the beginning when they appear that one applies a cautery to each head of the pimple:
un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	A fine cautery of elm wood, whose points are taken by fire, or from the root of the asarum long, or with the lentis-shaped cautery.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez;	And each time they cauterize, at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and they cannot grow pus forward but remove the excess that comes from them, and become healthy;
mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	But it must be done after the blood has been evacuated.
quant li artere est copee	When the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses;	Many times great bloodflows from the artery which is cut at the wound, leading to backflow or at the incision of an abscess, or during the application of a fire cautery on the limb, and similar situations;
et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	and it is very difficult to smell such things.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus;	And yet, when such an event happens to none of them, if you quickly place your index finger on the wound in the vein, and press it so that the pulse stops under your finger, and no more drop comes out.
puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge;	Then apply several small and large olive fire cauterizers until they turn completely red;
puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	Then take one, whether large or small depending on the wound and where the artery runs, and place the cauterizer on that vein where you have your finger, and hold the cauterizer there until the pulse stops.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it jumps out when you remove your finger from the vein, and once the cauteries are extinguished, take quickly another one of the cauterizing tools that are at the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez;	And do not stop performing this one after another until the skin is completely healed;
et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide;	and see to it that you do not burn the nerve beneath, and that no other mischief befalls the patient;
et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit:	know that when blood flows from the artery, it may not be possible to heal it properly yourself even if the artery is large, unless one of the four methods we have mentioned is used:
ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc;	or by cautery, or through extraction if it has not been treated, or by the tight binding of a thread, or with medicines applied that have the power to heal blood.
et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	and bound and kept in place.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Who will administer the tying or binding with cloths tightly or by putting heat-bearing things thereon, or other similar actions, if it doesn't prove effective.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne;	And if this happens to anyone and they have no medicine present, then they should place their finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and stretch it out until the skin is completely healed above the wound and above the vein.
et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez;	And do not let it move, but moisten it with cold water often that it is very cold until the ice stays and grows and remains frozen;
et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And make incisions in advance for those who need cauterization and medicine.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	This begins the second book of treatments for amputations
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres;	We have told you in the first chapter about all diseases for which fire cautery or burning medicines are required, and we discuss their uses, causes, instruments, and forms of cautery.
et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	And I have covered this chapter up to the elbow, and I will proceed with this chapter in the same manner for what is found more easily and what you desire.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And when I begin this, it is important for you to understand that in this chapter there is more risk and fear than in the first section about using cautery, and for this reason, greater caution is required.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses;	For in the work of this chapter, there is often evacuation of blood when opening veins, and incisions over abscesses, and treatments for wounds, and removals of arrows, and cuts into stones, and similar matters;
ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I advise you not to undertake foolishness.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For many ways of people come to treatments.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice;	If they come from those who so suffered with their illness that they died lightly due to the anxiety they found in their sickness, and the severity of their disease;
et de ces doit on avoir paor.	And out of this comes fear.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit:	And from these it is that you give its meaning, and say:
«atendez, je sui garis»;	Wait, I am a bear";
et li maladie est despitouse.	And the illness is frustrating.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los;	It is not right that you agree to those who come to you in this manner, but place more restraint on your honor than on your greed, and do not open rashly but wisely about what you are certain of, and for which you can take and leave.
et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie;	And use diagnosis and guidance in your treatments for your illnesses where health may be transformed.
et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	And this will help you gain good reputation, glory, and long-lasting memory.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Dear child, our lords give you good understanding and justice, and if you wish to aspire from the holy inspiration of their hand, Amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or I have instructed this chapter according to its chapters, following what is before it in the section on cauteries, which I have outlined from the head down to the feet because you will find them more easily than those you need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	From the head full of water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant;	Know that this disease often comes from the child being born in childbirth, and when the mother holds the head of the child too tightly;
et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	And never does it come about due to an unknown cause that we know not.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors;	And I have never seen this disease occur in anyone other than children, and among all those that I have seen, it hastened their death;
et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And because of this, it seems to me that I should break off the work in parts of the treatment.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir;	And I saw that the child of him, the shoulder was full of water, and the head swelled each day until it could no longer be borne;
et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os;	And so much moisture had built up that he died, and this moisture was collected around the bone near the shoulder blade, between the body and the bone;
et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large;	And the operations are like this: when moisture is between the body and bone, and the abscesses are small that you cut through the head with a wide slit;
et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre;	And it should be as long as two of our fingers, so that the moisture can flow out.
et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	and this is how the pus looks:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is more abundant, and the abscess is larger, make two openings in a manner like a cross, according to this shape:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut:	And if the moisture is around the bone, and you see the edges of the head opening from every part, and when you press it with your hand internally, there's a sharp pain that doesn't stop:
si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	If you must split through the head's middle, three cuts are necessary in this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, extract all the moisture completely.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor;	After binding the incisions with cloths and powders, then I put wine and oil, and leave it like this until the fifth day;
puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	Then remove the dressing and treat the wound with tents and treatments, and let the head heal evenly, then give the patient dry meat from a pig of water until the limb is strong and healthy.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue;	And another method of incision is that you look at or expose the opening of the abscess, and join with water;
car aucune fois est elle devant;	for it does not always present itself;
aucune fois derrier;	nor is it behind every time;
aucune fois en destre;	None of these times to the right;
et aucune fois en senestre.	and none of these times to the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir;	Therefore measure the cut or the incision, and fill with water, and do it according to your ability;
et warde que tu ne coper l’artere;	and be careful not to cut the artery;
et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	and allow a flow of blood, so that the patient dies from bleeding and the evacuation of moisture.
de reume	Of cautery by fire, command to the unwell that they let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When there occurs a disease which is called "catarrh" to the eyes or at the bottom (of the body), and the disease is old, and the treatment with medicine doesn't help, then the last resort of treatment could be cautery using what one would cauterize their two major arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief;	Therefore, as soon as you see them cut, the patient should bleed after its head;
aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel;	After rubbing the injured area with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then pull the patient's neck to all parts of the cloth;
puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues;	Then look where the veins are located, and where the hands of each are after the ears, and that's how they're positioned;
puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	Then mark the hands of an eagle, and cut both of them with a sharp knife for two parts, as long as the vein extends to the bone, and do this along the width of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see it, stop the bleeding from beneath the artery and above the cut, by making a cut also like one inch through.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, let the blood flow out continuously from up top.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os;	And if the artery does not open upon feeling it, you should measure the length of the space to three inches, then cut deeply into the eagle and proceed up to the bone;
et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere;	And what needs to be removed of the blood is six cubic centimeters, and by chance slightly more or less, depending on how the patient can endure it, and the filling of the artery;
puis regarde la plaie:	Then look at the wound:
s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	If it remains on the bone tip of the spur, cut off the abscesses if none are found. Then suture and bandage the wound, and apply ointment treatment until it heals.
de emigrainne	Of the removal
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When old age comes, and acute cough, because of the moisture from tears and heat in the temples and lower back that is beyond endurance and similar things. Medicine is treated with ways of medicinal cures and all this does not help him, so we extract the arteries in the temples and cauterize them, as we have reported.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit;	And the method of extracting them is that the patient feels behind their temples and listens for the artery that emerges at the temple, because it opens well through its beating, and has little response beyond in some people who are too cold;
et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement;	And if it is responsive, then suture the patient's neck with some cloths, then rub their head with a coarse cloth, and submerge their head in hot water until the artery appears clearly;
puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	Then take the spatula with which this form is made:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie;	Start by lightly scraping the skin until you feel the artery, then guide it upwards with forceps, and carefully remove all the tissues that are under each part;
et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	And if the artery is delicate, guide it to the tip of the distal phalanx, then cut that portion according to the size of both fingers.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it isn't cut, or jumps not all at once,
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III;	And let blood flow from six cuts, until three;
et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc;	And if the artery is large, it's necessary that you tie it in two loops with a strong double silk thread, to prevent infection before the healing of the wound, and also to prevent continuous bleeding;
puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez;	Then trim the excess that is between the two threads at that moment. And if you see fit, then cauterize with a surgical cautery until it reaches the bone as long as the shoulder head is trimmed;
et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And this is a surgical procedure, if the patient doesn't have fever and has warm constitution.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors:	For the cautery helps to finish off moisture:
por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	because it is of greater help against moisture.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites;	It is necessary for the extraction of arteries where you fill up half of old cotton and place it under well-made tents;
et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when they are released, if you apply dry medicine substances that produce heat and tents until it is healed;
et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez;	And if you are uncertain about the location of the artery as far as your skill allows, use caution by fire, or fill the area with vinegar and squeeze it with your hand until the skin is tightened;
et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient;	And if you do not have this tool at hand, you should immerse your arm up to the elbow in cold water until the ice melts, and lift it from cold water continuously while holding it as necessary;
et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	And the one who is slippery and more easily extracted from the artery, you should cauterize the vein with this tool by cutting it in two parts, but make sure the cuts are well spaced to retain heat for longer.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instruments are too tight, they retain less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus;	And there should be about half a finger's width of space between the two knives. And when you signal to continue with the two of them, and place the hot iron until it reaches the bone, then cut the vein into two parts;
et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout;	And keep them apart on the shoulders because there is no welding with this cauterizer across the entire length;
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it is the form of the cautery:
des larmes	of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis;	When the tears of the eyes are draining from the veins that are above the test of the head's neck, and no cure with medicine works there, then you see the face of the patient turn red, and feel or perceive on their forehead as if they were trembling;
et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	And wherever they are touched and moistened so that the paper hairs fall, and the papers heat up, and are scorched by the heat of the tears, there is need for this treatment.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front;	And they called the old "treatment for burns", and when you do it again to the patient who has this illness, have hairs on their forehead, then make three cuts evenly across the forehead according to its length;
et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres;	And let one of the slits also like two all around on your forehead when swallowing down until near the nose, and the others two under the ribs by over the papers, and beware of the incisions of the arteries which are under the ribs by over the papers;
et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins;	And keep your hand away from the continuation of the two jaws, and let each wound have the size of three doves crossing paths;
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	And have an applicator of a sponge and cloth to dab it so as to wipe the blood, then pour the sharp spatula from two parts in which its form is made:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision;	From the incision that is behind the temple up to the second incision;
et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	And scrape off all the keratin between the two slits across the entire surface of the skin that is on the bone, then make another incision from half way through the middle incision up to the other second one, and then remove this spatula.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	if you ignite in the first gap the tool called 'cultellaire', and it is very sharp on one side, but blunt on the other, it has this shape:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And make the cut towards the fatty part of the meat at the bone, and the cut should go towards the bone from the flesh, and stop when it feels halfway through the skin.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer;	And take all the vessels that descend from the head with their eyes until the incision is continuous up to where it opens on the wound, and then proceed elsewhere in the middle crack up to the other end;
et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris;	Then remove blood evenly, and express the wound for the contained blood;
puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne;	Then place a piece of old cotton in each crack, and lay wet cloths with wine, oil, and asphodel over them; make sure no pus remains.
et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And on the third day remove the bandage, and apply great plantations of tepid water, then administer a balm with basil oil and other treatments for wounds, until it heals.
dou reume des eulz	of the eyes
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees;	When there is no usual cough and you see the eyes become red and small, and weaken vision, and burned papers;
et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue;	And the hair grows, and one feels pain to fever, and the patient sweats.
adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	Therefore, know that these occurrences show that those matters and this putrid fluid come from many veins, and the wet treatment that it is, if is such.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And it is that you instruct the patient behind their forehead, then make a large cut in the middle of the forehead, and another one somewhat wide below this.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os;	And begin from the left temple groove to the right temple, and make the incision up to the bone;
et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier;	and keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move with chewing;
et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin;	And when the bone is revealed, let all the blood drain onto an sponge, and then dress between the two edges of the cut, placing old cotton and linen;
puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut;	Then cover with wrappings moistened in wine and oil, and guard against pus formation;
quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	When it is being extracted, it must be that you rub the bone until the blood begins to emerge, then it is treated with excitative things, which make blood emerge.
En teil maniere:	In this manner:
pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre;	Take two parts of wheat flower, and four parts of comfrey, and make them into a plaster;
et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	and apply this to the wounds to promote blood flow everywhere.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	From ear piercing
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses:	Everything that has an effect on ears is one of the four things:
ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer;	it could be grains, or an animal, or rock from mining, or something similar like iron;
ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois;	or seeds, such as beans, peas;
ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	or anything that flows, like water and oil, and similar substances.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When it leaks through the ear hole or in any other way that doesn't fit with the ear or doesn't grow inside the ear, put the ear in the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction;	If you see the stone, if any purple or pine oil drops out, then proceed with its extraction;
et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine;	and have them sneeze with consideration, and block their nostrils when the sneezing comes on, and insert pieces of cloth or wool into the ear;
et estent l’oreille au desus.	and keep the ear above.[/em]
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure;	Many times it succeeds through this treatment;
et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	And if it doesn't succeed, proceed with the delicate extraction using forceps, which is described like this:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin;	If it jumps out by means of forceps, that's good;
se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure;	And if not, proceed with the extraction using a small sharp spoon.[/em]
et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne;	And if it does not spring from this, make an armpit needle and pinch the tip of the needle or earache plant strongly, and apply some waxy substance to that part inside the needle so that the wax cannot enter with the needle;
puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit;	Then proceed with the treatment, because many times it goes wrong as we have said.
et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor;	And if it doesn't come out in a proper way, take glue from its own and use its claws, put some instrument that is suitable for this task, and place a little cotton inside;
puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	Then press the glue onto the stone or whatever it may be, and proceed with force.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme;	And if it doesn't spring from all these things that we have said, hasten to pierce the ear like an abscess should be found there, and proceed with caution.
et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant;	And the way to make an incision is that you first cleanse the patient's forehead and then drain out any blood according to its strength. Next, allow the patient to be held in your hands, turn the ear upwards, and create a small cut at the base of the ear where the fat hangs down.
et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche;	And make the incision like a crescent moon, until you reach the stone. Then scrape with your tool according to your strength, and suck quickly into your mouth;
et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Continue the treatment as long as it is effective.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction;	And if there are grains and they swell up, administer an extraction;
et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it cannot come out, perform the puncturing with care according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and make an incision on that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces;	But do not undertake this when you believe that the grains are damp due to ear moisture, until you have done many pieces of work;
puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	then apply gentle pinching and suction, just as we have said, so that the extractions are done smoothly.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In cold thus that the ear discharges, then the patient should use coughing with warm liquids first, and fill the ear with old cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And be lying over that same ear or where the cold is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If she jumps for heaven, it's good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu;	if not, take many stones according to the length of your nose and gently, and heat them a little on fire;
et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille;	and place the heated stones in or near her ear, and push out one from each foot, and use another stone on the stone that is in the ear;
et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer;	and continue to alternate using stones from one another until the pain leaves entirely, and then she leaves all her pain.
et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars;	And if you see this, take the small stick and place one of the bones in the ear, and place the other bone with fire until the largest soft joint is burned.
puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	Then do it again with other sticks until all the sharp end comes out, as we have said about stones.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division;	In the extraction of the bug, if it is of small size like a mite and similar things, treat it as we have said in the division;
mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures;	but if it is of large size that one can feel, then perform extraction with pliers;
et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	and the thing to be removed more easily is in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil:	In the extraction of worms in the ears, when you treat it as we have said in the division and with distillations, and if the treatment does not help, then you should examine the ear in the sunlight:
s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	If there is no opening, then use subtle needle pricks. And if you cannot see anything, take the wax from where the form is located:
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And let it be narrow below and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine;	And apply the most subtle pressure in the ear according to the amount of suffering the patient endures, then gradually shape all the wax;
fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	Do this often until all the wax comes out.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere;	And if they do not want to come out, then immerse cotton into the wax as I have said for in the ear;
et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations;	And if they do not come out as we have said, administer distillations that the old ones have proven in the treatment of worms, and you will find or seek guidance on distillation treatments;
et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if you drip your oils and medicines into the ear with this instrument, as it is shaped here as you see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller;	And whether made of silver or of iron, place it near the small nozzles, and above it to allow for distillation;
et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton;	And to press within the distillation with a well-made iron tool for this purpose, and if you see take the wick and wrap it around the cotton tip;
puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille;	Then pour your oil or juice, and what you see of your medicines in the reed, and let the reed be inside the ear;
puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille;	Then stuff all the cotton inside the wick, and press your hand evenly until the oil is distilled or up to the length of the ear;
et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille;	And within it the sick feels pain, and if you warm a little spirit on fire like this one you distil it into the ear;
et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And remember that it should not be too cold, for the medicine would then not be as good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	From ear piercing
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles;	No child is born without any wax in their ears;
et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir;	The same thing happens to adults through the impact of wounds or a fetus being born inside the ear. These impacts often enter the ear uncontrollably, unless one can see them;
et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	And never does the liquid overflow the wax, and it is seen clearly.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil;	That which comes uncontrollably, if it cannot be seen, is often due to an imbalance in several conditions, and this is where one should understand that you should place the ear towards the sun with the sick person.
et regarde dedens:	And look inside:
se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	if you see the external manifestation, if the work has all this substance from which it is formed:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille;	And be both digging in front and behind completely flat, so as not to damage the ear;
se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	if the external manifestation is of newly formed flesh or parts of the ear, and you have delicate needle-pricks, then gently scrape it, until that flesh is completely removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the pellets are inserted fully into the ear, take a fine, lightweight rasp and gently scrape it on the fire, then place it inside or near the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille;	if you feel the external manifestation to which the ear is strained from its pain, puncture gently, and make sure not to damage the nerves of the ear;
puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	then place in the ear a tent according to its width of the opening, and moisten with Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet;	Let this continue every day until the wound is healed. Or you take a tent and soak it in pink water, and sprinkle on powdered vitriol;
et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	And if you see the ear swelling up, then you should take off the tent and replace it with another wet tent made from rose oil and beeswax, until the swelling subsides;
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then continue to cure as long as it is sound.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if bleeding occurs, immerse a cloth and dip it in cold water, then place it on the ear, and apply other treatments that stop bleeding which are known from distillation processes.
de la char des papieres	From the page's contents
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines;	This should be done each day when the eyes are moist and then dry. It is necessary to spread them with forceps and tweezers, and scrape the root of a snail's shell;
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	Then place sulfuric acid powder on it.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues;	And if you cannot remove it by scraping, then apply a delicate round-hot iron for the cautery, and the cautery operator should perform an incision afterward.
et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines;	And many times they return, yet nothing remains from their roots;
et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
de la gresle	Of the gravel
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz;	Many times, in papers, come things that seem to be gravel by their shape and hardness, and because of this is this disease called 'granuloma', and it is a gathering of thick moisture on the surface and beneath in the paper.
li ovraiges est telz:	The procedures are as follows:
pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir;	Take care so that the granuloma does not move on one or both sides, and it is a simple matter to know this;
fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Stretch out first from a large area, then lightly cauterize each part, followed by pinching and pressing it.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide;	If you cannot cover it without piercing the paper a little, but do not harm the patient;
et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	And if there's a large tear, join it with stitches, and treat until it heals properly;
et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	And if it's small, don't apply too much force, because the ointment will quickly restore and grow new flesh.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre;	And if it's large and descending into the ear towards the upper part, invert the paper, place the granule on needles, apply them from one side to the other;
et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien;	And if the paper is moved by the incision, it does not harm anything.
et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And when the large ice has been broken, remove the salt water eye, and cleanse the place from that which infects flesh until the patient is healed.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat of the granulomas
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz;	Exinach is a type of fat that is found in the weaves of paper sheets and this happens more often among children than adults. It causes much trouble for their eyes, and it comes to them at dawn, and they cannot look at the sunlight because tears rush to their eyes;
et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	And because of this, they lie down on their faces for a long time, and sleep on them, and have the paper sheets under their eyes wet from sweat that causes puffiness and an appearance over them due to the Exinach which opens in the eye.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press on the arm with your fingers and feel the pulse between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain;	And the way of treating it is that the patient puts their head in your healthy state;
et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li;	And then take a linen sheet, and prepare a tent in the shape of a circle according to the amount that escapes from each part, then place it on him;
et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle;	And press with your thumbs on both sides, so that the escape is gathered within the circle;
puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne;	Then in the middle of the moisture on the skin, cut a slit about as wide, and not more than the wound one makes in the cleansing of veins;
et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach;	And let the skin be in place until you see the escape.
et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And from many dispositions comes escape from the slit, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars;	Remove then with one piece of cloth between your thumbs at the back, and turn your hand to the right and left until it disperses;
et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	And ensure you do not adjust within the fissure, that you do not reach the entire spleen up to the eye, that you do not pierce it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere;	And if they emerge not at the beginning of the fissure, then widen it gently until it opens;
puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	Then pull it out as we have said, then moisten it with oil and water, and place it on the head, and stretch it with bands.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if there are such individuals who grind salt and place it to corrupt the moisture that remains.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the doctor should treat as long as they remain healthy.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if pus starts to form in the arm, so the doctor uses plasters that soothe until they remain healthy.
des poilz des papieres	The phrase "des poilz des papieres" translates directly to "the hairs of papers". This might refer to paper fibers or could be metaphorical depending on context. Without more information, this is the literal translation.
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz;	When hair that is not naturally born appears and ages, if it harms the eyes, they can lead to diseases like habitual watering of the eyes and degeneration of the papers (possible typo) and impotence, all of which can be a cause of eye damage;
et est li cure selonc IIII manieres:	and the treatment follows four methods:
ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	Using a fire cautery, using medicine according to what is described in the previous chapter on cautery, and doing it through cutting and stitching or by ligature, as I will explain.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre;	It is necessary that you place the head of the ear in your health, then turn the paper of the eye to your left hand;
s’elle est convertie, c’est boin;	If it has turned, it is good;
se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus;	if not, then insert a needle through all the threads;
et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur;	and whether that goes across the edge of the paper where the hair grows beneath these hairs, and pull the thread upwards through all the paper, and then trim it with scissors;
puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit;	then do it in the part under the paper, under the closely fitted hairs, all across the nostril opening, from the large tear to the small;
puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	Then extract the thread, and place on the paper a small cotton ball and gauze tent, then mark on the paper an oak leaf shape, similar to the bay leaf, and always ensure that the figure matches the amount you see when lifting the paper which is placed underneath.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie;	And if at that time it has need for handling paper of large quantity according to how the paper is softened;
puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit;	Then make along all the veins above the two lines you have marked, and start with large drops until small ones;
et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute;	Let it be one of the splits near the natural hairs in growth as large as a root, then place the comfrey at one of the two corners on that side, then scrape thoroughly.
puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce;	Then gather the two lips together using a needle with all one thread of fine wool. Clean out the blood, and remove excess thread on the two corners at any sticky areas. If you see fit to do this;
et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII;	And if that doesn't suit, if you don't mind it, then leave the stitches and threads for up to three or four days;
puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	Then cleanse the wound without using wet or sticking materials, for paper burns upon contact with the wound and its assembly, but the stitches rot (as the old ones said), and it is work without fear;
et si a une autre maniere:	And if there's another way:
et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	And if you want to cut paper into a shape that is as round as the leaf of myrtle, like we have told, in three inches square according to the form shown here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	Then take what stands above the smaller forces evenly according to the shape which is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure;	And if you do not have the ability to hold the forceps, and the thing is not equal, then take a needle or where there is thread, and stick it through at the tip;
et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment;	and pierce another thread through the large artery, and the second thread through the small one, and join the threads evenly between your fingers;
puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then lift your hand evenly, and lift all the skin over which you have incised, just like we have described, then join the two edges of the wound with stitches, and treat it until it is healed;
et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	and if pus comes to your incision, soothe it with tallow and similar soothing ointments;
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit:	and sometimes the hair of the paper gets converted:
si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision;	It is necessary for you to use what we have instructed about incisions;
mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	but the suturing in one and the other is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme:	The treatment for scabies follows this form:
et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est;	and you should cut the paper and make an incision according to what I have said, then create two canals by hand, and also sew two fine threads as long as the paper and as wide as the needle is;
et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz;	and tie each of the two ends with one of the threads;
puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment;	then delicately join the two at what is above the paper of the eye, and tighten the two canals from each part forming;
et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	And let it remain for a few days, and the skin which is restricted will die and decay, until it escapes through itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	If it drags on, if the condition persists with strength, then treat him as long as he remains sound;
et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil;	And when the wound is healed, and if it lifts the paper, and no more hair will grow;
et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	And this is the form of two cauldrons that you will make according to this diagram, and according to this size in length and width:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil;	The operations are such that you take a fine needle and thread it with silk string and it is strong and fine;
puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc;	Then join the ends together and tie them finely, and let the length of the threads be half a palm in length;
puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil;	Then arrange for the hunt another fine silk thread briefly, and tie the knot of the thread.
puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain;	Then place the patient's eye on healthy part;
et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil;	And let the sun down so that the works are clear, for it's an intricate and small work. Then fix the needle all through the hunt in the root of the well-adjusted hair, and pierce on the paper quickly as you pull it above the natural hair;
puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors;	Then remove the hair up to the hunt, and fix that hair in the hunt if there is one, two, three or more;
puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	Then remove your hand until the hairs remain out all through the paper with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil;	And if the chase (presumably referring to hunting or tracking) has been treated and the hairs do not grow with it, then pull the chase away from the wound up until you ordered it to be placed, as long as the chase feels forceful downwards and when you see this through your eye's vision;
adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus;	Therefore, pull the chase and the thread, and cover the eye and leave it covered for two or three days, as long as the hair grows in its place and the flesh starts to grow.
et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the hairs are small, then accompany with one long hair as found naturally on a cow, and raise it along with whatever you leave or allow to remain, until it is lengthened, then raise it.
de la porriture de l’oil	Regarding eye infections
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres:	When this disease which is called "aleacrati" or eye putrefaction occurs in the eye, if there are two ways:
l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	One is natural, and the other is unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And happens suddenly due to an injury or surgery, or from similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	And the way to work on it is that you split this seam and open the lips of it, and put linen cloths inside, and bind it until it's healed;
et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And it is not right for you to use in its treatment things that dry out and restrict.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere;	For if you do this, the sickness will return worse than the first one;
mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic;	but use things that soften, such as fennel;
et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	And let it be rinsed with hot water or oil and linseed oil, and apply garlic poultices in none of the oils, and wrap it in a cloth, and treat it with this.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant;	And the treasures of your treatment are that you must beware so that it does not join without regard to its former shape;
et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the remedies that we have described do not exclude directions for this illness, so that it does not recur according to its former form.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	Of the matter that comes to the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease, which truly is called 'dislocation', and it is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans;	Accidents arise from wounds, tears, cauterizations, and similar things;
et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char;	And in executing the procedure for this you take a needle with two threads, insert it into the flesh, and make it pierce from the left eyelid to the right eye socket so that the thread passes through two parts of the flesh.
puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	Then the flesh is stretched above all the needle, and it cuts across the wide space of the spatula.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin;	And if the figure on the paper returns according to what is appropriate, it's good;
se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere;	And if not, then take a ruler and place it in the groove, turn the paper, and cut two grooves where they would have been inside the paper;
et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»;	Let the ends of the two grooves at the two corners of the cut you made be arranged, and make an angle such that when they are assembled, the figure is as that of a letter which forms a 'G' in Greek;
puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne;	Then shape that flesh according to the size and thickness of its edges as they were before, based on where the paper was, then align the two needed parts, and stitch with a thread like yarn;
puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then follow the treatment we have discussed for softening medicines and ointments, until it is healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant;	And if the disease originates from a cut or stitch or cauterization, it is necessary that you make an incision full of hair along the lines of the hair on the skin, and according to what was mentioned before;
puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit;	then sew between the two leather panels of a tent, as I have said;
et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil;	and you should perform the operation according to the shape of the disease, for it is very diverse in shape, and the skilled surgeons prepare all kinds of tools so they can return the form to its natural state;
et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	and even for patients themselves, according to what needs treatment and the use of various tools in multiple configurations.
dou soudement de la papiere	right along the paper
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut;	When this bonding occurs in a manner between hands where the paper above is bound with the white of the oil and cannot move or perform its natural operations, then it is necessary that you bind the tip of a razor under the paper, and lift it up;
et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil;	And extend with the pincers, until you hold what is disturbed under the delicate point of the cautery, which must neither be too hot nor too sharp, so that the patient does not suffer from the heat being too intense and scorching their eye;
et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil;	And make your cut, from which you sear that united one lightly, so that the skin heals according to its natural form;
et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere;	And heal the whole united part, and do not perform any sharp operation in the eye, and use sweet water for washing, and wear a collar;
puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef;	Then place between the skin and the eye a linen tent, and put wet wool from an egg over the eye;
et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	And after three days use hot water and other warm things until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	From the edge of the eye
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres:	Know that the nail follows two ways:
elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om;	It is nervous and appears like hard leather, and another that is not nerveless but appears like white moisture frozen, such that when you touch it with iron and treat it using hot needles, if it doesn't hurt.
et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	Both of them begin near the large tear duct, and grow slowly, slowly until they cover all the eye and all the light and the movement of the eye.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz;	And the method of incision is that the patient places their head in your healthy position, then you operate on their eyes;
et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus;	and lift the paper with your hand, then bend the nail with small hot needles, and extend it above;
puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort;	Then take a needle, and I put horse hair, or cow hair, or bull hair, and strong thread;
et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement;	and double the needle point slightly and insert it into the nail, then pierce through the entire length of the needle, attaching the nail with a thread and extending it above, then scrape off all hair from the base of the nail that is under the cuticle and up to the hair at the base of each hair follicle and skin, leaving the natural tear by the tears so that upon incision there is no usual body discharge;
et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit;	Each time you extend only the nail to the cuticle alone, and with the thread, as we have said;
puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	Then scrape off all hair from this area: it is the form:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie;	And ensure that the splinters do not touch the fatty tissue and break it, and that the thorns do not pierce.
et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	And after the incision pour some of the pus in the eye, and make a spoon from silver, and leaves it until another day;
puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat as needed so long as they are well.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines;	And if the nail is not made of bone, and you cannot push in the needle, and the crescents cannot enter it, this condition is treated many times with medicines;
et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And it grows in the way I have described in the division; and if you see it swell, this creates an eye problem from a disease, and take the splinter lightly sharp according to this shape:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor;	And remove the nail gently upwards, and if you see that it does not diminish at all and your reason presses on, then drip from your mouth into a ring-like eye made of stannic oxide and red and white amalgamated, and bathe the eye until another day;
puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	Then repeat the other operation according to this same procedure, until everything is excavated.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If there is nothing against your vision, like pus-filled blisters, then you should proceed, and first treat the pus-filled blister until it's cleansed, then restart the procedure as described previously, until it's cleansed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne;	And if the appearance of the tissue from the lacrimal gland causes harm in the eye at night, then suspend it with honey, and take only part of it and not all, so that no tears may come;
puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	Then drip into the red eye ring which is made of stannic oxide.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh that grows around the pupil
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste;	There are some people who do not grow red eyes, and cover the pupil, restraining on papers and turning outside, and seem like a candle flame;
et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force;	And the operations are such that when one's body heals its head, then it opens the eyes, and all of that flesh to an extent suitable for this, and supports it with strength;
puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige;	Then remove the first layer of flesh, and carefully shave it all until the end, and ensure you do not irritate the eye during the operation.
et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	And let the incision be gentle as we described in the section about nail incisions and using small forces with it, just like the form shown after this chapter's demonstration.
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut;	And when the incision is completed and all flesh has been removed, apply oil of sulfur or distill a red colander and similar corrosive medicines on it. Place cotton soaked in egg white over this to protect against pus; make sure there's no open wound that could cause infection.
et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut;	And if it remains motionless, and the patient sweats profusely, and you suspect an abscess at the spot, then let your eye observe and treat the abscess with soothing remedies.
puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	Then return to your work as long as it is safe, and thus make four cuts and join them together in the eye according to this manner.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil;	But nevertheless, it must be that you adapt the treatment of each natural weakness in the eye;
et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer;	and of the accidental path through which a metal object has passed;
et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	And do not leave your hand in any of these incisions until you see that this limb endures the cut.
des voines des eulz	of veins and eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	When the veins are red that cover over the eye, and cause harm to sight for days.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel;	So then the task of the first one is to look at where the eye is, and if it's dislodged, or outwards, and there is no other disease besides the dislodgement;
adonques le coil en teil maniere:	Therefore correct this as follows:
comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	Instruct the patient to place their head in a healthy position, then suspend all those veins according to their wisdom for as long as possible. And make sure that each pulse is doubled according to this shape:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And let there be two inches by degree on one side according to this shape:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil;	Then work on these veins subtly, and see the blood flow hour after another, until you see those veins being removed from the eye;
et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes;	And make sure you don't burn the eye at the ends of the spatumiles, and do this operation at midday in front of the sun, and be very zealous in your work so that you only handle those veins;
et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	And when you have done this, if you distill into the eye a collar of green and red for to corrupt that which remains under the inflammation.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if you do not have the strength to perform this all in one go, make a plaster with things that soothe the pain from the eyes and leave it on for some days until the pain is soothed and there's assurance of no abscess formation, then continue according to this method as described until recovery occurs;
et c’est li forme des forces:	And these are the forms of strength:
de la fistule de l’oil	of the duct of the eye
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule:	The wound is called "arissati" in this context:
quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	When you treat it using cautery and hot medicine as I have described previously, and if it does not heal, there is a place within the wound where an abscess forms, near what should be its point of entry. Remove all the moisture that's there, until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme;	And when you uncover the bone, and you will see the corruption and the darkness, if you take all of the instrument that is formed here;
et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And it is called 'hard leader', and may be made of steel indented at the tip, and should be pointed like a file as it is in this present shape:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese;	And place on it the tip of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your fingers, and press your hand a bit until you know that that corruption has been removed;
et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And do this once, then restore the head of medication-drying.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez;	If the joints are joined, and scar forms, and the body of the bone is joined, and remains like this for 40 days, and does not heal and does not become pus-filled, and no bad incidents happen, you know that it is healed;
se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme:	If not, if there is no other organ except to bring the sinus back into its place according to this form:
et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	And when you uncover the bone for the second time with a metal tool and by using aqueous medicines; and if it has been uncovered then take your axe according to this form, and secure the piece of iron with three angles, and let the handle be thin until as far as you see depicted here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif;	Then place it against the bone near the eye socket, and keep your hand away from your eye just slightly, then turn your axe until it pierces the bone and you feel the pain in your ear as long as your hand is on your nose;
et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif;	Then restore the area with dry medicines as I have instructed, and when the heat starts and hardens your hands, take the material to your nose;
si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	If something is lighter for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	From the exit of the eye
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide;	When the eyes open completely everywhere, and there is no disturbance in the heart or diminishment, it is necessary that you bind the patient;
puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz;	Then heal him, then apply suction cups or bandages without piercing to evacuate it, then place over the eye I a bandage made of acacia and aloe and incense and gallows flesh, and then release the eye, and plaster it with strips and cloths;
et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier;	And the method of the cloths is that you take cloths sufficiently soft, and fold each one into four, and then place one on top of another according to the amount that the eye needs;
puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir;	Then apply by means of a hard binding above, and reapply the suction cups to evacuate without piercing;
puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout;	Then apply the suction cups and keep the eye restrained day and night, and if it starts to close, you must keep it closed.
puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin;	Then loosen the bandage after day and night, and if you see the eye heal, that's good;
se ce non;	If not;
si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	if you have to re-wrap, bandage, and apply the eye patch along with the bandage and suction cups until it is healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	At the rupture of the ovarian membrane
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir;	When disruptions come in the vitreous thread, then open and comes out force of paper like resin bits, and it is observable;
adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier;	Therefore, if you see it covered, the operation is like poking an awl into the root of half above the lower part, then poke another awl where there is doubled thread at the tear part;
et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition;	And make a puncture, and let the first needle according to its placement;
puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef;	then place a loop of the thread double and tie part of the eyelid from inside outwards, then tighten it well. After that, remove the needle and place a wet wool on the eye with plenty of egg mixture;
et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee;	and let it be until the thread has healed with the eyelid; then treat the eye with comforting substances until the wound is healed.
et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and afterwards, each part of the wound is held in place by one half of a circular piece of cloth until it has healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost;	And if the eyes do show a prominent appearance, then puncture through the thin membrane that comes under the eye, and dry out the moist pus and allow the eyes to sink in quickly.
puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	Take out as long as it remains healthy.
de la bowe de l’oil	Of the oil of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue;	This disease which is called 'alcunnati' can only be found in bile that has gathered in the gallbladder, resembling a pointy object descending, and it is not an actual needle;
et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz;	And the way to observe this process is that you make the patient sit on the operation table and have them face forward straightly. Then hold their head with both hands at two points, and move it until you see the needle coming above your eyes;
puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit;	Then either place it there and keep it from going down until the light is gone, and see how things are happening as they should;
et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	And if it doesn't descend anywhere, know that it is a needle, and when the descent of the needle isn't as we have described.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse;	If you make the patient sit between your hands, then take the fine spatula and perform on the corneal surface an incision from point I to the continuation of the conjunctiva with the corneal tissue and the crown, until the blood flows;
et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when it has flowed out, if you distill it into the eye with hot water mixed with honey, or hot water with boiled fenugreek and honey, then apply other remedies until it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	Of the waters of the eye
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier;	We have the appearances of the waters in the division, and what needs to be pierced;
si en oevre selonc la santeit.	if done according to health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort;	It is necessary that you place the patient between your crossed hands, away from the light towards the sun, and tie the healthy eye tightly.
puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres;	Then place the paper of the eye on your left hand where the eyes are on the left, or on your right hand where the eyes are on the right.
puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre;	Then take in your right hand, where the eyes are on the left, the tool that is called 'almagda', or in your left hand, where the eyes are on the right.
puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide;	Then place the tip of the tool beneath the cornea at the thickness of an eyelash in that corner of the eye to the part below the minor tear duct, then force the tool called 'almagda' vigorously, and turn your hand until it pierces through the corner of the eye, and feel when almagda reaches the empty space.
et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour;	And it must be that the size of the almagda's passage matches the size of the space from the cornea to the edge of darkness.
et c’est li corone de l’oil;	And this is the crown of the eye;
si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	You will see the bone inside through the transparency of the cornea paper, and then place the tool until it reaches where the tip is, then express out one after another along a path.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	Let the patient now see his illness before him and the instrument in their mind.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc;	After laying him down, and if the tip rises up to the second path, apply force with the tool, and when it is securely in place and no longer ascends, gently remove the wax by turning your hand back and forth.
et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	And then place a small amount of beryl in the water, and remove the eye from inside it.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then place the oiled or greased eye shutters or wool soaked in rose oil and a plenty of eggs, and bind it with a healthy oil.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	Yes, and those that belong to our time should be placed on the common broth with plenty of eggs.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if almagda cannot enter the eye because of its hardness, as there are some people whose eyes are too hard, it is necessary for you to take the tool called "alberit," which has this form:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit;	And therefore pierce only the conjunctiva, do not go too far around it, but make it subtle. Then pour out the wax, as we have said;
et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous;	And upon completion of his work, the surgeon, accompanying the patient, instructs him to sleep on his back in his dark room;
et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor;	And avoid all movements, and please eat light meats, and do not move your head to the right or left. Secure him accordingly until half of the day;
puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor;	Then release him in that dark house itself, and test his vision. Make him see nothing, then reapply the bandage until seven days;
et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And it is not advisable for you to do this during the treatment or after incision now. Instead, apply this method because the wound has swollen rapidly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme;	When it comes to discharging pus, you should release the eye before the seventh day and apply treatment to him who relieves pus.
et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	And when they are calmed down, open the eye and place an ointment on its lid for a few days to cover it, and be in that dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas;	And then leaves the house little by little, and transforms into its place;
et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	Know that no one should intervene in such cases.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens;	And one came to us who was from the Iberian Peninsula, who told us that there they used a type of garlic called "almagda," which one bathed in water, but still we have never seen any such thing in our land, nor have I ever read about it in old books;
et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And by chance, this is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie;	And these are the appearances of almond shapes, because those who do not know them see them;
et soient d’arain proprement:	and be of good arane properly:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And indeed the head of such from this same subtlety, and the rear end in three angular pains.
de la char sor le neis	of the flesh around the nose
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez;	No birth or creature is made from various connected fleshes, some of which appear to be scorpions with the legs of a bird;
et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	And if there are such creatures or one has flesh with dark color and if there is flesh with good color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil;	From those creatures that have good color and not dark, it is necessary for you to place the patient between your hands facing the sun;
et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers;	and breathe through his nose, and apply vinegar to those creatures, and remove them.
pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	then take what you can hold on the sharp fine point of a needle from one side, until you know that the creature is entirely made of bone.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien;	And if there remains any part we cannot cope with, if you expose it to the operation of all the delicate instruments gently, so that nothing stays behind;
et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient;	And if it's not covered or if there is an abscess pressing outwards, if you support it as should be done;
et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if it's malignant ulcers, if you act quickly and cauterize as long as the wound is bleeding and all the muscles are cooked through, then pour or flush it with cold water or wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez;	If the wound heals and moisture reaches up to the palate, know that it is clean;
et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier:	And if the moisture does not penetrate as it should, know that there is new flesh under the bone, to which the instruments cannot come for cutting:
adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins;	Therefore it is necessary that you insert a thread of linen somewhat thick, and have your hands tied together, and there should be between each knot the space of an inch or less;
et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche;	and place the patient's head with the thread in their mouth as much as possible, and pull it out until it comes through the nose inside the mouth;
et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire;	and many times this is done with children at school, and it is a simple task for whoever wishes to do it;
puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	then hold the head that comes through the nose with one hand, and the other head that comes out of the mouth with the other hand, and know them one after another while being guided by us who are holding the thread.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant;	Do this until you know that the thread has corroded that flesh, then pull out the thread, drain the blood, moisturize the thread with Egyptian ointment, and quickly return it to its place at the nose as before.
fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char;	Make it for three days or more, until the ointment dissolves all that is buried in flesh;
et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use;	And then apply or inhale a row of opium for several days until it heals, and if there is need for dried medicine substances, use them accordingly.
et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	And this is the form of the tool for purging the head, with which one distills oils and medicines or inhales them:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi;	And whether it's made of silver or arsenic, resembling an open lamp or like a cane, guide it in the same manner;
et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief;	And if you see fit, make a closed cane, and ensure the tools are full for purging the head;
et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And have your hand ready above the head to hold when one heats the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	of the flesh around the nose
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder;	Many times a disease is born at the nose which is called 'Toul', it grows and becomes large until it reaches something to be seen.
et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant;	And thus it is necessary that you start by covering it up, and let the bone fully heal, then place your cauterizing tool or hot medicine.
et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens:	And if you delay covering it when it is large, take heed if it's hard, if it changes color, if it shows poor sensation:
si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide;	If you don't touch it with iron either because it's an internal abscess; for when you cover it once, it brings great trouble to the patient;
et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	And if the abscess is due to heat rather than change in color, and you see that it can be completely covered, let the patient drain and cover without fear, and treat with dry and restraining remedies.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	When the nose is cut and stitched
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Know that when solutions for prolongation come into contact with one of these venous loops, it benefits little, because in some people.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc;	Therefore it is necessary to avoid any such situation, so check if the wound is fresh at all its blood;
et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	And then adjust the two lips to suture them, then treat until they are cleansed;
et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet;	And if the lips have dried on both sides, it is necessary that you scorch all parts of their keratin until they heal. Then adjust the two lips with a stitch and tighten them, and sprinkle repeatedly with powdered dragon's blood and ground incense;
et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place the powders on a plaster of great strength or another adhesive plaster, and let it until it discharges by itself, then treat with ointment until it is cleansed.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution:	The method of suturing is that you adjust the solution:
ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre;	by needles, as we have said about the stitch for the belly;
ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	by thread, as I have informed you.
des apostemes des levres	from abscesses of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant;	Within the abscess inside the mouth, one finds hard lumps sometimes, smaller and larger.
adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie;	So you should open the mouth and cut into each lump, take it with forceps, and remove it in every part;
puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	Then use the mouth after the vitreous incision as long as the wound is bleeding;
et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then wash with water, and cleanse the wound of dry substances until it heals properly.
de la char des gencives	from the flesh of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»;	Many times there grows on the gums a grayish deposit that the old call "albula";
si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc;	It is necessary for you to hold it with the tongs, and cut at its root, and allow blood or blood flow to continue.
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives;	then place sulfur or the vinegar poultice, or other drying and restraining powders;
et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize:	and if that flesh returns after the incision, and this happens multiple times, if you cut it again, and apply the cautery:
si ne revient mie aprés le cautere;	if it does not return after the cautery;
et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	these are the forms of the instruments to use for cutting.
des sordens	Of cauteries with fire command the sick person to let the hairs grow long and evenly; if they pierce at their root, hold the eyes firmly so they don't move until they fully grow.
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres;	They are gathered at the root of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, and they consist of ugly and hard scabs;
et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant;	And in no instance do you find black and yellow teeth with worms, until the decay reaches the gum, and the teeth smell;
si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien;	If it is necessary for you to have the sick person sit between your hands, and his head be in its proper place, and touch both teeth or skin until there is nothing remaining.
et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees;	And thus make of the blackness and the greyness, and of the yellowing and other discolorations, until they are completely gone;
et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin;	And if you remove what is at the primary cause, it's good;
se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis;	But if not, begin again on the second day and the third, until you have taken everything;
et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens;	Know that teeth require various types of instruments to be extracted, according to what the work demonstrates, because the remover used for taking out teeth at the surface has other shapes than those used between the teeth;
et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	And these forms and others are equipped with you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire;	It is necessary when you treat the tooth's pain that you delay the extraction for as long as possible, because it should not cause any harm.
car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	because this is such an intense substance that one would not have any excuse for scratching it.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	So when the patient is constrained to bleed, it's necessary for you to know exactly where to puncture.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent;	Many times the pain moves through the body, and beware if it's toothache or a disease of the teeth, then extract the good tooth;
et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors;	and still do not leave the pain alone until the bad tooth is removed, for we have already wanted to do this for our soldiers;
et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars;	And when you are certain of the tooth that hurts, it is necessary to incise around the tooth all the way through two or three millimeters to keep the gum from spreading in every direction;
puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles;	Then guide it to your hands or with the use of delicate forceps at each poke and poke, until they are well dislocated, then firmly secure the forceps.
et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	and have the shoulder of the patient between your knees, and keep it steady so that it doesn't move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After extracting the right tooth straight without breaking it, and if it doesn't spring back, take none of these instruments and insert them gently into each half, and move it like you did first.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont;	And if there is a hole and you can feel it, then it's necessary to fill it with cloths, where the holes are;
et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre;	and if you squeeze gently with the forceps, so that it doesn't break while squeezing.
et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	And it must be quite carefully open in the gum to remove the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And be sure to handle it well so you don't break it, and if any part remains, inform the patient of the greater pains caused by the remnants of the root after the initial extraction.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit;	And beware that you do not do as the ignorant surgeons do, who break the bone every time out of their haste and boldness, and they do not bring to completion what we have told.
mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut;	But one comes with each time by the action of this great disease through the roots that they endure, or through the matter that they break, as we often wish;
et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil;	And when the tooth is extracted, wash the socket with wine or brandy and vinegar;
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet;	And if there is bleeding which often occurs, when treating it, fill the socket with powdered vitriol;
et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And if that doesn't work, apply cautery to it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent;	The forms of the tools by which you first remove teeth should have long points and thick handles, such that they do not bend when you are pulling out teeth;
et ce sont les formes:	and these are their forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And may have large limbs that do not bend while being used, and be made of strong iron well-crafted, with teeth for gripping.
de la racine des dens	from the roots of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou II, tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne;	When the root stays during the extraction, it is necessary to put in the socket wet cotton soaked with butter for a day or two until the joints are softened. Then take out the forceps which are called 'algefri', as the patient seems to require care.
et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	And be sure that they are done as with a file and it is this shape:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out completely with these pliers, it is necessary that you uncover the entire flesh up to the root, and place the instrument known as "althali," which means palmache, as it is formed thus:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin;	And be sure to make them strong and thick so that they do not break at all, and if the root jumps over this, it is good;
se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	If not, assist with all the instruments from which the forms come next:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if help is taken from this tool which has two points, as it is formed thus:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other tools that are in front according to the size of teeth, and this tool which seems like large pliers, as it is formed thus:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont;	And be sure that these instruments do not break and know that many instruments from the socket exist;
et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez;	And also other instruments, which are not even mentioned;
et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And the wise surgeons find their tool by themselves, according to what their works and diseases show them. For there are some illnesses where the old did not teach any tool because of the diversity among these, or when it breaks part of the bone or from others, or it decays, if they search for the tools that suit, as I have said, and help with gestures, which is described here, concerning this form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster;	And let them be thick and well gripping to hold the bone, so it doesn't slip but can be held and removed;
et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And then restore the area with suitable medicines for this, and if there's decay in the bone and it is small, take it all with this tool:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer:	When the tooth appears not according to its natural course, and its form is ugly, even especially in virgins, you should know that it has been born after the tooth, and isn't properly placed, and one cannot take care of or sharpen it.
adonques lou raie;	therefore the fold;
et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	and if it is in line with the tooth, take this tool as described, and let its shape resemble that of a small beak, and make it from iron that stays sharp.
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the tooth is ground slowly with my hands day by day due to the hardness of its root, and because you do not move the others, and if it appears that one can be filed, then I file it in a single piece like this:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles;	and is also like the awl's file that one uses to make needles;
et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece;	and carefully file the tooth a little bit by bit with your hands gently, until it doesn't move as long as you continue;
puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	then in the end smooth it off with a scraper, and if the tooth is too sharp and hurts the tongue, you should file down the roughness until it's even, so as not to hurt the tongue or impair speech.
quant li dent lochent	when the tooth rots
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut;	When it comes to the front tooth or by tapping or striking, and if a patient cannot press on what they are eating that they do not defecate, and you have treated them with constrictive medicines, then this is ineffective.
si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques;	if they need to be restrained with an golden thread, for silver threads turn green and decay, but gold never changes.
et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens;	and let the thread neither be too thick nor too thin, according to the size of the gap between the teeth;
et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part;	and if you see to straighten the teeth, take the thread and hold both ends between the two healthy teeth, then place the dislocated tooth between the misaligned teeth, whether one or more, as long as you can feel it properly up to the healthy tooth on the other side;
puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point;	Then resume the covering until you have reached the part where you stopped, and apply your hand skillfully and carefully, until it does not move at all.
et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	and bind your floss to the tooth root so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue;	Then hold the teeth with forceps and join them together; place them between healthy teeth, making sure they do not irritate the tongue;
et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil;	and leave it like this as snugly as possible while still allowing movement, and if it dislodges or the string breaks, use another string to tighten it again;
si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	if it allowed for movement and remained like this throughout its use, and that is the shape of the teeth and the position of the two healthy back teeth and the two front ones as you can see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit;	And when the jaw is dislocated, if it is placed back in its position, repeatedly freshly, as we have said;
et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	and do not interfere with it unless you are cautious and endure pain, and no time is made in the shape of an ox bone tooth, and we place it where the defect is, and hold it steady as we have said, and remains and serves for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	covering the wound of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi;	Not once is it possible for the strings that come from under the tongue or the jaw to form this way; we do not create such things.
ou par accident de plaie soudee;	or by chance due to a healed wound;
et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue;	and the operations are such that you work on the mouth with the aid of medicine, have its head in your healthy position, and lift the tongue;
puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement;	Then connect the nervous cord across the wound, until the tongue is dislocated from its place, and if there is stiffness or swelling, and this is sudden injury, if you break the hook and reconnect it firmly;
et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz;	And make sure that the cut isn't too deep, for there is an artery underneath;
et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin;	And when you have done this, if you raise the wound to the pink water and cold air, or to cold water, then place a linen tent over the tongue;
et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	And treat it with herbs every night, so that the wounds do not heal incorrectly.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet;	And if there is blood leaking out, put vinegar over the wound.
et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu;	And if it does not stop bleeding, cauterize with the slow cautery, which is good for this purpose;
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	Then follow another treatment as long as it is salutary,
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre;	And if you see it is reddish or black or hard, even when the patient doesn't feel it and there's no touch to it, for it indicates a putrefaction;
et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre;	And if it is decaying into phlegm, and there's moisture, then let the pus flow out, and make a fine incision, and discharge it from both sides;
et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer;	And if it doesn't taste good in your work, then put vinegar to boil until it's thoroughly infused, then return to your work as long as you're using the entire strength;
puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then lift up the limb and the joint, and follow other treatments as long as it is beneficial.
des apostemes de la gorge	From throat abscesses
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde:	None of the time comes within the throat valves which are called 'godath', and they should be correctly known as the two almond shaped parts. And when you treat them, as we have stated in the division, if they remain unsanctified, take care:
se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	If it's hard pus of small sense and with a woody texture, do not touch it with metal.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc;	And if it's red and the root is large, don't touch it with metal either, for fear of bleeding.
mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi;	but leave it until it is healed, and then you will remove it, or it would burst on its own;
et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if it's whitish in color and the root is delicate, prepare your instrument properly but first check that the pus bubble rests and calms down.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme;	So have the patient sit in front of the sun, and his head should be upright, and let him open his mouth and hold the surgeon's knife between his hands, and press his tongue down until it meets the entire instrument, this is how it is done.
et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	And may be made of silver or finely crafted iron as sharp as knives:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues;	Can't you press the tongue to this entire instrument, and can you see the abscess? If so, take an ounce and pierce it into the almond, and force it upwards more than you can.
et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces;	And pull nothing from the threads with it, then place the cap on the instrument, as described here which seems like force.
et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	And always the head is bent, and one place to another, and it's very sharp, made of iron or finely crafted metal:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you don't have this instrument at hand, then shape it with pliers, which should resemble the form described above:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom;	And being cut from one side, and from the other side name;
et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	And when you have cut one of the almonds, cut the other in the same manner, and after cutting gargle the raw wounds with hot water, or hot and mild water. If there is bleeding during this process, continue to gargle with cold water, or slices of cooked pomegranates peels, or mint leaves, and similar things until the wound has healed.
puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then continue the treatment as long as it is effective;
et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	And no new abscesses form in the throat other than the two almonds, so cut them similarly as the two almonds equally.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens;	And I treated a woman for an abscess that was inside her throat, namely the small one;
et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And indeed I had almost completely closed the entire throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the blocked passage and could neither eat nor drink, and she died if she remained like this for one or two days.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscesses were so high that they had required two drains each, at both nostrils of the nose.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe;	I acted quickly then, and struck one of them with an axe, and after that, the other ran out, and I cut out a large portion of the belly;
puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue;	Then I cut into that one from its other nostril, and I looked inside, seeing the tongue and pressing it.
aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc;	After I struck them in those abscesses and scraped out some parts, only a little blood came out.
et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens;	And thus the woman's throat passage was unblocked, and she began to drink water and then wine, not stopping her until I continued to cut into that abscess for a long time.
et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros;	And the abscess would reappear immediately, filling up again the space I had emptied, until it reached a size that was not very large;
adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge:	Therefore, I gaged and cauterized inside the throat:
ensi demora sens croistre;	Then it would not re-grow;
et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	And I left those parts alone, may only God have made them after me.
de l’uve	from the eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»;	When the rumen descends to the ovum, and it is elongated and long, it is called "perpendicular";
et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	And if it is outside large and round, it is called "ovum".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes;	When it is treated as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help, and you see that the ointment for the abscess has calmed down, and it is subtle, then it is necessary to take her.
et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe;	And the one that is round assembled and isn't far;
et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	And if it's reddish or has a coppery hue or is black, you should consider making an incision on it.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger for the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant;	Therefore, when you see it, according to the manner I have said, of its blemish and length, you should make the patient stand in front of the sun, and press their tongue with the instrument we described earlier;
puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	Then insert the onion in the belly, and guide it along, and prepare at the location of the two instruments I said about in the incision of the two almond-shaped glands.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil;	And it is necessary that you do not remove more flesh than the excess beyond the natural boundary;
car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle;	For if you do more, you harm with your voice, and by your words;
et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And after the incision, apply what we have advised about incisions on the two cheeks, and treat until it has healed.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if they are in danger from excess, you should apply the instrument of cautery to remove them.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the method of cautery is done with an incision tool.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere;	And when the patient's head has reached your health, then press their tongue with the instrument we have discussed in the section on fire cautery, and use it with sharp steel blades, so that they are neither too thick nor too thin;
et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	and in using the power of this tool, as it is described here:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve;	And let your head receive a hair or where you place the medicine, just like the movements of a spoon, and put the tool over all the medicine on the wound;
et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece;	And the patient's sides are so sore that he can barely breathe and move his muscles from within his mouth to the medicine, so it doesn't descend into his throat, and he sweats.
puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie;	Then hold your hand over all the medicine and press it onto the wound, the amount equivalent to half an hour's dosage, until you see the medicine bubbling and the agitation of the medicine subsides.
et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve;	And when you see this, take cotton and wrap it around any tool, soak the cotton in the medicine, and place the tool with all the cotton on the wick above, until the cotton burns out over the wound.
et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V.	And do this often, until the cauterizing agent is perfect, then let it dry, and clean after three or five days.
Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine;	And if you need to restart the fire cautery in medicine, then do so, and after the cautery, press inside the eye with a cotton swab soaked in butter, and clean the area that was treated by the medicine;
et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And you should rinse with cold water, or perform gargling until it is healed.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere;	This treatment is safer than incision, without using the cautery;
s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir;	If it is treated with fumigation in this way, take calamus, hyssop, oregano, rue, chamomile and parsley, and any similar herbs, gather all of them or some of them into a pot, put water in it, and bring it to a boil;
et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	And let the pot be well sealed with strong earth, and in the middle of the pot place the tool for burning according to this manner:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie;	And whether made of silver or iron, and whether one of the shoulder blades is placed in the mouth of the patient until the steam rises from the wound through the nose, until the wound has become necrotic;
aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent;	After the process often repeats, until the wound dries, and remember not to do this at the beginning of the abscess's development, for many things happen;
et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	And don't do this until the abscess is ready to rupture.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut;	And if this instrument is not present, take a cloth and place an eggshell inside the patient's mouth, so that the heat of the wound does not become too hot;
car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	for the eggshell does not allow heavy steam to enter the mouth, and this is a good treatment that promotes healing.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose;	Many times a foreign object is inserted into the throat bone or spine of fish, or no thing;
si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose;	So it follows that you should extract what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument, so that you see the thing move;
et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac;	And what does not allow you to see and is found in the throat, it follows that you should make the patient vomit this way so that the meat becomes cooked in the stomach;
par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement;	By chance if the thing is expelled by vomiting;
ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec;	Or the object ingested might be an sponge piece, or a belly button piece, or a lettuce root, or a chunk of dry bread;
et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse;	And you attach the thread to the sponge, and then swallow it.
et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer;	And when she comes to its place, if it extends, then pull with force;
et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	And if she does not come by means of what we have said, take the plumb instrument according to this shape:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit;	And have the instruments bent at its head so that it may enter more easily into the throat, and raise the head high;
et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens;	And be careful not to touch the epiglottis, that it does not harm him, nor should you push any bone inside;
et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse;	And if the patient pushes the instrument, that's what it means when he moves or if something is slippery;
si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	If it pushes into the mouth, or pulls forcefully with all the instrument equally until it is strong.
de la sansue de la gorge	of the substance of the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines;	No treatment is given to those without blood, as I have said in the division, through the cure of medicines;
et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	And if this does not benefit, then look into the mouth of the patient towards the sun, and when you press their tongue with the instrument I have told you about.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the vessel, guide it with all your skill, or use delicate forceps that are suitable for this task.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if this doesn't suffice, take a hairy stick and place it in the throat of the patient, then press where the hair of the stick bends, and do this often.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if you wash the patient with water every day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent;	Then take a full cup of cold water, and open the mouth, pour it in gently so they can swallow, and move it often with their hand;
et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	And if soon after the water reaches the blood, it causes them to vomit.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve;	And if it does not vomit as we have said, then fumigate the patient with asafetida, using the instrument I mentioned in the fumigation of the eye;
fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	Do this many times, for it will succeed without fail.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument;	And the method of fumigation is as follows: you take the pot where there are burning coals and place it under a closely fitted lid in the middle, with the head of the instrument in that space;
puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue;	Then pour in the fumigation, and the patient places the tip of the reed in their mouth, closing it so that no smoke escapes but goes all the way down to the throat;
et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois;	And now the saliva will flow out, and if it does not, you should repeat the fumigation many times;
et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue;	And let the patient feel thirsty, and have them consume salty things and such, but do not give them water to drink;
et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And thus, it is necessary for her to depart through this governance.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge;	And the shape of the instrument used to extract gallbladder bile, if it is seen, resembles curved scissors for moving into the throat;
et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier;	and has the appearance of a surgeon's knife, and it has the roughness of a rasp, so whatever she takes, she cannot leave;
et vez ci la forme:	and here is the shape:
li chapistres des apostemes	The chapter on abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille;	No exact descriptions of pus are given, according to what memory brings up after one and another in this book, they vary in perforation and size;
et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	and there are two ways to do this, one being in its own appearance and the other due to moisture it holds.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second way is for those who have them within their body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	For the abscesses in the head are different from those on the foundation, and the abscesses on the internal muscle are different from those that come to joints, and each has its judgment in action.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement;	And if dealing with abscesses one must not pierce them until the wound has fully developed according to its natural course;
et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And for such cases it is necessary to pierce when they have grown and do not heal according to their development, like abscesses that lie near joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscesses come below joints, if you leave it ripe inside by chance, perhaps the ligament and nerve of the joint are corrupted, which causes a contraction in that member.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil;	If the abscess lies near the main limb, and if you delay the puncturing until it is dead, it will harm the main limb;
ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs;	If it lies near the root, if one pierces it or in such a way that it is dead;
et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule;	And it is not appropriate to pierce a growing abscess without its natural development being completed, except for the one that lies near the root, which should not rot internally and extend inside, resulting in an internal passage;
et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	And cannot heal properly in a large extent.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes;	And it is necessary for you to know the time of the abscess perforation which happens with completion, and this is when the pain subsides, and the departure of the fever, and the reduction of the pain and redness, and the beginning movement and sharpening of the head of the abscess, and other signs;
et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues;	And it is necessary for you to position the puncture or more according to the location of the abscess, and wherever it opens moves;
et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And let the puncture be along the length of the body, and if the abscess is on hands or feet, or joints and necks and arteries, and in all equal places where there is no curvature.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In such cases when they bend, according to that limb.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when abscesses are within the fatty part of the body, it is better to wait until you have completed digestion before making an incision as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure;	For if you pierce him before it, so it penetrates his body with the venom from him, and is full of maggots.
et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	and by chance harden the lips and you depress under them.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if at no abscesses they puncture across the width of the body, according to what the limb requires.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus;	And it is necessary that you remove small pus pockets, small cuts;
et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme;	and in large pus pockets, large cuts, and many wounds according to the size of the pus pocket;
et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper;	and if there are such pus pockets or it is necessary to bleed it, and cover;
quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes:	when it has become as white as a cloth, and is softened, then you must do the same as when dealing with boils:
et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres;	and if there are such that are split into three corners, and if there are such as are treated like the leaves of myrtle, like boil-like pus pockets;
et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And if such occur or one makes a round cut, and other cuts and seeming slicing.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement;	Those without heads, such as superficial abscesses, it is necessary that you pierce them completely;
et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie;	And when the abscesses are large, and they have grown significantly in size, if you pierce them, do not drain all the pus at once, but remove a portion of it;
puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief;	Then numb the abscess up to the other side, then leave nothing untouched thereafter;
fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute;	Do this repeatedly from large to small portions until all pus has drained;
meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	Similarly, if the patient has weak immunity, or is pregnant, or young children, or elderly and feeble individuals.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For when he tries thrice with the release of the bow, that perhaps kills the patient, and you do not realize this.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite;	Avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you have identified your abscess, if it has ruptured, observe the wound, and check whether the abscess wound is small;
et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton;	And if it's a flat stitcher, try using linen or vegetable cotton.
et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre;	And if it's a large abscess and there are many cavities, it is necessary that you insert a needle in each one so they press against each other;
et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor;	And if you have removed a portion of the skin in the abscess and sutured it inward, it is necessary that you fill it with old cotton or linen thread ash, and bind it up until the third day;
puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the bone, and treat with ointment as long as it remains healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if blood should start to pour out from your vein, cool it down with cold water and ease it off gradually, and hold the wet cloth there for many times.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut;	And if blood loss continues persistently, you must administer control and treatment, and the powders that I have mentioned with your hands in this book, and if it's near a vein, or the place where an abscess is, being mostly nervous, then it is necessary for you to put moist tents and cloths soaked in wine and heated oil on them;
et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit;	And if it's in the body, and the affected area is fleshly, then it is necessary for you to place moist cloths on them, either in water or oil, or wine and cold oil, up to three days, as we have said.
et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then remove and clean the abscess, following as it should be done, until there is no more pus.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes:	And this knowledge should be universally applied in treatments of abscesses:
or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	Or you have been told how to proceed before the treatment of abscesses, and this chapter explains it.
des soros	of the stomach
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	In the head region, small abscesses come about, and their manner is like those on cloths, similarly to a jeweler's work with a catkin, and many have similar appearances.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz;	There are some that are fat and such where there is moisture as well as pus;
et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	And for those that are hard and stony to the tailor, and there is no doubt that they have arteries not otherwise.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the work of the scalpel is that you must prove it with every instrument which is called 'intermediary', from which the form comes after, something it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, then make the cut above for its length.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien;	And when the moisture is drained, one scours without leaving anything behind the skin containing that moisture, for it returns immediately once nothing is left.
puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens;	Then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it's present;
se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	If not, in water and salt, and apply it to the wound, leaving it until the next day;
et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And these run those who remain during the night.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit;	And repeat the cotton process, just as before, on the second day and the third, until you are sure it does not remain overnight;
puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then apply ointment to the wound with what is suitable, until it heals properly.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc;	And if the abscess remains without pus, shape it according to this form, along its length;
et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist;	and remove your doubts, and burn all around, and apply your entire treatment to the area where it is located;
et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	and if it goes against the artery, do what I have told you after.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And similarly handle the abscess if it is made of stone, and cut and treat it as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And when cutting on the stone-abscess and the wet one, it is lighter because they have little blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme;	And if there is no moisture in any of these abscesses or heads, and for the pus-filled abscesses that I described or from an old woman;
et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier;	And I found the abscess just like a soft stone, hard, rough, and white, and could not break it;
et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if we had missed any, we would have also made the wound just as well like in cutting through a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe;	In other abscesses coming or going, it was necessary that those coming from the neck and the roots of the ears have their incision open for as long as possible depending on its healing, so that the blood may come out;
et les cure si com il covient.	And treat them according to what is appropriate.
des scrophules	regarding the pock marks
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times this abscess occurs in the throat, and close to the glands, and in the necks, and do not come to any other parts or on the body, they are hard, and are entangled with each other.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit;	And each scrophula is properly within its coat, just like the node and the abscess at the neck, as we have said;
et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And the appearances of these scrophulas are many.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some that contain moisture, and there are others that do not want to submit to health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde;	In that situation where you see good condition at the throat, and it appears like the color of flesh, mute from each side and not strangled around the neck or to the artery nor in the duct, and is not deep;
si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief;	It is necessary that you treat it from above, and excise each part of it, and have the two lips of the throat at the angle where they meet, if you need to do so, just as we explained in abscesses of the head;
et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	Gently and carefully remove it, be sure not to cut the nerve or the vein, nor make too much of a mess with blood, let your hands stay in control, do not advance too far, so as not to remove more than what you should.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie;	And if you have to remove the vein or the artery and it doesn't allow opening, apply vitriol or any powders that coagulate blood to the wound, and restrain the wound;
et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	And let it (the patient) until the abscess is calmed down, and the wound begins to soften, and heal.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses;	And when the boy has been healed, then return to your work, until you finish it;
puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	Then follow the indication of whether there are any small scabs remaining, if you clean and remove them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement;	And if there is a large vein in the root of the scab, it doesn't suit to clip that scab at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread, and let it fall away by itself without harm;
puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	Then apply the wound with old cotton dipped in Egyptian ointment, then proceed with treatment.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you are dealing with all of the ulceration, it is necessary that you gather together the two lips of the wound, and now suture them, because there should be no excess remaining due to the size of the ulcer.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	It is necessary that you understand how to cut into it, drain the pus, and suture it, just as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure;	Those excess scabs that remain, pierce them wherever they have opened and let them heal;
et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption;	And dig as was said before, while depending on it, then he administers remedies with ointment and similar things, so that what is left of the decay can be corrupted.
et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the wound has been well cleaned, let the ointment cure the flesh, as long as it is healthy.
de squinance	"De squinance" translates to "on squinting" or "concerning squint". This term could be referring to medical treatments or observations related to eye disorders where one eye may be turned inward (intorsion) or outward (extorsion). The specifics would depend on the broader context of the text that this phrase is found in.
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge;	The old ones spoke and discussed about the surgery of the throat;
mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	But I never saw anyone do it in our land, and that's how they wrote their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee;	For those with strabismus, it is necessary that the incision of the throat called "the epiglottis" be avoided;
et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	And do not seek help in this way because all the veins and the heart are near to those with abscesses either inside their mouth or in the throat or under the two kidneys.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is within the channel of the lung, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis in order to prevent the loss that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	Therefore, when we wish to incise the epiglottis, it should be cut through at three or four small cuts in between two circles. By the size of these cuts according to their depth, not within the cartilage;
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	And such cuts are compatible for the division of the epiglottis that there is no flesh, and the blood vessels are long along it.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil;	And if the surgeons are fearful, it is necessary that they extend the skin of the throat to all the inch, then cut out the lump until it reaches the bone;
et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	And avoid blood vessels, if you see nothing, then cut out the sore, as we have said;
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	And it is demonstrated by the rupture of the stream in the bone that leaps out through the limb which has been broken, and due to the loss of voice;
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	Leave the wound open for a piece.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige;	And when the time has passed in which one doubts strangulation, gather the two lips of the wound like a mouth, and sew it all smoothly without touching the cartilage;
puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then administer medicines that promote strength until they become clear.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albacus suggests that one should not perform this until the throat is completely blocked, and the patient is judged dead, and the deficiency has been made.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	Therefore hold the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe normally, and they are breathing through the wound, and thus is protected from death;
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	And because they were commanded by the ancients to leave the wound open until the illness's malady passes, and it passed in three days or four. And then they ordered to stitch up the wound and clean it, while it was being cleaned;
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	And I will tell you what I have seen.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	I saw that a maiden took a knife and stabbed it into her throat, and cut some of the channels leading to the heart;
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	And I was called to heal her, and found her as if dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound, and found the blood that was issuing from it, and it was well that she did not have a cut vein or artery but rather the wind flowed through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	I rushed, and treated the wound, and cured her until she was healed;
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	and only had to rest for the maiden's voice to recover, and she returned after that to her usual state of health;
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	Therefore, I say that in the surgery for the tailoring of the epiglottis, there should not be hesitation.
de la grosse gorge	from the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	These abscesses are called "neck hernia", and they are large abscesses in the color of a chestnut, and are very common among women;
et est selonc II manieres:	And according to two ways:
naturez, et accidens;	naturally, and by chance;
ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	or natural has no illness.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	And the accidents occur in two ways, of which one is similar to our fat and the other way is like an abscess that comes from our blood.
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	and there is fear, and it should not open for surgery except in cases that are small, and the proof and search apply to every intervention:
se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	if you find it as large as our fat and cannot reach any vein, cut it out, just like we would cut out our fat, and treat it with all its boundaries, if there is any part;
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	and search thoroughly immediately, then treat as appropriate until it is completely healed.
des nous	from nails
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	Many ways are available to us, of which I will say all the equivalents;
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	and it is necessary for me to explain all the differences that exist between us and them.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture;	I say that disease is characterized by fever and warmth until the ebullitions have passed and putrefaction has been completed;
adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	So, the fever and heat then subside.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	With the healthy body has no heat, fever, or pain, and contains lymph, which is its own sac and follows the color of the flesh, and begins also like a boil, and becomes swollen;
et sont selonc II semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	and according to two appearances, or fatty, or moist, and much of the color is as I have described in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary, when you come to the treatment of a new injury, that you first test and inquire about all the instruments which are called 'intermediary', according to whether their shape appears or after chapter which follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	And the method of incision into abscesses is that you take or more moist than you find within the abscess, and move your hands little by little, until you know that the instruments have reached the core, then proceed according to the size of the abscess;
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	Then extract the pus, and take care that no spill occurs.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	If the moisture is clear and of what color it is, cut it as I've said for other abscesses;
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	And if no pus comes out after the pus, know that it is fatty, then cut it diagonally, and take hold of it with forceps, and gently scrape each side of it. Keep the cloth where the pus lies to pull out a healthy one with the knot;
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	And if you cannot bring it back healthy, so take it piece by piece until nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	For if there is nothing left, the body will return through many times;
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if only a little remains and it doesn't bother you, use some corrosive powders on the wound, keep the wound in place, apply things that calm abscess heat, and treat with other treatments until it is healed.
et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	And if the body is large, so cut both lips of the wound, and treat with those who are in charge of surgical procedures.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc;	And if the vein is too small or another if you hurry, use the inside of the ashes in powder form, and let it sit for 2 days or 3, until the wound heals, and rest with blood boiling.
puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	Then return to consider what has been delayed by the new.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres:	Here are the forms of the surgical instruments that are used together, and they are in three ways:
grans et moien et petit;	large ones and medium-sized ones and small ones;
et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres:	and there are three sizes of them which are called 'albaret', and one that is called 'breb', and they come in three ways:
grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	large, medium-sized, and small ones, to encircle the abscesses of fistulas;
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	and they are also like needles from which one sews veins, and they can be of citrine quill, or iron, or silver, and golden ones are preferred because black wax is more effective for encircling the bends of a fistula;
et sont de III manieres:	And there are three ways:
grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	Large ones, medium ones, and small ones, according to the amount of width in the cuts.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci:	The forms of the thorns are like some resemblance, as you see here:
grans, moiens, et petis;	Large ones, medium ones, and small ones;
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi;	and if there are thorns with two curves in three ways such;
et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres;	and if there are thorns with three curves, and they are also in three ways;
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres;	and if there are thorns with two curves, and single-curved thorns only, and they are in three ways;
et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	All of these are necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	The head of this one to whom you make your cutting tool, and there are such who do not cut force but from one side, which we burn the skin, because here one does not cut the vein nor the nerve;
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	And these introducers have their handles attached with clamps, so that the patient does not lose them during the opening of abscesses;
et sont de III manieres:	and there are three ways:
grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	largely, small, and moderate, as you see;
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	and none of them uses force only in the lower part, such as legs and arms, breasts, and joints, and similar body parts;
et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	and there is no other small instrument similar to the surgical blades, resembling stumps of nails, according to this shape, with which one stops bleeding:
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	And it should never be placed at the site of a healthy artery or veins, and under no circumstances follow this large form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	At times, the nipples of some men swell when they begin to become corrupted, until they seem like female nipples.
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	And remain disfigured and swollen. If one wishes to treat them, they should do so according to this form of this line .b. until .g..
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	Then strip the fat, apply medicine to the wound that promotes healing, then stitch together the two edges of the wound, and continue treatment until it is healed;
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures;	And if the nipple leans downwards, and is flattened due to its size, like it happens in women, if they divide it into two parts above, by two similar slits;
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	From which one holds onto the other at the end of one and the other, so that the largest line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line .b. until the line .g.;
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then burn the skin that is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and apply what we have instructed about sewing and powders, and what is necessary in treatment, as long as they are healthy.
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	And if it is not healthy, or the incision is not fully made, because the patient cannot rest, or due to bleeding, you should fill the wound with moist cotton in a corrosive salve;
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	And leave it as long as it can chew with the mouth and swallowing the fat, then treat it until it is healed.
des apostemes des asselles	removal of abscesses from the armpits
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	Wounds that come from abscesses are manners of hard scrophules where there are nodes, and if there are any containing moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those who contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from line .b. up to line .g:.
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the pus in the abscess is drained, you should fill the wound with old cotton and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton and apply ointment until it heals.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscesses resemble scrophules, cut them as we have said in cuts on scrophules, and if the wound is full of pus, apply a cautery as we have said previously.
de la routure de l’artere	Of the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	When the artery is cut and the skin above it has been sewn together, there are many times when abscesses occur, and similarly, this happens with the drained vein and abscess.
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	And if one knows it thus when it is due to an artery, then are the abscesses long and filled completely;
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement;	And when you feel it with your fingers, if there's a constriction;
et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	And when it's due to the vein, then expect discolored fluids;
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	And it's madness to cope with this abscess, and similarly when it appears on the sides and at the angles and under the collarbone and in many other parts of the body, and is very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	Therefore, one should avoid the iron treatment, and that which is at the head also needs to be avoided, and for him who has an inflamed artery, do it above the skin until long;
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	Then work on the twelve inches, and beautifully remove the artery from the tissues, until it is uncovered;
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples;	Then take out of the person a needle, and make it pierce until the other side, and bind the artery with a doubled thread in two places, according to what I have taught you in extracting the two arteries that are in the temples;
puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	Then puncture the area between the two ties with an introducer until blood flows from where there was a clot, and release the abscess;
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	Then apply the treatment that requires blood flow, as long as the knot is present;
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then treat this with ointment attached to it, until it becomes clean;
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	And if the abscess is as large as the vein, you should mark with your hand what part of the abscess you can reach on the skin. Then take out the needle from the area held in your hand and make it pierce through, using a doubled thread, so that you bring it to the other side;
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil;	Then remove the abscess, as I told you, or tie one of two parts at each shoulder with a string;
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus;	And if you doubt that the threads will hold, if I sew another needle to each end of all four threads across the entire abscess at the incision point for the first needle, and secure the threads in four places;
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	Then cut the abscess as much of the excess comes out, then trim away the remaining excess carefully and leave what is tied up;
puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then place on the cloth a moist mixture of wine and oil, then administer treatments and ointments until it is healed.
des apostemes des ners	The removals of nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Similarly, when an abscess forms in the artery and vein, abscesses also form on nerves when they are cut, or due to excessive labor, and similar conditions.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	And this often happens with shoulders and elbows and in all places where joints are present, it's the case for abscesses, and its color seems like flesh color, and is felt in various positions without pain;
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	And when it is constrained to form, the patient feels great pain, and is not satisfied by the fullness of the body, but rather experiences discomfort in the belly;
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer:	And moves in all directions, neither forward nor backward, neither up nor down, and the one in joints does not fit to be covered with iron:
par aventure i vanroit contraction;	By chance it would undergo contraction;
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And that which is in the head or forehead, makes the skin sweat out.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	If abscesses are small, then with your forceps, you grasp them at their base;
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is large, then suspend it at the anus, and cut it open, and remove the muscle, then sew up the wound when it's clean, and continue the treatment until it heals.
des grosses boces pendans	And for the larger blisters, hang them.
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros;	No matter in which parts of the body or anywhere else, this is a disease that is named "fungus" due to its appearance, and it has a delicate root, and large heads;
et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	and there are some small ones and many large ones;
et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	And I saw two homes who had them in their stomachs that resembled fungi more than anything else, and there was no distinction, they were white, had a small root, and split open, and within they corroded due to moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	I copied them and found that one weighed eighteen ounces in the other six. The organs at the incision are such that when you look they see that the flesh is moist, and the appearance of the inside is white and wet with a delicate root;
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	If you seize the broad spot, and have the fire cautery present.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	For many times in the barber surgeon's work there are too large bleedings, and if they overwhelm you, then quickly use a cautery;
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors;	And if you see the patient alarmed and afraid by the iron incision, then take a well made thong of hemp, and bind it to the handle as we have said, and leave it for two days;
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail;	And then bind it firmly, and do not stop straining the hemp thread until you feel its tension, and notice that there is no pain.
et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne;	And if the roots are large, and you feel fear when seizing them for the abdomen, but you might well seize half of it, then apply a cautery so that they do not regrow.
puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	Then treat the wound, and ensure you do not disturb the pustule which is of a reddish hue and has little sense perception and milky appearance.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For this is an abscess that's been incised, and I will come to the treatment of gangrene after this.
quant li boude ist fuer	When the boil burns
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	Its appearance comes from the cautery of wounds or fissures in syphilis, and is on the belly; there are some ulcers like this, as happens with other cuts, or bleeding from veins or arteries according to what has come before, or from windiness.
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	And if it is through the cut in syphilis and through the exit of the ulcer, its appearance resembles that of redness, and it is a light thing without much pain, and opens from various exits.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it's due to the exit of the intestine, then it is more varied, and when one presses it with their fingers it returns, and then comes back again, and by chance it might swell, and grows much at the entrance of the bath and through strong labor.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie;	And if it is due to moisture, it's a light matter, and opens well when you press it with your hand, not constraining.
et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	And if it's due to blood, open through these signs big and hard abscesses, and place them according to a quantity;
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it's due to winds (or风气), there is a coughing sound at the chest, and the veins so you should observe whether their appearance indicates blood of an artery, or of a vein, or winds.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	If it is necessary for you to allow the treatment.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear involved, as I have told you or in the chapter on abscesses, regarding the artery and the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	And if its appearance is related to the intestines or the bladder, you should instruct the patient to scrape their urine, and make sure it flows straight, then strike across all around the scrotum;
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	Then command the patient to relieve themselves between your hands, then proceed into the area where you indicated on the entire abdomen, and leave half of the pus above the entire large curve.
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	Then bind it around with a strong thread or tightly with a sturdy silk cord, securing the tie firmly.
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	Then operate on half of the abscess extended over the tie, and place your finger tip, and inspect the intestine.
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	If you find it caught by the tie, remove the tie, and push the intestine out of the belly opening;
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	And if you find it to be swollen, take hold at the knuckle, and remove any excess;
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	And if the artery or vein is contrary to you, or a blood vessel, then insert them firmly through, and return to your work and take two needles, and insert two strong threads, and place the two needles through the structure where you pierced.
puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	Then clamp the abscess with three needles above the needles, and if you see it, remove the needles, and leave the area until it heals, and discard any dead flesh by itself.
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	when it becomes fine and reddened, then treat as appropriate, and cut the abscess as we have said.
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	and remove the blood or moisture that you find, then treat and heal according to what is needed, and stitch the area.
dou chancre	and gangrene
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer;	As we have said in the section about the signs of gangrene, and how it should be handled with medicine, and how to avoid iron treatment;
et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement;	And we say that gangrene can spread in the arm, and great caution is needed in treatment. The old ones said that when gangrene is on a limb or able to be removed such as gangrene on breasts and cooking, and any similar limbs, it must be entirely removed once it starts.
et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner;	And when it is large and old, if you cannot approach it, for I never knew a cure for such.
ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	No one has ever been cured in front of me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire;	And the operations, when it is in its place or can be removed, as we have said, is that you cleanse the patient of black coagulation without exception;
puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige;	Then make the surgeon if it shows fullness, then prepare the patient well for the operation;
puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier;	Then remove any abscesses or ulcers, and clean the hair from all sides, and cleanse the bone from all sides without leaving anything behind;
et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	And let the blood drain completely, and wash well the area with your hand or without anything, and if the bleeding suddenly stops in contrast to the incision of an artery or vein, then apply cautery until the wound becomes numb;
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then continue with another treatment until it heals.
de ydropisie	Regarding dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer:	We have discussed in detail the symptoms of dysentery, and how the assembly (or collection) of water occurs, and the signs for each symptom, as well as the treatment done with medicine, and what is treated with iron.
si est eclites soulement;	if it is merely minor;
et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances:	and iron should not be used in these two symptoms:
c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose;	which means, peritonitis and typhoid fever, for they are deadly conditions;
donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses;	therefore when you use medicine to treat this dysentery symptom called "eclites" with medicine, and the treatment doesn't help, then observe if the patient is weak or has any other illness besides dysentery, as well as things like solutions for an upset stomach and similar symptoms;
si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance;	If you do not touch with iron, because there is doubt;
et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	And if you see the liver is very green, and it has no other illness except ydropisia only, and it is neither too young nor too old, then I should operate as follows:
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	Lift the liver straight above your hands, and have the ministers press on the belly from behind with hot water applied at the lowest part of the foot, then take the sharp spatula in this form:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And may you have a depth of two parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	At the tip, and it must not be so narrow that it can come up to the intestine when inserted, but cannot be too sharp;
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines:	Then look to see if the ydropisia extends towards the intestines:
si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil;	It is necessary for you to cut there on top of the breastbone three inches below the heart.
et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois;	And if there is jaundice due to liver disease, you should cut on the left side of the breastbone three inches below.
et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	And if it's about the lungs, on the right side, and it is not good for the patient to have the wound over the cut area so that no excess flows into the weak one.
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor;	Then pierce all the skin with the instrument, pull it and lift your hand throughout the fat area between the skin and the chest bone as much as when searing in a quantity of one nail or more.
puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	Then pierce the chest until the fat turns to oil, and this is the time of cold water, then pull the muscle, and take this instrument which I have described:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus;	And it is like a thin silver rod, or a slender nail or rivet, and in the part just below the larger end there's a small nub.
et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus;	and on one side, it has three nubs;
et II d’autre part, et I d’autre;	and two from another side, and one more from another;
et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	and the shoulder is cut as if it were a feather, and this is the shape of the incision that the writers describe when cutting the feather:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument;	at its apex is the armpit, so that when the instruments reach the water, they now descend upon the instrument;
vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	then empty half or a third of it, for if you empty more than it should at this hour, by chance the patient might die from the release of his spirit from the weapon, or he might faint, or he could approach death;
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz;	But adjust according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the virtues' dispositions signify in the patient, and its pulse;
puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere;	Then draw the instrument and hold the water, and it is now held due to the cure that numbs the tip which is on the tongue, as I have spoken, that you pierce according to this manner;
puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	Then continue with the instrument on another day, if you see the patient suffering from this, and draw out a small quantity of water;
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	Do this for any day, and refrain from letting it stay but just a little bit of water.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre;	And if you doubt about the patient and leave much water, if the cure for the burial or sand heats up, and through a little sweat or bath and in the sun, and if it turns to drinking;
et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	And the treatment with drying medicines until it is healed, and cauterize on the stomach and liver and spleen after the removal of pus, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	Regarding the operation to correct a curved penis
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	No child is born without defects in the penis, or if the defects are small, or it doesn't stay in its place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If it is necessary immediately when there isn't much pus to drain at all, very finely according to this shape:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet;	Then apply or attach thin strips of linen, and keep them in place for three to four days. When it wants to urinate, remove the bandages, let it urinate, then put them back on;
et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	And if there is no need for that, because the urine that comes does not allow it to be closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	Those who have lost their teeth, if it has a remedy with a poppy's root, as we said, should increase its dosage.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut;	Those who do not have the linen around their groin turn blue, because none are born with the linen at the tip of their penis, so they cannot urinate before lifting up their penis;
et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	And they cannot copulate because the matter cannot come up to the urethra, and this is a bad disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient;	And the way of this work is that the patient lies supine on their back, then have the head of the penis and the tip also as long as a feather's width, so that the torn flesh hangs in the middle, just as it should.
et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	and protect yourself from the multiple times bleeding occurs, and if it happens, have the person who stops bleeding attend to it, and treat the wound until it heals.
des pustules de la verge	The pimples of the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide;	Many times, stones come down in the penis, and there is an appearance of ugly flesh;
et en i a malignes et non malignes;	and among them, some are harmful and some are not.
si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien;	It is necessary that you extract them at the finest point, and treat and cleanse them all, then place on cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment;
puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Apply the ointment treatment until it has healed completely.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the infection is malignant, with pus and discharges, it's necessary that you apply a cautery to it.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier;	When you have completed it, and if the bath is in his thigh where the testicle, and part is inside the skin and part outside, it is necessary that you remove the bath which is inside first;
et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	And when it has healed, address the one outside.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion;	For when you treat them together, make sure that the head of his penis does not get pierced and comes blackness and decay in his penis and anus;
si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	So you must remove everything that is black and corrupted. Then cover with a paste made of chestnut shell and vinegar, as well as honey and flour. Once this has been done, continue other treatments until it heals completely.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And when the bleeding ceases, if blood drainage is occurring, then apply the lunar cautery according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble:	The fire cauterizers assist through two arrangements together:
c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption;	It means, regarding blood discharge, and decomposition;
et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi;	And if the testicles are corrupted and removed, it is necessary that you use a fennel rod or lead them out from the testicles, and let the patient urinate.
et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	And when the hair grows around the tip of the penis for those who have not undergone circumcision, or due to injury or abscess, then it is necessary that you cauterize with a small tool until all the ligaments are freed and the head of the penis is released from all sides.
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil;	And if it is to discuss such things, then you should cauterize near the tip of the penis and foreskin;
puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	Then take two pieces of fine linen cloth that have been treated with oil and watered down cold, so they don't stick together.
de la circoncision	of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies;	Circumcision is not a surgery of continuity like other wounds;
toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	However, whenever we perform this work of our free will, and for children, it is necessary that we do the best work, and make it the lightest on their health.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that old people did not advise circumcision for their children, as they did not practice it in their law, and we only have this knowledge through our acquired experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule;	For I have consulted with most of the masters and surgeons who performed circumcision around day three, and for all purposes, up to the entire foreskin;
si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	If it was just one layer because there are two layers of skin, and by chance if you cut through both, this leaves the other below.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre;	Or they receive a copper, and there is doubled pain, and at the amputation where it is done not well the point of the limb;
et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	And in the amputation of the nail by chance the metal escapes and runs away from the operation, and many times it grows as if it does not need amputation and I have noticed this.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	From the dissection done forcefully at every part of the thread I found out that it was good to experiment, for the force cuts as well above as below accurately.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens;	For when you squeeze your hand, if cut equally like an 'I', all the tension is relieved;
mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir;	but ensure that the thread is well inserted within the skin;
et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	and let the method of the first operation be such that you make the child think, if they hear, that you are only tying the thread around the penis just like that, and then make them exercise in all the ways you can;
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens;	Then make him stand between your hands straight, and place the strength in between your hands or over your feet where the child cannot see it, nor any of the instruments.
puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens;	Then place your hand on the penis and blow or pinch it, and guide it upwards until the head of the penis is inside.
puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien;	Then clean it thoroughly of the dirt that has accumulated, then tie its waist with a doubled thread, and tie each piece to another link;
et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	And hold it with two fingers by the second layer to the pocket and at the second index point, place your thumb between the two threads, then lift the pinch upwards quickly and guide the head of the penis.
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres;	Then let the blood flow gradually and gently, for that's how it should be.
et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And put powder here and there on the powder I spread glue with half a yolk from a cooked hard-boiled egg mixed in rose water, seasoned with oil that is good and fresh, and leave it like this until the next day, and apply further treatments until he heals.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste:	The forms of the forces in universal transformation are as follows:
li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	Let both shoulders be held and cut, and let the shoulders also be as large as the arms equally:
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision;	The error in universal transformation occurs when the kidneys flee during incision;
donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme;	Therefore, it is necessary for you to extend until your nail, so that the legs perform an incision;
et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	And do it evenly, and if you cannot hold it at your nail, then hold it with pliers, and then proceed.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement;	And if they pierce through for three days, and the one who is beneath the member swells, you should let it be until the pus is calmed by exudation, and lightly scrape it.
si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And when you can endure it, protect the part of the member, for this will not harm him.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point;	So treat the burn of wounds with powder, as we have said or discussed about powders, and if you exceed due measure in heating it, and it goes beyond, it will not cause harm;
cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Treat accordingly, as we have said, until it is healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	Regarding the retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	Retention of urine is due to the obstruction of stones, or blood that has frozen, or bile, or pus, or similar things, as we have discussed in the section;
et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz;	And if the patient is not relieved of his urine, and you see that it is being held back by a stone in the bladder or neck of the bladder, then it's necessary for the patient to be raised on his knees;
et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet;	And have his feet placed under the back, and extend his stomach from the part above the back, and hold the patient so that he cannot move until he can.
et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	And then the necks of the bladder must be forced to express the stone above, so that the urine is relieved.
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme:	And if it doesn't come out as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you should administer extraction with all the instrument that is called "syringe", which here is its form:
et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil;	And may it be fine silver strands of light hair, such as those of a bird;
et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	And let it be the length of a palm and a half, and fine at its root.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue;	And for the passage of urine, take a double thread and tie it around a small part of wool or cotton at its root, and keep the root inside the syringe with the thread.
et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	And cut off the excess of the wool and keep it until the end of the syringe, then smear the syringe with oil or butter and egg yolk, and have the patient sit down, and squeeze the bladder and penis with moist oil and olive oil and vinegar.
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude;	And gently place the syringe in the penis, until it reaches the root of the penis, then bend the penis upwards towards the anus.
puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors;	Firstly, insert the syringe before reaching the bladder, and guide it until you feel the patient's urine coming to the empty thing; this does not follow the exact order as some might lead her in a twisted direction.
puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	Then pull the thread until all the wool is done little by little, and the urine follows the thread. Then pull it out, making sure to properly drain the urine.
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And keep using the syringe until the bladder is emptied, and relieve the patient of their discomfort.
des maladies de la vessie	Of diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When burns or blood come into the bladder, or corruption is assembled there, and you see distilled waters and medicines, do so with all the instrument that is called "clepsydra", and it has this form:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus:	It's closed, and if it's been three attempts:
II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois;	Two on one side, and one on the other, as you see;
et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	And let urine flow through where the medicinal cure should be such that it numbs the penis well without additional substances. If there is moisture to expel, allow it to flow out as needed; and push if necessary.
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens;	And when you see your medications flowing into the bladder, place the end of the catheter in the moisture, and pull at the one who is attached.
si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens;	if you pull on the catheter at the other end, then firmly reconnect the catheter afterwards;
si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	if moisture enters from there, and goes to the bladder now, so that the patient feels it;
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie:	and this is the form of subtle colic in which one irrigates the bladder:
si est ci:	if it is like this:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut;	And made of silver or horn, and the shoulder is higher;
et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet;	and downwards to the back or under the armpits;
puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu;	Then take a sheep's bladder and fill it with the moisture you use to irrigate the bladder. Then tie it between the two breasts in a good double thread, and heat one end of the moisture over the fire;
puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	Apply the blistering agent to the head of the bladder in the penis, then hold your hand over the bladder until all moisture accumulates there, as long as the patient feels that this moisture has reached the bladder.
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor;	And if you don't have a bladder, take a piece of parchment and make it into a circle, piercing it roundly through.
puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument;	Then insert a strong thread into these pustules, then join the circle just as one would tie a knot, and put inside it what you see of pus, moisture, and water, and secure it with the tool.
et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	Do this just like you did with the bladder, squeezing with your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
de la piere	from the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines;	We have discussed the methods of stone treatment and extraction together with remedies;
et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille;	And I have explained the difference between a kidney stone that has been attacked by rain, and all the signs, and in which kidney one should open for size;
et en la vessie, et en la verge;	And in the bladder, and in the penis;
et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	And I will explain it clearly and succinctly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit;	I say that the kidney stone within the bladder usually occurs more often in children, and this is a sign that an infection has spread from the bladder similar to one that spreads subtly;
et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist;	And when it is in the urethra, and affects the urinary organs of the penis, and it passes many times, and then becomes hard;
et a mout de ces saut li fondemens;	and at the end of these infections, the kidneys
et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece;	and the healing of children is lighter until they are four years old, and there is much complaint in the elderly, and it's moderate for those between middle age and old age;
et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	And the treatment is more gentle for those with large stones than for those with small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to treatment, it is necessary first to cleanse the patient by purging, in order to extract all the pus that is inside.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it clogs up every time when trying to cut into the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut;	Then take hold of the stone by its edges, and pull it out while moving downwards, so that the stone descends to the front of the bladder, and emerges only once from its upper part;
puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval;	then have him sit between your hands while preparing everything, and his hands under his thighs, so that the bladder is fully hanging downwards;
puis la quier et la touche dedens;	then seize it and feel inside;
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	if you sense the stone in space, cut immediately on the stone now.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis;	And if she doesn't pass with the touch along all of it, wet your index finger of your left hand with urine, for if the stone is young, or with half your finger, for if the stone is a mature adult;
et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie;	And dig until you reach its base, aim for the stone, and when you feel it under your finger, if it touches the neck of the bladder;
puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	Then press towards your finger, and dig further in the place where you see to cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille;	And instruct the surgeon to press the bladder with his hand, and command him to spread upwards both legs with his right hand, and hold the skin that covers the legs with his left hand in the area where the cut will be made;
puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	Then dig into the fatty tissue, which is its form:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre;	And make an incision between what's in between the legs and the base, not in the middle but at the edge of the left side of the bladder;
et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	And be straight on the stone, and your feet should lie on a base or foundation, and be made to span across it so that it is wide outside but narrow inside, according to the size of the stone, not too large.
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail;	By chance if the press needed which is or foundation, that it may jump to make sense of work;
et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges:	And know that there are parts of stone where there are angles and edges:
si est griés a issir;	if it is torn to exit;
et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	and if it is at parts that are under, resembling a walnut, and round, whose exit is light.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant;	And above where there are angles and edges, make the size larger;
et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe;	And if it does not jump, then you should tighten with the tongs that are like a file at their tip, to force out the stone so that it doesn't escape;
ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief;	for you thrust out of it with the slender curved instrument to the head;
et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	and if you cannot work it like this, if it is large but quite small and rough, and if you do not debone it, then season it with vinegar;
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	and if there is more than one stone, if you remove the largest first from the neck of the bladder, then cut upwards, then force out the tract, and afterwards the smaller ones if there are any.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if she is very large, then one must cut her out, and create a larger wound.
Car II choses avienent au malaide:	For two things happen to the patient:
ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder;	or he dies, or his urine comes out immediately even if his legs cannot be sewn together;
mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	but strive nonetheless to pull or break it with forceps until you extract it piece by piece;
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut;	And when you have finished your work, cleanse the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, then bind it. Place a moist cloth in oil and wine, or in oil and cold water and rosewater, to soothe the inflamed area.
puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	then straighten the hair up on his neck, and do not loosen the tie until midday.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you untie it, be sure to raise the head and torso very well with oil and water, then wash with ointment of laudanum and ointment of basil until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine:	And if abscesses come into the wound and infections occur, or blood clots in the bladder, causing retention of urine, which is known to behave like this: without urination with the urine.
boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	So then burn your tool in the wound, and remove that blood, because if it remains, it will corrode the bladder;
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then cleanse the wound from water and slime and pus, and assist with all methods that you know, until it is healed.
et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And ensure that all the remedies you use, you bind his two legs together, and apply the remedies on the affected area.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir;	And if his stone is small and it's led by the penis, and stuck inside, causing inability to urinate;
si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	If you follow what I say as such, that you trim many times and excuse the loss of size due to this treatment.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have already gained this experience.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take one piece of iron according to this shape, and let there be three pegged points in it.
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie;	Then take thread and bind around the penis near the stone, so that it cannot come back into the bladder;
puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere;	Then gently push the stick in the penis until it reaches the stone;
et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part;	And turn the drill to your hand in the stone little by little, until you can pierce the stone from another side;
si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	If it comes to an end quickly, then press your hand onto the one that is stuck of the stone which is inside the penis.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	If it breaks soon, and jump with the urine, and the patient will be freed;
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie;	And if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, tie a thread over the stone and another on top, then place the penis between the two threads, then pull hard, and release one of the threads, and cleanse all the coagulated blood in the wound;
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And treat it as long as it is clean.
de la piere des femmes	From the stone of women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses:	A stone may become lodged inside a woman, and if it happens even once, the treatment is exhausting, and must be resisted for three reasons:
l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge;	One reason could be that perhaps the woman is still a virgin;
et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	And the second reason is that it might be difficult to find a woman who would willingly reveal her condition under scrutiny, especially if she is pure.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains;	And the third way could be that perhaps it might be hard to find a woman who knows this art well;
et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil;	And the fourth way is that perhaps the stone in a woman's body might be deeper than in men's, so it requires deeper cutting; and there is great fear involved. If you must resort to this, then seek out someone very skilled for this task, and guide her hand well; if you can't find such a person, you might not dare let a pure person look into this matter further.
et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	And there comes a clear insight into the life of women, where a woman who understands some part of the art is instructed and commanded to do what you command concerning the inquiry of the stone.
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge:	And carefully observe whether that woman is a virgin:
adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere;	Then it must be pushed with force or at the very least seek out the stone;
et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	And if she finds it, force her with due measure and seek the stone, and I advise that she push her effort or press against her hand on the bladder's formation with her left hand and presses firmly.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse;	And if she finds it, it is necessary for her to move it gradually from the entry of the bladder until beneath, as far as she can reach the root of the thigh;
puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie;	Then cut on the stone at the root of the thigh over the middle of the femur, where you can see the bone, and feel the bone in that part.
et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	and do not move his tool above the stone or nearby it, but make him small at the beginning.
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont:	then pinch the vein at the opening, if you feel the bone increase the wound as much as the bone can be forced out, and know that many types of stones are:
c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	which means, small and large, hard and smooth, long and round, and those that have grooves.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	If you understand the symptoms to know the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	And if it doesn't hurt you, then put vinegar in the wound and keep it there for an hour until the skin becomes numb;
puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	Then return to your work, as long as the stone is hard, and have at hand the instruments I told you about in removing stones for home use to help you with your task;
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide;	And if you can't do it without it hurting him, and the artery has been cut off, then apply the powder on the wound and hold it tightly with bandages and don't try again. Leave the stone alone and don't remove it by force, lest perhaps the patient dies;
puis cure la plaie.	Then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood has calmed and the wounds are healed, return to your work while the stone remains intact.
de hernie carnouse	of fatty hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef;	Gelatinous moisture is nothing else but a gathering of moisture or white grease, which resides in the belly of cows, that contains the egg;
et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef;	And it is called "grease," and there is no clean egg fabric within the shell if one believes that this is another egg;
et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit;	And this is the skin around the scrotum between the white testicles that we have described;
et ceu n’avient se poc non.	And it does not contain any small opening.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the formation of these blisters is due to weakness that affects the kidneys, and spreads this substance.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors:	And never let there be a percussion on the testicles, and this moisture takes many forms:
ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	or it becomes yellow like jaundice, or without redness, or black, or watery white, and this happens more often.
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And these are the signs to recognize this condition; for if it is white like we have described, then it indicates an abscess formation, and extends as long as the shape of an egg, and does not affect the testicles, because there is moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	And if there is moisture in the proper membrane, then it indicates an abscess with part of the egg, and because of this, we think it's another egg;
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien;	And if moisture is between the skin of the joints and the white bone, you will feel it well;
donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	Therefore, when you know the color of the moisture, if you test all around the involved area, from which its shape is as described.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to this following text which comes after the introduction, judge based on what is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors;	And when we treat it with iron, it must be cured according to our ability and the restoration of their body;
puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	then place him on his back, on something slightly raised, and cover him with wool.
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions;	then sit to his left side, and instruct the attendant to sit on the right, spreading the leg out to one of the two ribs near the joint.
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	then take the spit iron, and place the skin of the joints among it long from head to toe until under the knee, and make a straight cut all along cutting the skin of the joints up to the white bone, and gently cauterize slightly according to your ability;
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont;	Then pierce the eye fully with a sharp needle, and extract all the water, and then put your fingers on it, making the eye go up.
et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement;	and do not touch the root of the hair follicles, but only the eye.
cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	take it all or in parts as best suits you, that if you do not take it carefully enough, it will return to be watery.
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac;	and if the egg jumps to your work, once you have completed the operation on the eye, reset it in its place.
puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then sew the two edges of the hair follicle together with one stitch, then treat it as you would other wounds until it heals.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc;	And if you find the egg spoiled by another disease, it is necessary that you tie the veins that are suspended, worrying about blood flow;
puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	Then cut above the pubic bone, and remove the fetus, and clean it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices;	And if the gall is gathered into two parts together, know that these are two branches;
si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	then cut the other part in the same way you did the first equally, then let out the blood, and put wet wool soaked in rose oil in the wound;
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	then place another wet wool soaked in wine and oil above the two heads, and place them on top of each other, then cover with folded cloths, and fasten it all together according to this shape:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil;	Then take two cloths and fold them with torn wool according to this appearance so that they are joined by sewing in the waistband of the breeches, and one of the shoulders is placed up to the back at the bottom, and the other at the part near the elbow;
et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	And the other two heads on the two angles, and all together restriction is confined to the loop of the binder;
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	And each time the rod of this cautery is treated like a metal tool, and you should take the fine fire cautery instrument, and peel the skin off the joints, and heat it up as we have said, so that the white liquid contained in the water becomes revealed;
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Take the cautery in this form, and puncture the white spot like bones, and burn it with this fine fire cautery instrument:
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout;	And peel in all ways that you can, until you remove everything;
et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef;	and make sure the fire does not touch the egg;
et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve;	and know that this work is more saved;
et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	and while preventing blood flow, and mindful of proper incision techniques;
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And if nothing goes against you, or if there is pus discharge or bleeding complications or any other issue, treat whatever goes against you according to what the one in front says.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit;	And if the patient is afraid, and does not want to undergo this procedure due to its horror, then perform a puncture, as I instruct you, and know that when you are well assured by our explanations that the watery part is there, make the patient sit on the raised seat;
pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors;	Pierce the abscess at the part below where it is large enough for the pus to flow out, and make the puncture long through the body;
et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	Make the incisions wide enough so that all the pus can come out.
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	Then place cotton on the head, bind it, leave to cool with water applied, then treat until the wound is healed.
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant;	And if the white pus does not allow water to escape from the wound's mouth, then it is necessary for you to insert a feather or an instrument used to treat water drops from the eye, whose shape is as described before.
et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And when you widen the wound, know that the water will return, and it will gather after six months or more, and once it gathers as before, then those days of illness will pass.
de l’aposteme des coions	from the pus of the ears
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	Know that in this part of the branch there is fear in multiple configurations, for which reason I believe it's best to move when one lets it.
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	And I will tell you about the work and the appearances of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions;	So then, I say that many abscesses come from horns, and similarly with crows;
et c’est par mout de cas.	and it is due to various reasons.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	This means that it's because of excess bitter and fever, which spreads among crows, or due to impact;
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors;	And the color of the abscess matches the color of the horn;
et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	and no pain is felt, and it's an abscess causing discomfort;
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	And sometimes an abscess forms under the skin and bone, with a red hue, and does not originate from any artery, or swell out of a vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	When it comes from a blockage of an artery, one can recognize by the shape of the abscess; when you press on it with your fingers;
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	and it should not be that you touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	The one made of venous swelling can be recognized by its shape at the expression through touch with fingers, and you can do well to measure it on this resemblance, and on other characte\-ristics;
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	And when you count the knees of cows, then it's like an egg at the top, and the thread is white and tight, and release all suspensions from the egg in every direction.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	If the egg is already bound with these characteristics then it should be that you remove the egg and take note;
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	And if it is under the skin or within veins, it is necessary that you remove all of this tension, and round off the incision.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the beginning of the body is or behind the head, it is necessary that you hold it all together and remove the egg, just as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your operations are finished, apply the wound with wet wool in oil and wine, then proceed with other treatments until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	from the pus of the ears
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	This is an abscess enclosed by an enclosure resembling a collar, with the softening of joints, and when it grows, it causes pain in the patient.
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	And the treatment for this illness is quite effective as with what was described before, and nonetheless we will instruct you on how to handle it, according to what the old ones did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	It is necessary that you make the patient sit on an elevated seat, then pull up the scrotal suspensory ligaments with your hands towards the testicles, over all veins near the penis, and pinch them tightly, and extend them.
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	Then cut deeply and widely through the veins, as far as they are exposed, and then burn from each side, just like we explained in the extraction of arteries which are found in temples.
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	Then prick with a needle where there is thread, and tie it to the main part where the rod came, and tie it right away to the other end.
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	Then cut straight down the middle, according to the length of the body, and remove the rotten fluids.
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	Then treat the wound as with others or by bandaging it, so that no vein bleeds out either side of the heart;
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	for nothing ill comes from this, and if all veins go straight, then it is necessary to drain the hearts for all veins;
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	If one's eyes do not maintain their position due to incisions of the vessels, they dry out and cannot be moistened.
de la routure dou syfac	Of the rupture of the spleen
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	The occurrences of this branch happen through the section that comes from being compressed or stretched on the belly in the area of the appendixes, because the intestines descend through this opening to one of the kidneys;
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes:	And this opening is from being compressed or stretched by him, and come in these two ways of cause:
ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	or from beating, or jumping, or crying, or lifting the stomach's weight, and through similar actions;
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	And the signs when it's due to stretching of the appendix, if it happens gradually and over a long period, not suddenly;
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	And the pus is even until near the front, because pressure from the syphilitic agent reaches the intestines.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it's about cutting through the muscle, where there comes a sudden pain at the beginning, and the abscesses show various appearances close to the skin, because of the exit of the intestine and the body behind the muscle.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes the loops descend with the intestine and get stuck, causing great suffering to the patient when pressed, even if it's just a pinch.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these fevers where there is fear, one should avoid them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	And the way of the operation is that you instruct or direct the surgeon to make the intestines move inside the wound with their hand, if they can fit into it;
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	then sew up his neck. hold him between your hands, and lift the legs;
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	then place the knee above, and cut all the skin around until long;
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	then insert into the belly's lips according to your need for opening the wound, and make sure it allows the intestines to come out;
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	then scrape off the syphilitic agent that is under the skin around the anus, until all white spots of the disease are exposed from every side;
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac;	Then place your index finger in the one that surrounds the kidney, in the one between the white yolk sack which is under the skin of the egg, and between the second yolk sac, and separate the one behind the egg, and between the second yolk sac;
et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	Then move your right hand inside the peritoneum of the kidneys, and place the white yolk sac at the top of your left hand, and gently lift the egg towards the waist across all the yolk sacs;
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	And command the minister to extend the egg upwards, and untie the one that is behind the ligament;
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	And check with your fingers if there is any part of the intestine wrapped or white yolk sac hard, and if you find nothing, then proceed to the abdomen inside;
puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions;	Then take a needle or it has a thick thread made of many threads, and put the bow in the back section near the syphilitic part, which is after the skin of the scrotum;
aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz;	After shaving, then cut the hairs that appear on the threads, until there are four threads;
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars;	Then join them one on top of the other in a manner of a cross, and tie the syphilitic part, which we have said is underneath the scrotum skin, with a strong thread of two parts;
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	Then wrap the hairs of the threads, and tie them in two parts, so that none of the vessels that are carried cannot enter into them, preventing an abscess from spreading;
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	And put the thread down straight according to the first long two dois (units) from it, and after these two threads leave the syphilitic part which is underneath the scrotum skin, allowing a space of a dois roughly;
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte;	And after all else according to the circle that the eye bears;
puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	Then cut in the area beneath the skin of the buttocks, until you reach the anus, and the bowel, just as we have said previously;
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	Then apply wet wool in oil and put it on the wounds, and attach the bandage as we have said.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And once you have sealed with the white wax that we said, after the incision, due to concern about blood leakage.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui;	For this happens many times, and leave the bandage until it discharges from itself;
et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	And if it takes too long to discharge, then use hot water, and place on what we have said until it discharges;
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	Then treat the wound with another cure, until it heals perfectly.
de hernie carnouse	of fatty hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this branch I never see anyone who dares to perform the iron treatment.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	And the old ones said that it should be done as if you are assembling twigs in a bundle, in such a way that you link the vessels after lightly cutting underneath them;
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient;	Then cut me open, and cleanse the abscess of the one who works, while the veins leak out;
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and clean it as we have said, until it is cleansed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus;	Never come the rupture in the arms, as we have said, and expose his limbs;
et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	And no intestines come out in childbirths, and if they do, it's rare, and repair them at all times;
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	And even if he stays too long in this position, the wound or sore is believed to develop, while the intestines are descending;
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	And this happens through the stretching of the sore which is in the arms, as we have said, because it is stretched out, then softened and swollen his limbs and exposed;
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit;	And the treatment involves a cauterization, as we have mentioned earlier;
et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	And it is often treated using iron in this manner:
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois;	And when the patient lies on their back between your hands, then lift up the area that is swollen wide according to the size of three fingers;
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	Then remove the fat that is under the skin which follows, then take the tendon and place it in the visible area of the fat;
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	Then press it down to the front of the belly, then sew the two visible areas of fat under the tendon at the top of the tendon, and sew them together.
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	Then remove the top of the tendon, and do not cover the fat or spread the yolk or any other thing, as I have shown you in treating the removal of intestines;
puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	Then he heals through the treatment of wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you hold the children, if they die and treat the wound, until it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The uterus is constrained, and does not show any sign in labor, and the cauterizations are effective in this area, and closer to salvation.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	from the softening of the skin of the heels
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir;	Many times the foreskins of men soften in some bodies, because the parts inside them have softened, and it can be seen.
et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil;	And it is necessary, when one wants to treat it, that the patient make the malady spread on his back, and hold the softened skin against the natural skin;
puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement;	Then join the two lips in one stitch, and if you see fit, make the first cut of removing the excess of the softened skin to three or four stitches firmly;
puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Then sew between the stitches, and treat the wound like other wounds, until it is healed, and remove the thread.
dou chastrement	of chastity
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre;	Know that chastisement and fines are part of our law, and for this reason I would prefer not to speak about them in this book;
et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres:	And it is necessary for only two reasons:
dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure;	And one reason is so that the doctor knows how to answer when asked, and knows the treatment;
et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	And the other reason is that we often need to castrate some animals for our help, as with goats and sheep, cattle and others.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres:	So I say that castrations are done according to two methods:
ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	either through attraction or by making an incision.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant;	In the method where we do it through attraction, we place the animal in warm water until the testicles soften and during that time;
puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	then take it by hand as long as they recover and you no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille:	Of the discipline of execution:
covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez;	It is necessary that you dye the animal. Press its belly skin with your left hand, then secure it and operate on each kidney individually, when you have well scalded them;
et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz;	and leave no small pore or subtle pore that is under the vessels;
et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure;	And this method of execution is better than the one done by attraction because with attraction there might be some remnants of the intestines left over, which causes the animal to crave lust.
puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Then treat the wound until it is healed.
des hermofrodites	Of those who are hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes:	Hermaphroditism occurs in two ways:
l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	One way is if between the two kidneys there's an opening as in the natural figure of a woman, with hair present, or sometimes in court she urinates.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	The other way occurs in women, and it has something like a penis above the belly button, resembling two genital openings.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies;	And the treatment for the womb and fever is that you apply all the compressed poultices, and treat them as other wounds;
en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	In the second method, for those who have their urine jump through the skin of the kidneys, if there is no treatment.
de la tentigene	Of the eczema
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir;	Tentigene is a compressed poultice placed on the natural part, as long as it is too ugly to see;
et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	And some women have it so large like a hand, and this is the treatment.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement;	It is necessary that you dye away the excess of the tentigene with your hand or tongs, and apply it gently;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do not go too far around it, lest bleeding occur, then treat with another treatment until it is healed;
et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	And there is another kind that arises at the mouth of the measles, and pustule, and by chance fire comes out, and according to its appearance it resembles a boil, so they called this old disease "boil sickness".
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If it's necessary for you to handle it, as we have said about the pustule, and the treatment until it heals.
de erratique	Concerning the erratic
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis;	Erratic if the nature of the woman is not completely perceived, or if the pulse is too small;
et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est;	And it's natural by birth, or accidental due to disease that has come about;
ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit;	Or it's by a roasted joint, or due to a subtle or coarse syphilis, and appears on the measles, or in the chest, or below, or wherever.
et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir;	And it involves conceiving, and childbirth, and by chance having flowers to obtain.
et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	And the understanding of this comes through the examination of the hand.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the strikes are closely visible, one should look at your hands or on the road.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi:	If it is very soft and sensitive, and it's close to the two hearts, if you hurry, and it behaves like this:
met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes;	Put your two fingers together, and have the woman on her back, spread out her legs;
puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens;	Then form both hearts, until the subtle syfac is round and covered by the ribs;
puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	Then take wool and the fatty flesh, place it on the heart, and have the woman rest in that position each day until she can no longer heal.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if it's firm and dense, then you must shape its surface as it appears to be when resembling the leaf of a myrtle.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope;	If they are bone protrusions, suspend them to the ceiling and cover them;
et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef;	And have remedies for stopping blood, such as this, dragon's blood, incense, mix abundantly with one egg;
puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder;	then administer a wide bandage, so that the wound does not heal together;
et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec;	and do this for a long time, and then apply a linen tent (bandage) dry;
puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then continue with other treatments as long as the wound is clean.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when there is metal in the wound that's from birth, if it should be treated according to this method, assuming it's embedded foreign objects that need extraction.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For an embedded abscess in the wound, one should not apply fire to it.
des emorroides	Regarding hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul;	Emmoroydes are openings of veins that without regular care, and when emmoroydes become old they turn into thromboses.
et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	and we have mentioned the appearances of these in the division, and the signs, and I will now describe those that lead to healing.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that the hemorrhoids and their chronic issues, when they are impacted by maris (most likely referring to a type of treatment or substance), do not appear at touch feeling, except for the remedy through iron.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those that are by the mouth of maris (most likely referring to an opening or entrance), can be felt, and those that can be cured are these.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses;	It follows that you should place the woman in a cool house, then set up an altar with tongs, and the fire at its roots, then powder with medicine that restrains blood flow, such as juniper and dragon's blood and incense, and similar items;
puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide;	Then bind her feet to the wall for an hour, then put her in cold water;
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	And if blood drainage occurs, make her sit in a decoction of sumac and the bark of apple pips and yarrow and similar items, then take oat flour, mix it with honey and garlic, and apply this plaster to her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if it stops bleeding, that is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir;	If not, make her undergo suction cupping on the back and breasts without causing injury;
puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	Take wool, and extract the moisture from plantain or from the juice of ageliet with old wine, and make it strong enough for use on the body.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when the abscess subsides, treat the wound with ointment until it is clean;
et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul;	And the one called "albathir" is red and resembles hard white, if it needs to be covered in the way that I have explained for the thelul;
et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then continue the treatment until it is clean.
des apostemes de la marris	The discharges of maris
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many forms of abscesses come about in the female body, such as gangrene and pearly abscesses, herpes, boils, furuncles, fistulas, hemorrhoids, and other diseases that I have mentioned in the division.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe;	Therefore, I must describe in this treatise the spontaneous abscess that occurs with marriage, which is not among those that cling to clothing;
et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	And if you know how to handle iron work, observe that the abscesses are inflamed at the beginning of their appearance, and full of heat and fever; and if it turns red, then you will be able to see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie;	Therefore do not rush to pierce, but let it die until the pain subsides;
et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe;	And then have the patient sit on the stool, and place two small stools under his hips where he leans forward, supporting him from behind and bringing his feet to align with parts beneath the leg;
et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien;	And spread her buttocks, and place her arms under her knees, and bind them well with a firm ligature;
puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme;	Then guide the birth towards the right side, and prepare the tool with which one operates in the mouth of the mare, from which the form follows afterwards;
et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide;	And it is necessary that when you see the tool being prepared, you make the first effort to determine the depth of the mare's mouth, so that what enters inside the tool does not penetrate too deeply and cause pain to the patient;
et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve;	And if the instruments are larger, it is necessary to cover the depth of the wound with bandages, so that the tools do not weigh on them.
et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	It is necessary for him to place the funnel of the instrument above and to sharpen the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit;	And when abscesses open and one makes it with the soft hand, if it is suitable to cover at the head, over the lung.
et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec;	And when the wound is emptied, it is necessary to put in the wound wicks soaked in rose oil, or in dried green oil;
et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites;	And place the wick of the wound at the bottom of the bandage, and put it in front of the bandage and against the knife with clean, oil-soaked lint or wool that has been cooked in water;
puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then the treatment continues for two days after applying the ointment, as long as it is healing.
et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites;	And each time she lifts and cleans the wound with a mixture of water and honey, then with water or the roots of lilies and lady's bedstraw that have been cooked;
puis reveigne a l’oignement.	Then resumes with the ointment.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is healed in the marron, then you should avoid cooking with iron but treat it as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	Of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar:	Knowledge of the natural birth process is crucial for delivery, and you should recognize its signs when you see a woman about to give birth and feel the urge to smell the amniotic fluid:
adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir;	So the child begins to force its way out;
adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui;	Then you know that this birth is according to the natural form, and is his exit through his head, and the second stage follows him;
et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost;	And when you see these signs, it is necessary to gently press his belly, so that the baby comes quickly.
car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification;	For when he descends on his head, there is the second with him, and is born with his excesses expelled through good purification;
et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	And this alone comes naturally otherwise does not come.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises;	For it comes only on his feet, and comes from the belly or shoulders, and from his hands, or when it comes on his belly, or groin; and is transformed by chance near his neck, and through other evil shapes;
si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	It requires wisdom and finesse in these matters for the midwife, and understanding to avoid error and deception; and I will show you all the shapes about how one should help with them.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent;	When the child comes forth from its mother's womb by natural means, and the woman gives birth in pain, and her strength is weak, she should be made to sit, or women should hold it.
et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	And from whence comes the essence of something like fennel cooked, and then apply it between her fingers on the small placenta which has this form:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers;	And cut the second nail, and scrape under her fingernail until all the moisture that was inside is out;
et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament;	And squeeze the woman's belly as long as the child descends; and if it doesn't descend, then one should administer a栓塞 of fennel oil with safflower oil to the woman.
puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre:	Then have her take and sneeze with consideration, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour:
si istra maintenant l’enfes.	If you have just delivered the child.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc;	And if they emerge forcefully with two hands, it is necessary that you gently guide them little by little;
et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut;	And if they cannot enter, make the woman sit up and lift her feet high;
puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement;	Then place the stool on the ground, cut the cord of the woman so she does not urinate during delivery;
et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And if her hands cannot enter and the child is dead, take the knife that was prepared beforehand, cut her hands, remove the child, guide it equally.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	From the birth of the child at its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	When the child comes down with its feet, it is good to push them up;
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	And then turn them little by little until they are equal;
puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	Start by rubbing some pieces gently and gradually.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	Can't he jump up to his thighs, if commanded, and make himself sneeze from consideration;
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	If he can jump, then may God will it.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if he isn't better as we have said, if it twists little by little, until it is according to the natural figure.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	And so it becomes slightly easier.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier;	And if he doesn't jump as we have described, say that you should mix altitude powder, oil of saffron, and melted gum, then grind everything in a pestle;
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	and place the woman's inner and outer sides with this ointment, then have her sit in hot water until she reaches her ribs;
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	and when she is thoroughly moistened internally, have her wear a balsam collar, and place it on her, leaving it for an hour;
puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	Then make her sit on the stool, then make her snort and hold her mouth and nose, and touch her stomach lightly, for the child jumps now.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	From the issue of the child on its knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	When the child takes this form, if someone puts their hands on it gently and gently;
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit;	Then hold her on her neck, and have the legs hanging down at the back, and let her stand at the bed;
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	And fold her hands gently and gently, then hold her hands on her belly, and remove the pillows underneath as long as she hangs down at the back;
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	And if the child doesn't jump, take her feet and force them together, then move her belly upwards, then start rubbing your hands.
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc;	And gently guide the child;
et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	And instruct the woman to bear up until the child comes forth.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	from the exit of the child that comes from a wide hand
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	It's necessary to engineer to bring back the hand:
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	If one cannot bring it back, then have the woman lie down and walk;
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	If she cannot walk, make her sit up on the bed, and place her legs straight;
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	then apply the rubbing technique I have described;
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	And if she does not give birth, make her sit on the stool, then study to bring back the hand;
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	And guide the child according to its natural shape, make her sneeze, and instruct her to bear up until the child comes forth fully.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	From the birth of the child at its neck, and extends its hands, and its face turned towards its mother's back.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	It is necessary for him to wash his hand with a tincture, then turn it gradually and gradually, and gently lift it.
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	And when it is even, place him in the natural lifting and oily motion like we said, then instruct him to move gradually and gradually;
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne;	And when you have done this, make her sit on the chair, and instruct her to pray;
et la fai esternuer.	And make her sneeze.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	In this same manner for all the second part
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	When it comes to this manner for the entire second part, if you cut the second part up to your nail, as long as the moisture is drained;
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	And if it falls to its face and neck, cut it from the belly, ensuring it is not held back, so that the child dies;
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	Then remove the child inside, as long as you have placed them correctly, and instruct the woman to refrain from any action.
adonques si istra legierement.	Therefore, if it is pulled lightly.
de l’issue des gemelz	from the birth of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII;	Know that many times worms are born, and every time three or four are born;
et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	And this is not an unusual thing, and it does not happen.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	Two are uncommon things, and do not live if they are not named;
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	I know this, that they multiply and are expelled by the sperm which devises them, which is connected to the womb;
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	And every time they come out just as naturally as one under another, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	And if they hurt strongly, like we have said for treatment, and if the wound is subtle, then do it promptly and lightly as she does.
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	Do so in such a way that promotes health.
de plusors enfans	from many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	They are not formed in the Marsyas I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or more than fifteen up to XV, and they are all formed like a child by measuring their greatness glorious, and it is necessary that the healer know everything this, for such a thing might happen to them.
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	Do so according to what is appropriate.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	When you treat the woman with a dead fetus or belly issue, as I have said in the division section, and it doesn't come out, and you are forced to operate with your hands;
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	If it is necessary for you to know whether she has healthy virtue, and she does not have an accident or fear of death;
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	If it is necessary for the woman to be in good condition on her back, and have her legs inclined upwards, and her feet raised;
et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	And the minister applies the tingle of two parts, or if she is tied to the bed so that it does not come off during childbirth;
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	Then rub the mouth of the mother with moist almond oil and a mixture of coriander and fenugreek seeds and flaxseed, then smear her hands with these oils and this mixtures;
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	Then have her move lightly, then when she is ready or when the contractions are sufficiently strong for this to occur, and take care that the child is ready to descend through its head;
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	If the lumps are embedded in his eyes or on his neck or in his mouth or under his palate or around the beard or in the armpits or near the ribs, and if he descends into bones, then embed them or grasp them with force towards the middle of the back;
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	And it must be that you cut the lump with your right hand, and place the bend between his fingers of his left hand, and he pushes it with all his strength with both hands, and embeds the lump in none of these places that we have mentioned, until it reaches the empty thing.
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	And this is the shape of the lump:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	Then place against another lump, or make it three if necessary, so that the extractions are equal;
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	And then they are moved equally on both sides, to allow movement, and so that the teeth might be able to hold in place, as this is their form:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	And if there remains any part of it, if the blood has flowed from some of his fingers to that spot, and stops at that part, then pull out the other part;
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if there remains nothing at all, place this tooth or move it upwards further, and do as necessary until the tooth comes out completely.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	And if one hand comes before the other and it cannot be brought back by squeezing, you should wrap around the upper part of the tendon until it comes out completely.
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	Then apply the knife at the ankle joint or on the leg bone, and similarly do this with the other hand, and for both feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	And if the head of the child is large and it is bent at the exit, or if it has a sharp, assembled head, then you should push the spiny thorn between your fingers, and bend the head and remove the sharp part;
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	or you will take it with the tool which is called "almidach", from which its shape comes with the tools or chapter that follows this one;
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	and in the same way, make so that if the child has a natural large head;
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	and then pull with the force using scissors, and if the head jumps out and is held by force, if it breaks, until the moisture or worse comes out;
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	and if she cannot come out, remove her piece by piece as you can;
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	And if it is swollen in the belly or around the sides, you must pierce him until the moisture escapes.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the child is on its feet, then it has light attraction, and the connection to the mouth of the womb is light.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	And if it is swollen in the belly or at the thighs, you must remove him until you reach the fur that covers on the hand;
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	And do the belly or the thighs, as long as the moisture is drained from it.
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	And if another limb is osteitis, and the head remains, then squeeze his hand all around the marrow, and pull it until you reach the mouth of the marrow.
puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer;	Then he removes the third or fourth bone, and pulls it out forcefully.
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	And if the mouth of the marrow is narrowed due to an abscess that has come there, it should not be forcibly moved, but it should be treated with moist and fatty things.
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	And he applies plaster, and if he has water that softens and moistens.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	And if the child is under his side, and you can put it level, then apply what we have said about live birth;
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if one cannot do it all at once, if you pull by parts, and leave nothing of the second part.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	And when you have done this, apply what we have said about incisions that come during menstruation;
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And if the bleeding continues, place it in water restraining and apply other treatments.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman in whom an unborn child had been bitten by death, then consulted with another on that, and treated the other's bite.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After much time, an abscess came in his stomach, and swelled so much that it burst, causing great pain.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was summoned to the treatment, and I waited for a long time, and could not support the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I placed it on a strong plaster, and out came a bone, and after some days another one.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was very surprised, because that part of the body doesn't have any bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought it was a bone from a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point;	I want the wound, and by my hands bone, until the woman was in the best place;
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	And she nurses the long well for such a time until there is a little blood from the knee.
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	And I only remember this chapter for when masters find an unfamiliar thing, that they should know how to provide aid.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to bring back the wife to her place.
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres;	Here comes the form of the presser, which is described in the books;
et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	and to two turns for each of the two shoulders for each of the two ligaments.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	Always, horns should be more delicate than that of a restrainer, and made from ebony or boxwood;
et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	and let the mouth of the pipe be two inches wide, and the thickness of the bark must be one and a half palms;
et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	and between the two ligaments there should be two joints of this same pipe, which must be solid in one and the other, from half a palm or slightly more;
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	And these two adjustments are inserted in the mouth of the mare to open when one turns the second horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	Another form, more subtle and lighter in appearance, may be made of ebony or boxwood, according to the resemblance of pincers;
et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large;	and has two shoulders for adjustments, just like you see, of the length of a palm, and two rods of width;
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	And when you see the mare open with all of the tool, make her lie down on a bed, with her hips hanging and her legs spread apart, then insert both adjustments together into the mare, and hold the handle of the tool under her buttocks;
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Then move your hand over the entire tool in the same way you would use pincers equally, according to the amount you see opening the mare's mouth, as long as the adjustment does what she desires.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances;	This instrument is entirely surmounted, and multiplied according to these resemblances;
et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	And when you equip the mirrors, the work is faster, and they stand higher for people according to their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	Don't lose hope in the tool if you haven't set it up, because its necessity is not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	When the second stage is retained during birth, it must be commanded to the patient to hold back her amniotic fluid, and then make her sneeze with consideration, and hold your hands at her mouth and nose;
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	and if she jumps through it, well done.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	If that doesn't work, take a pot and make it cover or have a lid, and put in herbs that can open the mouth of the womb, such as calendula, rue, fennel, chamomile, cinnamon, and thyme;
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu;	All these herbs, or any of them, whether cooked or boiled over fire;
puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris;	Then place a reed or a straw in the mouth of the marrow, and put another at the opening, and hold it until the fumes go inside the marrow;
puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	Then make them sneeze, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the second tooth springs up quickly.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine;	And if she still does not improve after this treatment, and if it lacks strength, instruct her to moisten her left hand with oil of sesame or rosemary water, then dip the cloth in nature, and desire the second one;
et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	And when she finds it, take and extend it slowly in a straight line, so that the marrow does not move during extraction;
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie;	But you should gently move it to the right and left, and then apply pressure.
si venra et se desaerdra.	If it comes back and becomes loose again.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	And if the nosebleed is due to anger and stress, as we've said, treat with sneezing therapy and herb fumigation;
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	And if it is not from anything of what we have said, just remember not to apply pressure when applying pressure.
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	However, when treating someone with nosebleeds, you should hold their mouth shut and tie it to the woman's waist; then apply ointment from Tetrapharmakon as enemas.
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer;	If the treatment works and stops, it will return strength.
mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	However, if after recovery there's bad smell in the stomach and head, and it makes the patient feel ill.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu:	So then, accordingly, fumigations suitable for this are required:
aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	None of the old have experienced the fumigation of watercress and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the instrument used to fumigate a woman during retention of flowers and the second stage is as follows:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	And to see it as if it were a cane, and place the subtle head in its natural position, and the larger heads above the fire;
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And let the fumigations be over the coals, and until it's gone, and start another one.
de percier lou fondement	To pierce the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	Many children are born who do not have the foundation pierced, but instead have its subtle suppression:
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	So then at the birth, let it pierce that suppression at its due time, and do not have it pierced by a sharp tool, and guard the operation so as not to touch it;
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then apply on wet wool in wine and oil, then the salve application while it is bloodless.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will not reoccur, then put a thorn in or near the place and leave the person immobile for some days, and remove it when the child begins to walk around indoors.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme;	And many times come these sudden cuts of wound or abscess;
si covient coper celui soudement:	if it is necessary to cover that cut:
si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	either salve it, as we have said about the elm bark.
de la fistule dou fondement	from the fistula from its foundation
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors;	Fistulas that come from the foundation are nodulation, and grow larger than those that come from below or in the space between two parts; if it is one fistula or multiple.
et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans;	and when that nodulation is old, if it operates, and often causes moisture to produce white or fine pus, and many times these are persistent fistulas;
et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	And are known by him who experiences or has emesis or windiness when the patient expels something, and accidentally moves from one place to another.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge;	And if it's about fistulas that extend up to the bladder, and up to half of the penis;
et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And reach up to the juncture of the thigh, and up to the knee.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	And thus one knows that there is an internal fistula, but not external:
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And if you hit your ring or base finger and hit a fine needle-like spider or iron pin into the fistula when there is no winding.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	And if it is winding, if you hit a fine tentacle or a horse's hair, as long as you feel the tentacle or hair at your finger;
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	And if you don't feel it, and there is no loss of appetite or wind movement nor vomiting, as we have said:
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie;	know that she does not pierce;
si te haste dou curer.	if you hasten to cure it.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula is almost through to the bladder or where urine flows, if it jumps with urine, and cannot be united by medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	If she is pierced up to the knuckle joint, then there's a temptation coming up to the elbow;
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	if there is no curvature and the invention of pain inside, then it's that it's within the elbow bend, and it doesn't benefit from medicine nor soldering by ointment;
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	and in these Persian fistulas there is no effective treatment but effort, and the vanity of misguided people who interfere.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos;	In those that are neither Persian nor old, there is hope for healing through iron, as I have experienced, and it's that the disease lies between your hands on its back;
et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	And he raises his legs up to his thighs, and has his buttocks inclined towards his belly;
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	Then set up a spider's web tent, or a snail's shell if there is twisting, as long as you know where the tent comes from.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet;	If the patient feels it at the bottom, then you must place your index finger there, and if you feel that the tent has pierced;
et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	And when discovered where your index finger feels between the anus or the rectum, you'll know that it's passed;
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If there is no movement, one cannot determine its location accurately.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	Yet even so, we can usually determine the location well, but this happens rarely;
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	And when we assist him/her, if it involves heating the delicate cautery according to the width of the fistula, as previously mentioned;
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement;	and he/she heats it up until it emerges from the base,
et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	and do this two or three times, until you know that these charred parts are burned, which resemble a bird's feather;
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	and then cleanse with ointments that contain moisture until those burned parts come out, then apply an ointment that absorbs the burn and seals it.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If he is thus healthy, that's good.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	If this is done correctly, no other cure can be better;
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	and if you insert it too far until it reaches the base or foundation, and between your finger and the tent you apply a thick covering of burn or ash, then you will see the fistula through that where the covering is thin.
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	If you operate at the beginning of the fistula, and fix it firmly before the tent, and then apply the cautery afterwards, until it reaches the tip of the tent.
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra;	And the tent will be removed, and it will heal;
puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	Then remove those thorns that look like a bird's feather, and do not leave any behind.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if it doesn't satisfy you, and there's a gap between you and the operation, then apply a fire cautery or an ointment with medicinal properties.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses:	For the fire cauteries combine two good things:
c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	That is to say, the burning of these thorns until they are joined, and the bleeding from blood loss and the drying of moisture;
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	Then treat wet tents with butter or ground substances, until the limbs drip blood, and out come the burned thorns in the drip;
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	Then treat the wound with the application of sticky, hard substances as bandages, and use dried medicines for the treatment.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it has been restored,
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes up just below the entire foundation, and is away from the body, then plug its tip or foundation, and inquire about it.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres:	If you feel the tentacle, and inside II is attached by a web or jellyfish or cartilage, or it's about to pierce, if there's only one way of escape for both hope and effort, through administering one of these three methods:
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	or you cautery it as we have said, or you cut down to the base, or if you can, put on bandages and treat as a first step;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	and don't cut too close to the foundation, that you might remove what holds up the structure, and allow for voluntary evacuations by means.
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	then treat it, as we have said;
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	By chance if it is healthy, or you remove that covering and cleanse then as she has been cut off from the foundation, either by mistake or by another tool brought near.
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	then wash out that grime which is in the wound, as much as you can;
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement:	then study to heal the wound and keep the pus in the lower part of the foundation:
si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	if it is easier for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere:	And always make the abscesses in this manner:
et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	and when you puncture the abscess from within, and it's located under the skin above the foundation, take a tool to pierce through the head according to this shape:
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And I bend one thread into an 'S', and place the needle with all of the thread in the abscess until it reaches the head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	If it is perfectly within the margin beneath the foundation inside, then extract the thread of that broken one, as if you bend your hand or base.
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II;	and pull the head of the thread, and join the two parts together, and bind one to the other, and leave it for one or two days;
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	and hold it back each time, until the threads come through these barriers that are between two, and connect;
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	then treat the wound until it is healed and sanitized.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not perforate, make it pierce in every way you can, provided it's not too deep.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For one should not make the incision too deep through the puncture stitch, and then treat it as we have said, while it remains clean.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	The form of the spike-shaped sputum that one makes into a fistula is rather thick and from one side and trenching;
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	and on the other hand not, because with that one should neither make nor avoid making it as you see here:
des emorroydes	From hemorrhages
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres:	Fatigues are according to two ways:
ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement;	They can be found within the foundation like small and large pieces of resin. If there are many or just one such piece, they adhere to the foundation and penetrate it from beneath and up to the main part of the foundation;
mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	But those that lie outside require very little moisture, and even if they adhere or a bit of lemon water or just a bit of blood, and have the color of brown;
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	And the treatment for those inside the foundation, you must instruct the patient to expel them through the air in chambers, until the foundations release, and they notice the threads;
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	If you hurry, place them in tweezers or hold them with your fingernail, then remove them from their roots;
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	And if they cannot hold them by their moisture, then take them in the handkerchief, or on cotton, or from a piece of camlet;
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	And remove them with your fingers, then cover them and dust them with some hot powders that are for the fire cautery;
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	Or you burn them as it is said or according to the chapter on cautery, and treat them with other remedies until they heal;
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	And if the fundament cannot come out, then treat the patient with astringent and harsh remedies for colic to help wash what is inside or at the fundament, so that it can come out smoothly;
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	If the patient does not improve and if their strength is weak for the fundament, then the treatment should be gentle;
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	And it is that you should hold them at your nail or with tongs, and grasp them, then cut them in accordance with what we have said, as long as the blood flows, and as long as they fear the incision by iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere:	It is necessary that you sew according to this manner:
pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large;	Take a twisted thread and make it into a needle. Then pass the thread through and pierce the needle from the other side, and loop two ends of the thread around the needle. And let them be wide;
et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	Tighten the thread in a neat form, then tie the thread, and remove the needle. Do this for all others, and leave some to manage excess blood;
puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	Then place on the wound a moistened cloth in oil or a poultice, and place it on the wound. Instruct the patient to rest;
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then let it grow until it is complete, and when they have fallen, if you apply ointment treatment and other treatments, until it heals properly.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	do drying by sweat or foundation
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times it causes bowel dryness within the intestines, and due to natural constraints, and when the illness is old and medicine no longer works.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	It is necessary for you to place the tip of a needle or on your nail the skin above, which should not be left moist.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	Then treat it until it heals properly as is fitting;
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	And if it cannot heal, redo the shaving more vigorously than before, until it heals completely, and is scraped clean;
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat it until it has fully healed.
dou fremit	with trembling
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	Formications are small irregularities on the skin before a boil forms, and they go deep into the flesh;
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	And once the vein is constricted, and it feels like shaking from cold, and this sensation can be felt all over the body, especially more in the hands than elsewhere.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	And the treatment is that you take a stalk from a goose feather or a strong hawk feather and place this stick over the twitching area, until the purplish circles cover the entire twitching.
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	Then turn your hand to all the stick until you cover the entire twitching area and place it evenly, and eradicate the twitching from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see this, do as follows with a spider's hair or iron according to this shape, and let it be slender underneath and sharp above:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser.	Don't pierce it, as you must hold with both hands, and gently press.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	And if you see the twitching, apply heat to it, in accordance with where or before the section of the cautery method is described.
de la forme dou clistere	Of the shape of the bladder
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet;	None of the time make an abscess of silver or lead, or melted spider;
et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	And never use these small and large instruments according to where they should be applied.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Those thus take on the task of healing children and those who are weak and painful, being little.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the bladder is small at the top and large, or the belly is bound in this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez;	And there is a need where the belly might be tied, as you see, and the child pierced within.
et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I;	And has on one side two missing parts, and on the other one;
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	And let's put medicines on the belly like from a beast bladder or parchment. It should be pierced all around by small missing parts, and there should be one inch of space between each part. Then insert into these parts threads about an inch long that have been twisted together in a crimped manner, either X times or 9 times around, and sew the belly shut like you would sew a goat.
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize;	And when the medicine is inside, tie it with a strong thread in front of the instrument, then proceed to cauterize;
et c’est li forme dou cercle:	And this forms a circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	And let the medicine not be too hot or too cold, and smear the head with oil from a thorn bush or an egg yolk, or something similar, then gently apply it.
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet;	Then have the doctors hold their two hands together on it while it is still fully visible, then remove the lump, and gently lift the patient's legs onto the surface, and if the medicine seems to be coming out, extract as much as you can.
et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And if it sleeps through one whole night, that is more effective help.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you use it to treat illness characterized by the loosening of abdominal contents, and the medicine seeks to quickly emerge, then continue using it as long as it is effective.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant;	And if it's bleeding from the vein or from an abscess, then let the lump be as subtle as for a baby;
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	and this is the shape of the subtle lump under whose skin tension exists:
des plaies	from wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies;	We have spoken about the treatment of wounds in the section on wound care;
or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	Or we will tell you about hand treatments and medicines, according to their application.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse depending on how they are made, and where on the body they occur, and why they have occurred.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	The things that cause wounds are by the impact of a stone, and the cut from a sword or knife, or from a spear or staff or axe, or similar actions;
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	or when they are caused by the actions of the body, such as a wound on the neck, or head, or chest, or belly, or liver, and similar parts;
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	And I will tell you how to treat each wound, and start with head wounds, since the recollection will come in its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut:	I say that when a simple wound comes to the head and there is no break in the bone, be careful if it's by stone or similar actions, and even if all the skin has been torn open and the wound is large, you might slightly suspect an abscess.
si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	If it results in quick healing of the head part itself, even if there is slight bleeding from the wound, and then heal against the direction of the removed part;
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	And let the patient consume their bodily fluids replenished with wine and fatty meats.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	And if they do not wish to heal quickly, let them reduce their meat intake, and refrain from drinking wine or eating red meats;
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	And place in the wound, if an abscess forms and breaks open, use moistened cotton in oil rose or only in rosmary-infused wine;
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	And if there is no pus, apply to the wound, if it has fresh blood and isn't disturbed by air, powder, which I will describe later;
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if his strength has been drained, then apply some remedies until he is restored.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large like that of a tailor and similar, and the lips cannot be joined together by stitches, then join them with suturing, as I would say for wounds in the belly, from the suture.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope;	If the wound exposes bone, and pain, but only for a little while, if you can.
puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	Then treat the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh instead of skin. Instruct the patient to eat hearty meats such as roasted testicles, wheat, and other similar items.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	And if you find or skin is putrefying, and it doesn't reach to the bone, then cut out all of the rotting flesh, and cleanse.
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	And if there is blood in the wound or vein without clotting, and it cannot be stemmed with medicine, then stop up the artery. If you find an exposed one, tie it with a thread;
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if this does not benefit, then apply cautery.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere:	And if the wounds are small and simple, then they require light treatment:
et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	and if you mix this powder which binds together like that once the iron has passed through.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est:	And the way of making this powder is:
pren encens une partie;	take some frankincense;
sanc de dragon II parties;	add two parts of dragon's blood;
chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	add three parts of fresh garlic, grind it finely, apply to the wound, and bind it firmly until it airs well and adheres to all its blood;
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle;	then mix well, leave it without bandaging if it does not swell;
car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	For one does not remove the medicine until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And this must be done with a salve alone, not with incense or the blood of dragons, but when the medicine has healed the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	And if the heart has made the wound bleed, even when it is in this state, I do not say that one should apply this powder.
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	but apply some medicated poultices, or oat flour mixed with water and honey, until the bleeding stops;
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then continue other treatments until it is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	And if bone breakage occurs with the wound and it's small, then use delicate tweezers;
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	and I will tell you about bone fractures later.
de la plaie dou col	from the wound on the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	This wound originates near the neck and is straightforward, if there's no distinction between it and beneath the chin, but if something within the neck or artery has been cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	If it's the neck, without any other concern than leaving the treatment alone and not putting anything that might restrict it, because it harms the neck and makes them pull away;
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	And do not put anything cold on the wound, for the substance of nerves is cold, and the continuity of such things is with the brain, which is the highest member.
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	But be it under the medicine, such as sage washed in mild water and mixed with rose oil, and also the garlic washed in the same water, and other earthy substances according to this manner, and moist applications.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, bind it tightly with bandages, then treat until it heals properly.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	And if the wounds are deep and there is hair and full of blood, then pierce or further down to it;
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	And if the artery is cut and bleeding ensues, then uncover it, repair it, and cauterize; this requires skill.
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	And if the esophagus is cut or the windpipe, and the passage is kept, through which the meat goes, then place the windpipe on the thread of the throat, but do not touch the throat, just replace it according to its natural shape.
et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	And then he restrains the protruding part, leaving it for several days, then he treats with dry ointments until it is healed.
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	And if there appears in the bone like a wound, if you find it;
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	And if there are bits of bone, if you can extract them all straight away and cleanly, do so. As for what you cannot obtain, wait until the wound turns into pus, then drain it and heal the source;
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wound is fresh, apply the powder I mentioned.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there are bones in the wound and it has an abscess, treat it as described in my chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	From the wound of a spear or knife
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne:	If it's from a spear or knife and the wound is deep, observe if there is wind escaping from the wound; if the patient is bleeding, act accordingly:
saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	So you know that the wound is fatal.
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	And if it is not deep, and it retains all its blood, if one does not apply the powder immediately in the first hour, or bind it with no risk of the blood escaping completely, and returns to the heart, causing the body to weaken, then care for the afflicted person;
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor;	but apply an attractive balm, and bind it twice a day;
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors;	and if you do not have balm, apply old cotton to absorb the moisture in the wound, and make the patient rest on the wound for three or four days, or longer;
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne;	if no convulsions occur, nor adverse heart tremors, nor undue strain;
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	and when you see good conditions, know that the wound is saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Treat with remedies and other treatments until the blood is drained;
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule;	and if it cannot heal or work normally, know that there may be an opening.
si la cure si com on doit.	if the treatment is as it should be.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	And if the wound is from a sword or knife cut, and it is simple, or worse, or on the back, then treat as the one in front instructs;
s’elle est grans, de cousture;	and if it's large, stitched;
et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	and if it's small, powdered, and if it's deep into the bone, or has splinters, clean out the wound and remove any external treatments if they are exposed;
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	and if they are not exposed, let the wound fester, and facilitate the extractions;
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And for other wounds on other members are judgments so as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	From the rupture of the abdomen
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	The belly distensions are large, medium, and small;
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	From a major wound, one might have an ejection of the intestines, or parts of the intestines, through which foreign objects can enter;
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	And the stitching is more complicated; for once, it's worse than small injuries compared to large ones, because in stitching up the intestines repeatedly over time, one would not risk sewing them back together if they were not stitched step by step.
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II.	Because the intestines swell even when they feel cold; if one sews them too tightly again, it's better to make small injuries. Therefore, one should gently stitch the intestines back to their original position rather than attempting to repair larger ones.
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres:	And know that the rupture of the belly occurs according to four ways:
les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	The two common stitches occur at the belly wound, and the stitch of other chest injuries are associated with other wounds;
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	Yet they are more precise with the stitch of the belly, and I will say each one and explain them.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres:	I say that when the wound is small and nothing of the intestine has been torn out, and if there's something to be sewn back together, this can be done through one of the two methods:
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	Or because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen due to cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	And when it is cold, warm him up in this manner:
moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	Moisten an sponge or add the salt in water only, or you cook in boiling water with ginger and cypress and thorns, and remove the intestines until the blood is drained;
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And once this wine has been reduced, and made thick so it can help in reducing swelling.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	And when you see the blood departing, rinse the intestines with water or wine until they are cooked well, because through this, the entrance allows passage of little things;
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	And if it cannot enter, then slightly widen the wound with the instrument used to remove blood clots;
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	And the first treatment should be made thick so that there is no unnecessary cutting of the size, because I don't have it;
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	And these are the tools to split them:
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	if you cut from within in the bend and not outward, and see this form:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines escape, if you can set them back according to their natural shape in their own proper place, because this is what matters, for it counts.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	When the wound is wide, and it's in the lower part of the abdomen, then it is necessary to have the patient lie on their back, and put their legs higher than their head;
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	And if it's in the lower part of the abdomen, then put the head and bottom higher than the lower parts, and similarly if the belly wound is in one of the two halves, place yourself so that the injured half is higher than the other.
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	And thus it is necessary to follow what I say for large and medium wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres;	For small wounds use what is suitable to you, then have at your disposal the entire surgical kit that sears the entire wound with its hand and joins the edges;
et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort;	And this is the common method of suturing, and you take one or more needles according to the size of the wound's width. Then leave about half an inch at the edge of the wound, then you place a needle where there will be enough strong thread.
et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble;	and pierce the two ends of the skin with the two ends of the stitch, which is inside the skin, as long as you make it pierce that part, and join the two ends of the stitch together in four.
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	then take two strands of thread and tie them together on the needle from both sides. Then join the two ends of the wound together slightly overlapping them, and then leave about half an inch, then place another needle.
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	then tie the thread in the same way you did with the first needle, and continue doing this according to your skill with needles until all the wound is restrained;
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	And use needles that are midway in size, between fine and thick ones, for the fine needles cut all the flesh, and the overly thick cannot enter well at all.
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	because it is necessary that they be midway;
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	and it is not good to have the needles too far out of the flesh and skin, for they would cut and widen the wound before sewing.
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	and when you stitch the wounds with needles, ensure they don't irritate the patient while sleeping, and cover the needle holes with cloths or bandages to keep them clean until the wound heals.
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II.	And this way of sewing with needles is more suitable for small wounds, because one or two needles are sufficient.
Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien;	The second stitch is common, and it involves assembling two bones from the skin and two bones from the muscle together on one needle or thread where there is one strong thread midway;
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	And when you have pierced all four bones together, you should reset the needle at the part where you started, in the manner one sews clothes;
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	and place an interval between each stitch as large as a half of a small coin.
ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	These stitches sew up the wound, and I stitched a belly that had been cut by a sword, which was torn open, resulting in a wound longer than one hand-width, and contained two hand-widths of intestines, and the wound was in the middle of the belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I brought back the intestine until it had been out for twenty-four hours, and the wound healed up to fifteen days, and I treated him, and he recovered.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	And they thought that he was dying, it was indeed a miracle;
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	And I would not cure it with ointment, because there was none to be found where I was or any medicine;
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	I will wipe the wound with old cloth twice a day, and wash it in honey water until it was clean.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture:	I will tell you the two proper methods of stitching:
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	Take the needle, and pierce from the outer part up to that inner side;
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	When it has pierced the center straight up and down, place the tip of the needle at the siphon or wound or where you have punctured with the needle, and make it pierce from the inner side to this outer part;
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	And the understanding of this stitching is that you sew in the same way as the marten furs leather, and you leave once on one side of the siphon, and take it again from another, until the stitching is fully completed.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	The second method of stitching, that Galen accurately described, is such that nobody does it. They instead unite the two parts naturally together and apply one end of the thread to the other in this manner:
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac;	Stake an awl or stick near the elbow area and make just one hole in that part only, leaving two ends of the needle;
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac;	Then twist the awl, and make it pierce from the outer part right through to here inside, until both ends of the needle.
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	Then pierce both from the outer part right through to here inside using two other awls that are opposite to each other;
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	And this is the way of stitching and it is the most common one.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	Galen said this sentence, and nobody denies it; one must stitch the belly with two needles, or where there is thread in each.
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	and must one stick one needle on the side and the other on the opposite side, like those who sew inlays;
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	and know that when the wound is inside the belly, the stitching is more painful than in their other wounds.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	The assessment of the injury is like that of the assessments of other injuries:
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout;	and so that when you find the fresh injury full of blood, just like how heat has treated it, you should return to its natural state, and then stitch;
puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	then put on the stimulating powder for charcoal, and if heat has treated it, then apply no lotion that is available until the injury heals;
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	And heat the needle, and let them sew up the cut, and mend the wound;
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then treat the wound as usual until it is clean;
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	And if you don't have remedies, place them, alternately, until it starts to bleed, old cotton, and stir it twice a day until it is clean.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	But you need no other remedy in multiple forms when the wounds are simple;
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	And if you doubt that the wound might affect major limbs, it is necessary for you to immerse light wool in oil with a moderate heat or in rose oil, and place it inside the joints, and cover the surrounding areas;
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	And if there is pain or gangrene in the bowels, and it happens repeatedly, then give them a black wine enema, and similarly if gangrene has reached up to the intestine;
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	And makes a puncture inside, and you know that when it is large intestine, it is easier to heal than the smaller ones.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestine that is called 'the young' cannot heal when it's injured, and this is due to the position of the veins involved, and because of the subtlety of the entire body, and the approach of its nature towards nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	And if pus jumps from the wound, if it resets behind as with an intestine while it is fresh;
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres;	And if it is old and has turned to blood or blackness, you should tie the area that is black, so no bleeding occurs from there, for there are veins and arteries;
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	Then cut the one that is between the tie, and place the two heads hanging from the part under the wound until past it for easing extraction when pus quits, and the wound closes.
de la routure dou boueil	from the rupture of the bladder
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	When the intestine is firm, and the wound is small, you can restore it in some ways, because I have seen that a brave man's belly was pierced by a spear;
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	And there was a wound on the right side of the stomach, and it became inflamed and developed into a fistula, causing malabsorption and flatulence;
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	I performed the cure according to my abilities and did not stop refining until it was healed, and bound his limbs.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	And when I saw him healing, I wondered if the patient might be experiencing pain in their abdomen;
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	And there was no illness, but he improved and ate and drank;
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	And it is said by some experts that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it should be treated in this manner:
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	Take large intestines, then join the edges of the wound. When the intestines open their mouths, place them on the two edges if they pull their mouth upwards;
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	And then one grips the head, and it is held in such a way that it cannot be released, after which another movement occurs in this manner right after the first, as before, until the entire wound has healed.
et cout la plaie.	and there is the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere:	That is the chief that gets into the intestines, and it causes no harm to the patient, and one can bind the intestine with a fine thread that has been cut from an animal's intestine in such a manner:
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	Take the end of this intestine thread that is most charred, and then tie it to the end of the other thread made from fine linen. Twist both threads together, sew them onto a needle, and stitch the intestine, then reset it in its place;
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	This method of sewing is solely done according to the path of engagement and hope;
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	And if the wound is large and wide, especially when it's in one of the intestines, if there's no injury or illness, because of its subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	from a fistula or wherever it may be.
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Know that every wound or abscess, as it matures, is universally termed 'fistula', and even when hairy and round in shape.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	And a fistula is according to the firm and white congealing, where no pain is felt, and it's also covered like the feathers of a bird;
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	And sometimes it appears clearly white, and at other times it's thickened;
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	Sometimes it's small, and at other times it's quite significant;
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes:	And I have spoken about this in the section on wounds, that any wound that is not healed and contains no pus, leaves only through one of the eight causes:
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	This means, by the weakness of blood or pus;
ou por sa malice;	because of its wickedness;
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	or because there is hard flesh within, and on the lips, that does not allow new growth;
ou il i a trop de bowe;	or it has too much blood;
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	or the ears are infected, and the substance is of poor quality;
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	or the medicine used in treatment is not good;
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	or because of the way it spreads like a plague;
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	or due to its late properties in that region, digestion is delayed and health also lags, fleeing naturally;
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	or it has veins or bones:
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the treatments with medicine in this section.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	So it is necessary for me to inform you about the treatment of fistulas which is done by manual work.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	Know that fistula occurs in all limbs of the body;
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	because there are fistulas that come from the large veins, and arteries, and nerves, or in the thorax, or in the intestines, or in the bladder, or in any of the ribs, or in the spine of the back, or in any joint of the hands or feet;
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	and if it affects the property of the main member, and exhibits the symptoms accordingly.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	And all fistulas that occur in this manner are difficult to heal, and there is no exception but labor and lack of knowledge;
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	And if there is no fistula that does not reach until what I have said, and you take the care of the cure, and you know how to recognize it; then use a spider web or iron wire tent, if the fistula is straight, then insert it.
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	And if the fistula is twisted, try to find a subtle path of penetration, for the needles bend and move along the twists;
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	And if the fistula has lost its ends and you cannot properly seek it through attempts, try enemas through one of the ends, for moisture flows from one end to another, and cleanses;
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	Then carefully inquire with your strength, to know if there is bone or nerve, and if it feels like hair underneath. Ask the patient about the pain they feel when you press on it, and where exactly that pain is;
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	And when you truly know the location of it and that it is far from joints, nerves, arteries or veins, or any other places I've mentioned, proceed according to what I've said; remove bone fragments and clear away putrid substances that are inside.
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	And then the treatment until it is healed, and if a sinus has formed, deeply dig in the correct location. It's necessary that you carve out as much as possible. Then place wet cloths with medical ointment, and let them soak up to the tip of the sinus. Continue until the medicine has eroded away any excess substance remaining at the bottom.
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And then place clean dressings, until it is healed;
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And if it has not healed by this method, then cauterize as we have instructed, and if the bone is decayed from the sinus, then remove it.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	And if the vein or major limbs are obstructed or hindered in any way, as we have said.
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if the bone is exposed, and there is decay and darkness, then remove it until all decay is removed. Then dress with clean substances until it heals;
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	And if there is no healing, and the bone returns as before, know that you have not yet reached your goal.
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	If it discovers and desires until you reach the bottom, and removes all the corruption, then return the bone;
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	And if it is already healed, that is well.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	If not, know that the corruption has gone too far, that you cannot bring it back;
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	if there is no other reason than to abandon it by nature;
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	And if there is only a small corrupted bone, and you can pull it with tweezers, take it using the appropriate instrument for that. If there are many bones, remove them all, do not leave any of them;
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	And if moisture opposes this against it, with no error or fear, handle moisture, heat, and flesh, and liberate the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	And if you cannot extract them within an hour, put something to stanch the wound on it for gangrene, and leave it as long as the flesh is gangrened inside the bones, and then they will remove the bones more easily;
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie;	And if it's a large bone, such as in the leg or thigh, just remove the putrefaction until all of the bone turns black, then close the wound;
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	And if there is a large portion of decayed flesh and it has reached down to the bone;
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	And if it suits to treat everything up until the decay, and then treat it until it heals completely;
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	And I will tell you of a case where a fistula occurred in someone's leg, so that you may take it as an example and seek help for your own work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	He was a young person around thirty years old, who experienced pain in his leg due to an issue inside the body that caused substances to travel down to the leg, leading to a large abscess forming, and there seemed to be no reason for it to open.
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	However, through their foolishness they opened it as wide as the abscess allowed, and within, they ate away at a great amount of substances, and became a fistula, and he suffered much loss that all groaned over and was affected by body moisture;
et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	And many doctors treated him for over two years, and there was no wise person in the art of healing hands until I was called, and when I saw his leg and the remedies being used to cure him, and that which ate away through the losses by great bodily suffering;
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	And became red the body of youth, and had a yellowish hue.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I pitched a tent in one of these depressions, and then searched all the depressions, finding that some came against each other from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	I hurriedly proceeded then, and cut into one of the blisters until I uncovered a part of the bone, and found it decayed and punctured, and the decay reached up to the inside of the bone;
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	I was the part that appeared from the decayed bone, and I thought there was no other decay, as it was only what I had exposed;
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	And began to treat the wound with medicines over time, and couldn't heal it;
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	And then I began again, and found the bone in the same manner as before, and found the decay continuing within the bone, and it too was affected, and I removed it, and tried to heal the wound;
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines;	But I could not do much until I copied about one hand of bone length, and treated it with all its parts, then returned it using medicine;
et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	And it healed and fused quickly, and no longer required resuming the operation except for the weakness of the patient who couldn't endure it, and because of my fear of his death.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For blood evacuation often occurs, but it was completely healed. In its place of the bone, a hard flesh formed, and it had good disposition and didn't cause any harm or opposite effect at all from beginning to end, neither inside nor outside.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, it should be treated in this manner:
pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	Take hold of it, and pull at the part of the bone that is exposed, and instruct them to extend it upwards;
et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	and place another thread of thicker wool than the first one, and bind it over the flesh that is inside the bone, and pull the contaminated flesh upwards, revealing the flesh on the part you want to heal, making sure not to hurt the flesh;
et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	And place a charcoal or a board under the bone to draw out the putrid flesh;
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And it is necessary to remove as much as one can see and feel the corruption, and also remove again later if needed.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute;	And if the bone is corrupted and does not open, and corruption is in the middle or a part, then remove all of the flesh;
puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit;	Then place charcoal underneath, and then remove the corruption from one part to another, and continue removing the flesh as long as it is touched by corruption, just like we have said;
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	And if the corruption is in the joint, then remove the corrupted joint, and expose the bone on the other side;
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then there is no other way but to cut it;
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	And if the corruption is or pierces by hand, or by foot, it becomes very strong but nevertheless you should inquire about that corrosion, how it has revealed itself to you.
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	and refine in all the ways that you can, but make sure that the vein or nerve does not hinder you;
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	and know that the incisors and the knives are many according to the setting of bones and the appearance of bones, and their size and their subtlety, and their largeness and their smallness, and their hardness;
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	and for this reason, it is necessary to prepare each kind of work with its tool.
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	and know that the work will show you the instrument you need according to the knowledge of this art and the testimony of the manners of diseases;
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	If you consider the tool that you need according to what it requires.
dou feu	by fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	The joints might dislocate due to an internal cause, or due to an external one;
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	And when you have treated that erosion by the cure of medicines, and if they do not benefit, it is necessary to amputate that limb up to where the erosion occurs, so that the patient escapes through death or through malice, which is greater than the fault of the limb;
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors;	And the signs are that the limb turns black, as if it were burned by fire, and after the blackness comes this erosion of limb by limb, spreading throughout the body;
si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	If you are to amputate, and if it's due to the impact of certain venomous animal bites, like sea scorpions and vipers and such, and if the erosion is in the head of both legs, then amputate and do not give any chance for them to reach up to the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	And if it comes just to the wrist, then you cut at the joint, so that the corrosion does not extend up to the elbow;
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute;	and if it extends to the arm, cut where the knife meets it;
et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	and if it passes through the knife, that is death, and nothing beyond its power can save him.
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet:	and in this manner proceed whenever the corrosion affects or touches:
s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	if it reaches the first joint, cut after the other joint;
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	and if it affects or touches anywhere else, cut all through that part.
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	and if it ascends to the leg, cut at the knee joint;
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	and if it comes above the knee, there is no other option but to allow the patient to die;
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	And the way to cover or sew the limb so is that you tie it above and below, stretch one surgeon's hand on the lower link and another surgeon's hand on the upper link, and you cut the flesh between the two links until the bone is exposed, as long as the bone is uncovered;
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	Then cover or sew it, and put one piece of linen from each side, so that the skin doesn't touch the healthy part, and moves to avoid another injury and infection elsewhere.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans;	And when the bleeding starts during your operation, if you should cauterize the wound immediately, or apply some止血 powders;
puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then return to your medicine until it's done, then bandage the wound with a suitable bandage, and treat it until it heals.
et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet:	And I will tell you what happened at my house one evening:
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	It happened to him one night that it seemed like a darkness as if of fire, and this corruption came first to his foot at the heel, until it encompassed the entire foot;
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	And when the owner saw the corruption, they attempted to cover the foot, and became reasonable;
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	And soon afterwards, the corruption affected two of his hands, and it came to me, and I placed him on things for reaction after the cleansing of the body, but could not stop the corrosion;
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	And he urged me to bandage his hand, but I refused, hoping to react the matter;
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible;	And I also feared that if I cut off his hand, he would die, because the power of the medicine was weak;
et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	And he utterly despaired, and returned to his land, and held up his hand in grief, and died.
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	and I have only included this part because someone else needs to do it elsewhere, if needed.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	No abscess ever comes in the inner flesh, and stays for so long that it causes a large gathering of pus;
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	and then spreads and forms holes, and the pus jumps out, and lingers in his bodily fluids, just like vessels;
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	And the skin above is as fine as linen cloth, and does not extend up to the bone or nerve, and such disease is also called "sinus", and it is not referred to as "fistula";
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	But if it is so long that it comes almost to the bone all through, it is called "fistula";
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	And when you cook, you should cover the skin entirely, and similarly, even when it's delicate like a piece of fabric;
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	and doesn't escape due to its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	And if you have made the skin dry out and the corruption isn't at its limit, with the skin full of flesh, then treat it like this:
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	Check if the glands are large, and if the one containing it has a rank smell; then use an enema of Egyptian medicine as follows:
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	Take ale, and oil, and silver bangle, in equal parts, and cook them in a vessel over fire until the medicine turns red and becomes as thick as honey;
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	And then take from this according to your need, and make it with water and honey, and with chloride of zinc in the breast, and restrain it tightly.
et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	And leave the medicine there for two hours, then remove it by pressing;
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	Repeat this process as many times as necessary until the breasts are free of milk and the duct is cleared;
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	Do this procedure every time you lack the medicine, and when this medicine is not available, use water made from ashes. If you take vine wood ashes and add water to them, then pour it in and let it drip, do so until you know that the breasts are well drained;
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	And if the patient cannot endure it, or if they can't tolerate the Egyptian medicine or water from ashes, use water and honey instead, perhaps with a little boric acid;
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	For you should mix honey with wine that has been well combined, as the honey possesses properties to cleanse and wash, and the wine makes the healthy person flourish.
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	And when you have done this and ensured that the lungs are well cleansed, if you insert something made from the thing that produces mucus in them, and then take up a transparent plastering material and apply it with rose oil and in wine;
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	For you should insert certain medicines and ointments with it, of which I have mentioned the properties or treated about ointments;
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	And if the space in the lung is small and the catheter cannot enter it, then you should widen it with a slightly heated iron, and apply an Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment as long as it remains widened.
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if the wound is too wide, then place a stitch and let only half of my length or the lymph node be able to enter. If the pus chamber is above where the boil begins, then sew it higher than I am.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	And when the boil has reached its fullness, do not let pus spill over;
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere:	And if you cannot cover the swelling fully as you see it, equip yourself in such a way that the boil flows to the lowest point below me, because when the boil has reached its fullness, do not let pus spill over and if you cannot cover the swelling fully as you see it, equip yourself in such a manner:
que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	so that the boil flows smoothly downwards, and do not leave any part of the boil;
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain;	and take restorative medicines to place within the healthy part, and apply them on a linen cloth that covers all the healthy area;
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	Then apply force to the small part of the breast that is just beneath the nipple and at a larger area than the first, place oil on each sheet according to the size of the lesion, and put it on the healthy part to ease the bowing, and do not remove the large sheet until after several days once.
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	And the one around the breast area often needs to remove the swelling, and you should know what causes this swelling: if it's due to poison or pus or a sufficient amount, or digestion or indigestion.
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	And be vigilant if the patient feels pain or no sensation, and whether there's an abscess or not, and when your medicine has begun to take effect in this way and you see the nature that jumps on the healthy part of the breast, then you know that the symptoms are dissipating, and brings health.
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	And then release it in the morning, or on the third day, and when you relieve the wound, change to another dressing, and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the child vomits undigested food after many days, you should know that the child has not been born.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if venomous bites occur after a long wait, don't lose hope for your health, for the healing is coming.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	For there are individuals who experience delayed healing of their wounds, and among those who do the opposite;
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	and if after many days an undigested lump appears in their chest, know that the breast is not growing;
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	and if the breasts are slow to grow and distant, adjust your remedies with both wet and dry substances, such as oil, for it contains a large part of vitriol, which is the last remedy;
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	take oil diafinit, and apply it with rose oil, and moisten it with old equal wine in substance;
puis le confit et en use;	then he relieves himself and uses it;
et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	And similarly makes it cook more fattening, when no application has been made, or you take myrrh and aloes and incense, and grind them into a paste with honey once the fire is on;
et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	And then mixes it with a paste, spreads it on the skin, and applies it several times, giving to an aromatologist long stalks, and lily roots which are also like flour of cloves and cinnamon;
et en use de simples ou de compostes:	And uses simple remedies or compound ones:
broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	Grind them, make into powder, and put it on the honey I mentioned, and use it;
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	And if the treatment lasts long and isn't helped by this cure, then know that corruption has spread throughout, making an impression in the bone, or causing stiffness in the limbs, or affecting the joints;
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	If you are treating a wound with pus, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	Of the abscess under the nail.
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	Panarice is an abscess that arises under the nail of the foot or hand, or may accidentally appear on other toes.
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	And when it grows old, and if no care is taken, then the abscess escapes, and runs and spreads as far as its roots reach under the nail, and by chance may spread entirely.
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	And the corrosion reaches down to the bone as long as there is stinking pain, and the shoulder blades are wide, and the skin turns pale.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have instructed in the section on treatment, and if the cure does not help, then it is necessary that you remove all the excess from under the nail. Then after that, cauterize the wound.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	The cautery is very effective if the bone is sound, and the nail is healthy;
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	And if the nail is too close to the flesh and starts to swell, begins to poke through, and blisters form; it's necessary that you place the rod under the nail where the flesh bulges outward, and push it up high. Cut away this subtle and gentle pus, and place with it an application of hot and corrosive medicines to remove everything.
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the treatment of ointments until he is well.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	And if the corrosion has reached the bone, you must remove it and scrape thoroughly, because as long as the bone is corrupted, it cannot heal;
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if you see that the tooth is rotten, remove it from both jaws as was explained earlier, then treat until he is well.
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	And if it is severe and hurts greatly, you must remove it first;
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	Then cut the nail near the thymus in a crosswise manner, and be careful that the cut does not go down to the flesh under the nail, for it would cause too much pain;
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	And if it happens, place something above which soothes.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	The pain is originating from the hand.
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	I must adjust what is born in the hands of some people by chance and has thick flesh, and by chance it may have bones or there's none at all times, and often there isn't a nail, and none of them are born at the root of the joint, where the birth is within any of us.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	Those born without any defect do not move, and those born with a defect at the joint, by chance, do move;
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	The size of one who is muscular appears light, in such manner:
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	Cut it down to the root of a broad spatula.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer:	Those born at the root of the joint require treatment:
si te tien dou coper.	if you hold it with copper.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In the one who is born or should be at the rear joint, it is necessary that you first handle until you reach the round flesh up to the bone, then cut the bone with a suitable tool according to this, and then treat until it is clean.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The decisions that come together at the elbow arise from birth, or from an injury to a wound, or from the application of fire, or from similar actions.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	If it is necessary that you solder that joint, so that it should be repaired according to its natural forms;
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	Then place between two damp cloths or sponges soaked in oil rosin, so they do not weld together;
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	or you place between two thin pieces of beeswax, until they are joined together, as it should be.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	When we perform soldering with her palm, if she applies the soldering paste as it should be done.
des vils	of the villages
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	These are thick veins filled with numerous melancholic superfluities that come from multiple members of the body;
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	And more comes in legs of those who walk and work and carry, than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	So you must give them once purging of bile, and then heal them from the basilica.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres:	The treatment with iron is done in two ways:
l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	One method involves bleeding, and the other results in black blood being discharged;
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	The other method is to open the vein and force it completely out.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere:	The incision is done in this manner:
arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	First apply hot water to the leg vigorously until the large artery is weakened. Then hold the leg steady near the skin above the knee down to the part below the knee;
puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	Then cut the vein near my location, or in II or III, with a broad size, then elevate and press with your hand for the black blood, from one end to the other, until as much blood flows out as the virtues of the malady can bear;
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	Then let it heal, and instruct them to dip in meat juices that darken this blackness.
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	And resume the evacuation and cleaning whenever the veins are full, and it harms the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere:	The method of treatment is as follows:
reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	Warm the leg from the affected area, if there is hair present, then immerse it in water, and raise the leg in hot water until it turns red, and expand the veins;
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	And if you do not have a cautery tool, heat it on the fire, and then apply it directly to the vein along its entire length from near the neck down to the knee joint, or in the area below the ankle.
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	Then cut into the flesh with an awl, and scorch each side of the vein until you see it when you touch it;
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	And it appears red and black, and when it enters the leather, it seems like a white thread;
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois;	Then pull out the wire until it is raised above the skin, and then cut into the flesh gently with an awl, then apply it to another part three times in succession;
puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	Then scorch the skin above the vein until you see it, then lift it with the rod as you did before, and cut into another awl, in the same way as you did first;
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille;	Then fit another size, or more if needed, then lift it, and fit to the foot of the pie, then guide and lift until the second size fits.
puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	Then stretch it gradually from size to size, until all strength remains, then fit it.
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	And if you cannot stretch and lift it, insert a pin through the entire thick thread, and bind and guide it, and if there's not enough of it, turn your hand from side to side until there's enough.
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	And make sure it doesn't bind up, for if it binds up, one can neither stretch nor lift it, and this is harmful to the patient;
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset;	And when you've stretched it all, place wet wool in the wound covered with wine and rose oil.
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And treat him while he is still healthy.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie;	And if the limb is twisted and turned into a bundle together, and it's not straight, as we have said, then you must cut through forcefully but do not bend it.
et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And guide it as we have explained before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	It should be shaped like the iron when one cuts with a tool, and you should not slice, so as not to cut through the vein;
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	And it should be thickly curved; if it were too fine, it would cut through the vein, but make it thick as we have said, and this is its shape:
de la voinne civile	of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	This vein runs under the legs, in warm areas where no herbs or trees grow, and in soil without moisture.
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	And by chance it may be born in another place than in legs, and this happens due to corruption that comes from under the skin, if it comes inside the body as snakes and worms do, piercing between skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the signs of the beginning of this vein so are that there comes in the leg a very great inflammation, then change the blood, and it begins the vein to exit outwards, like the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	When you open the joints, it is necessary that you wrap around with a piece of leather half way up to two and a half yards., then tie it off, and leave the leather hanging on the leg, and every time there is a little left exposed, if you wrap around inside the leather, and tie it off.
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	And if it is too long, cut off some part and wrap again by pulling up the remaining piece, but do not cut to its root until all of it has come out.
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	because if you cut too much, it goes into the flesh and brings about pus and decay at that spot, causing a harmful illness;
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	For which reason it is necessary that she be treated gradually and little by little until completion, and that she not leave anything or more than usual.
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse;	And in this case concerning the vein when it is treated with long palm lengths or ten palms, and one person came to me, whose vein was X palms long and attached from that position. And when you grasp it, if it yields after one or two pulls, and piercing until depth ensures all releases;
et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	And remove the substance within and apply internal remedies to prevent corruption every day, then treat it as for abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains;	And with this vein, use dry hands, and likewise when it opens at the ankle or foot joint, or when it comes from pulling too much, and without wetting.
cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	Treat accordingly as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	Worms that are born between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	This disease is called in our land "cow disease", because it has appeared many times on cows, and it's a small worm that is born between the skin and flesh, and travels throughout the body going up and down, causing one to feel well at each limb, until it reaches the skin where it was heading, then it jumps out;
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	and is riddled with putrefaction from various fluids, such as when they come towards worms and snakes and roundworms or hookworms in the stomach;
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil;	And there is confusion about its nature, for when it travels through the body and ascends to the head, and reaches the eye, by chance it returns and destroys the eye;
et ceu avient maintes fois.	And this happens many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	When you see it being treated and milked, if one cannot expect anything until it is about to:
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	Therefore, you should bind the head tightly above and below with a strong bandage, then proceed to milk it, and if it does not drain properly into the flesh, and you cannot find it, then apply heat cautery to it while milking, until it drains;
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	And the greatest troubles it causes, if they flow through the eye, as we have said;
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	And if you see it approaching or near the eye, then bind tightly over it with a piece of wood, then proceed to milk it and force it out;
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	It is necessary to use the remedy for cleansing sores of medicinal solutions for the removal of body fluids, and it is important to prevent the spoilage of meats from becoming putrid.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	The pain coming from windiness
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre;	This illness is called in our land 'vakirir', and it is a pain that comes to any limbs, and when it leaves one limb, it moves to another.
et je vis ceu que je vos di.	and I saw what I told you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	I was called to help a sick woman, and she showed me her arms, revealing a small swelling in the vein of one arm.
et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	and soon after, it rose as if a worm was climbing her shoulder, faster than anything else, like molten silver when cut from one thing to another;
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	the pain left that arm and penetrated her shoulder, and then shortly afterwards spread throughout the body, until it reached the other arm;
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	then she told me that it was twisting inside her body, just as I saw.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I marveled much at how it moved from member to member in such a way, for I had never seen this disease in this manner before.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	In every way, I wanted many that well had wanted to move pain of themselves to another, but I did not want it myself, as I see in the woman;
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	And I thought it was because the woman had a naked belly and her veins exposed, and for this reason that the constriction of wind became apparent;
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	And they don't become evident according to this reason in those who are delicate, and who have wet bodies and their veins enclosed.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	And when you see to treat this illness, and the patient feels that pain, if it opens as we have said, open it from above and below quickly, and then proceed with care until that constriction of wind in the body releases.
et cauterize le leu;	And apply cautery to the affected area;
et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	And if you don't see it at your eyes, seek the remedy for those who relieve wind troubles, such as stinking pills, snake venom pills, and similar other remedies.
des saiettes	The phrase "des saiettes" refers to arrows or projectiles that may be embedded in wounds. It is often used in medical texts of the medieval period when describing treatments for injuries caused by projectiles, such as those sustained from battles or hunting accidents.
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows are diverse, depending on their appearance and the location of their impact on the body.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	The variety of their sizes is such that some have large points, and small ones, and those with hair, and soldered ones;
et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	and there are those that have two angles, and those with tongues, and among some there are pieces;
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres:	and there is the one that urinates in no member but does so in two ways:
ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	or in the main body part, such as the brain, heart, liver, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar organs.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	When it urinates, then in no part of these members, and the sign of death, which I will tell you later, appears:
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	If you must perform the extraction of this arrow, for death comes later in various conditions.
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	And when this bad sign does not appear and the arrow is not fully removed, you should extract it, and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	And the sign of the brain when the arrow pierces and hits bone, and starts a fluid leak coming from under the head, is when there is paralysis, stiffness, inversion, and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasms with confusion in understanding, and vomiting of bile;
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles;	And perhaps it stops fluid from flowing out through the nose or ears;
et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	And sometimes it affects speech and voice.
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	And from the moist wound, white pus resembling hairs seems to come out, and also like ashes of burnt flesh.
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	And when you notice this sign, take care with the treatment, and pull out the arrow if it hasn't been removed.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	The sign of the arrow is when it bleeds or stops bleeding; it indicates that it's close to the left nipple and feels like it might have been stuck in something hard rather than empty.
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	And by chance, if the arrow stops bleeding like hair and black blood comes out, and brings on coldness and cold sweat, and fainting:
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	So, without doubt, it means that the person will die.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of the arrow that never lets out pus is when there's no foam bursting from the wound, and the throat swells up, and the patient's face changes color, and they sigh loudly with a cold chill.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes;	And if the arrow bleeds in the undercoat of the buttocks, it indicates that it is behind the small ribs;
et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire;	And causes great pain and great suffering and sighing;
et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And it moves the entire limb from the shoulders.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if an arrow or stomach is hit, by chance if there's any undigested flesh from the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if an arrow or stomach is hit, and there's no meat passing through the intestines in the jump, then there's no hope for treatment, nor for extracting the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor:	And if the arrow is inside the bladder, and urine spurts out and goes outside, and the patient feels intense pain:
saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	Know that the wound is fatal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other limbs, such as the arms and neck, throat, shoulder, elbow, forearm, back, thigh, leg, and similar limbs, are safe depending on various dispositions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is within your nerve or artery, and it isn't venomous, as I will tell you what happened to me, because that's how you should handle such a situation.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	It happened to one person who was hit by an arrow near the nose in its root:
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	I tried it and removed it from the other side of the ear's grease, and it was completely well.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles;	And tried to extract an arrow that had fallen into the ear's grease near the membrane and bone, the arrow was recovered, and one could not reach more than its tip towards the shaft, and the arrow was as large as a Turkish bow's string, all without hurting his ears;
li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	The body healed well, and no harmful incidents befell it.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	And extracted an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and the arrow was the Arabic one for ears:
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	I pulled out the arrows, and skillfully removed them as I pulled, making the Christian heal well.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	And extracted an arrow from a house, where it was stuck in the stomach, and thought he would die;
et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	and after passing 30 days, if his condition did not change at all;
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	I cut into the arrow, set it free, and pulled forcefully; there was no adverse incident.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	And if you find an arrow has fallen on the back of a house, and the wound healed tightly there;
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	And the arrow stays within, not finding relief from its natural functions or experiencing harm in any of its natural works.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	And see another man, who was struck by an arrow in his face, and the wound was sealed;
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor;	and thus he endured without suffering great pain;
et mout d’autres semblans.	and no other similar cases.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie;	And once an arrow was shot at the king in his palace home, he was caught in the midst of a battle, and was slightly leaning towards the right side;
et estoit li saiette toute reponue.	and the arrow had fully entered him.
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	I was summoned for treatment after it had been three days since he was hit.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I found the wound to be greatly constricted.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	I wanted to test its subtlety thoroughly, but I could not feel it;
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	and there was pain and discomfort traveling across his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	I thought it was from the tip of the arrow. I put on him a poultice that is adhesive and digestive; because his ears were not inflamed;
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	and it showed me that the ear of the arrow was visible.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis;	I applied the poultice every day and cured the wound immediately. He then stayed with the patient for a long time until he felt the arrow inside his nose;
et il le me dist.	and he told me this.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	I applied corrosive ague medicine to the wound for several days until it opened, and then I tested it, feeling the tip of the arrow that was lodging in his ear;
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	Then adjust during the opening of the wound through that blood-repelling medicine, until the head of the arrow appears visibly;
et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	and puncture well the ends for three months, and then loosen so that the wound heals to a point where I clip with my forceps, from both sides, and it could not escape;
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	thus I did not cease to refine and invent methods for tools, until I had one day with properly made forceps, according to what the shape will come at the end of this chapter, whether I use them, and leave the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	And the surgeons judge that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored:
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	thus I did so, and healed the wound, and completely cured the patient.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	You should know the quality of extracting certain arrows, so you place your treatment upon what I do not specify, because books cannot contain all knowledge.
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	but among wise masters and colleagues you will find some more precise knowledge, concerning both what is available and lacking in current practice. Discover nine new works, and nine tools for the discharge of extraneous matters that occur within this craft.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres:	I state that arrows are embedded in limbs according to two manners:
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	either by the way they enter or from another side;
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	The case where the arrow enters through the flesh or where it is inserted, it penetrates into the muscle, and this has happened without any exceptions so far.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	And if it doesn't jump now, let it grow until the flesh is thoroughly cooked inside, and achieve its release.
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	And if it's stuck in the bone and cannot be released, let it stay like that for some days, and remove a little each day.
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	Then it will jump; if it doesn't jump, drill inside through all the subtle woods until the interior muscles are widened, and then guide it.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide:	And if the arrow is stuck in the bone of the head and reaches up to one of the lungs near the brain, or any of the incidents I've described happens before the patient:
si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	And if you don't remove it, but let it grow until it's even after a few days; because if the arrow reaches up to there, that is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is only lodged in the bone and not to its full depth, and does not pierce any organ, causing no harm for days without a bad event, then the removal device for extraction should be used.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit;	And if it is so deeply inserted and cannot come out at all, then you should administer hot rods internally, as I have told you;
puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the wound until it is healed.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	And if the arrow has returned inside the body so you cannot see it, then search for it thoroughly.
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	And if you feel it, then guide it with any suitable instrument;
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	And if you cannot find it due to the tightness of the wound or the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone, nerve, or vein, then probe as far as the wound allows.
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	And if you can guide the arrow, pull it out. If there are ears attached to where she holds the arrow, extract any bone that is stuck halfway between two and your reach limit, then break or bend the ears of the arrow as far as possible until you can pull it out;
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And very carefully ensure you do not break the arrow, but pull it out more firmly.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you can't achieve it in one go, until the arrow reaches your hand, let it get stuck there, then pull it out because the extraction is painful.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	And if bleeding during surgery opposes you, then apply what we have instructed about treatment in this chapter;
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement;	and beware of incisions near nerves and veins, and do your best to carefully remove the arrow without risk, quickly or slowly, firmly or gently;
et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	and guide the patient according to the form they were in before the arrow fell, for this is the greatest aid that it should be possible, and if you cannot do so, then place them according to what the symptoms show you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	The arrow that came from another direction, or if there is no sign of it anywhere, or if the skin is swollen in some place quite obviously:
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai:	Therefore raise up, as long as the tongs can take hold, and then restrain:
si saut fuer maintenant.	if it jumps now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is held within the bone, turn your hand around, until it enters the bone, and widen the bone, then guide it.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	And if she cannot come out, leave her still and then restart the extraction until she jumps out;
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	and if the arrow is inside him, thrust it all the way through;
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument;	and if it is stuck and you see that the instrument needs to be applied, if you apply the instrument correctly, so that the arrowhead enters the hair of the tool;
et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	and then thrust forcefully, and if the arrow is embedded, you apply the instrument at its pointed entry to ease the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrow has struck him, then it is necessary for you to remove all the tissue around where I am entering or have entered, if possible, and then treat the wound as is fitting.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	And if the arrow is stuck or in pain or in the abdomen or bladder or ribs and it's close to the vital organs, and you can't see clearly, then cover yourself up, and you do so.
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	And protect against covering the vein and the nerve, and then extract it, and then suture the wound; that is a task you should undertake.
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And the treatment until it heals.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the forceps used to extract arrows resemble bird beaks, and here is the form:
Et en sont mout de manieres:	And in many ways:
grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	Large, medium, and small, depending on the size of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the arrowhead is similar to the feathers of a bird, for it points at the tip of the arrow, as this shape illustrates:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The shape for pressing and holding, as shown here, is like this:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of the veins of the common body
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir:	The veins from which we bleed are thirty-one, out of which there are sixteen at the head, that is to say:
II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	Two smaller ones located behind the ears, which are called "the two 'herbaches'";
et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans;	and the two arteries in the two visible temples;
et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	and two veins that are in the two upper parts of the eyes, which are called "aspires";
et li voine que est emmi le front;	And the vein that is found at the forehead;
et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	And the vein that's located above the nose;
et les II guindeges qui sont ou col;	And the two jugulars which are in the collarbone area;
et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	And the two veins that are located above in the cheeks of the mouth, and these are the veins that are called "augueherich";
et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	And two veins that are under the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras:	The veins we usually know consist of five in each arm:
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	One is the cephalic vein, and it's under the left rib, and they call this "vein of the head";
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»;	And the median is called "fast", and it's made up of the cephalic and the basilic veins, and they call this "vein of the heart";
et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	And the rib is either on the left or in the right side, and they call it by the common folk "lung of the belly", and it's under the ribs, and that’s where the heart lies, which opens clearly above the stomach.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains;	And the artery is the vein that's located between the index and ring fingers, and it has two loops;
et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes:	and in the leg and at the ankle there are three veins:
l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit;	one is near the curve of the belly on the left side of the rib, and the second one at the ankle on the right side;
et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	and the vein that is called "nose", which is in the ankle of the other rib side;
et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	and in the other leg are three veins beside those ones.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	The treatment of veins that are behind the ears helps with the cauterization of old patients, and aids in migraines;
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre;	And the qualities of the surgeon, as I've explained, and that you warm the head of the patient, rubbing the area where the veins or arteries are located with a rough cloth;
puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief:	Then pinch the base of the neck until you can see both veins behind the ears on either side of the head:
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	Place your hand there, and where you feel the pulse under your hand, let it guide you;
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	Then take the lancet, and place it just below the vein until you reach the bone, then lift your hand to right above the entire length of the vein, cut through the skin and the vein up to the bone well, allowing blood to flow out as much as you see.
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	Then apply pressure and secure it, until it is healed;
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	And I have spoken about the incision and the cautery in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	The health of the second arteries that are in the two temples, if they are ancient and hardened, and those who have accustomed to eye drops, and on the chest of feverish tears by the eyes;
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	And the quality of this surgeon is as I say:
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement;	And when the patient's throat is squeezed until both arteries can be clearly seen;
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	And feel under your finger, and then indicate on the right side;
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	Then gently place your hand over the artery at your right index, and hold the scalpel under it, then gently lift the artery up top, and cut it, just like you did with the other arteries, and let out the blood according to your need;
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	Then release the patient, place your hand on the vein for an hour, then place it on cotton;
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee;	and when the wound heals, leave it until it is healed.
et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	and we have spoken about them and their extraction, or the beginning of this book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	The healing of the forehead vein is as important as the healing of the frontal artery in old diseases, and for migraine, and heat.
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	And its quality is that the patient twists its neck in pain until the vein appears;
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	Then take the tool called 'digester', whose shape is as follows:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	And place the tip on the vein, and press with your hand or another object, and allow blood to flow according to the quantity you see;
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	Then free the patient from the neck, and tie the artery as long as it remains healthy and there is no cut to an open flame wide.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus;	Otherwise, it's not good for the flames to be too strong;
et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	And the wound should be across rather than straight, because the bone is nearby, and by chance, the flames might break when they are fine.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	The healing of the two veins that are in the two eyelids helps with them, and at the nose, and at the cheek, and in the ear by the ear canal, and for diseases of the face;
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	And the quality of their healing is that the patient twists their neck to tighten a certain bandage, as before;
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	Then heal it, and make the cut into the healthy part, a little across, one length of a flame's width slightly larger. For there is no flesh there.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise;	And if the flames are subtle, by chance they might break;
puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	Then make sure to drain the blood as much as needed, and then bind it with cotton, and bind it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	The treatment of the vein opening near the nose is valued for fever, and for clear mucus, and for diseases affecting the face, such as migraine and swelling that comes to the face, and also when it's old;
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	And the quality of this treatment is that the patient tenses their neck and holds their left nose to your left hand, take a thin flame lengthwise, and stick it in between the two nostrils into the gap where the vein isn't opening well, as the vein doesn't open properly there, and blood collection will now begin.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	And do not push too deeply inside, and make the incision according to your need, then let it rest for a night, because it is very quickly restored;
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	and this is in the form of flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	The hygiene of the two intestines aids in tightening the gallbladder, and at the beginning of mingling diseases, and for many illnesses, and in putrefaction, and corrosion, and in herpes, and indigestions;
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	And the quality of hygiene is such that the patient tightens their throat from both sides, as we have said;
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	And let the surgeons be on top of the patient's head, and the patients sit at the edge, then apply hygiene across a broad but somewhat narrow length, then draw out the blood moderately or as much as is needed;
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle;	Then restart by making another incision on the other vein, then untie the knot, and hold both veins slightly tightly, so that the patient does not strangle.
et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	and let it be until morning, so that the wound heals.
de la sainie des leivres	Of the healing of wounds
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The care of veins in the mouth aids in their condition, and it deals with gum decay, cracks on lips, nosebleeds, and inner cheeks.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	And the quality of healing is to have the patient sit in front of you, and hold their neck as I said;
puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	Then turn the lip and look at the two veins, one is on the right lip and the other on the left. You can identify them by their black color, and because they have small black veins around them:
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	Then tie both of them. If you do not know which to tie and are in doubt, tie the larger one from each side. And treat both veins above and below them in the same way, because it's the same method.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	Of healing beneath the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	The healing of veins that are below the tongue requires assistance after the healing of the cephalic area, and this is at the constriction of the throat, and for eye diseases, and for mouth ailments;
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	And the quality of the surgeon is such that when your hands are between them before the sun, and you lift the tongue, and look down on each side you find a black vein:
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	Therefore heal both of them, but do not go too deep, for they are near the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres:	The veins of the neck that are commonly treated are healed according to two methods:
ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	One method is by piercing with all the fire of a broad meridian flame, or with a subtle olive one if it's like a cutting knife, and this is called "aneusil";
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	And they are broad and fine according to the width and narrowing of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The shape of the flame dart is quite famous and very wide as you see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	And it requires to open the full, bloody veins filled with evident blood, and which contain thick blood and turbidity;
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	and that's like the shape of olive oil flame:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it is more slender and pointed, and used for clarifying subtle veins, or it has subtle yellow blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	The purification of the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases that occur in the throat, and neck, and stomach, and abdomen;
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	And it is for the surgeon to cleanse it properly, and he should be aware of the artery that's nearby.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	And if it hits the artery, and there is an outpouring of blood, it should be stemmed, as I have said;
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And it must not be held by fire, but cut like a hare.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	And if the basilica is not clearly opening, it's necessary to extract it, and then use another one;
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras:	either you want no hair from it, or you cut the vein instead of it with your arm:
elle apert manifestement;	it clearly opens;
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	and cut it with the fire like a hare, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	And if you know how to find the place of surgery, it's best that you pull on the arm so that you touch the area until you feel the pulse;
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	then mark the spot where to cut, then tie the arm, and cut the vein like a hare;
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere:	And beware not to pierce in the artery when you see the limb swelling, for it is from the artery:
eschui la donques.	So then, this is it.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	And if you see it bulging up as high as the urine of a child, and if the wound is red and subtle, know that it is from an artery:
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	Hurry then, and place your finger for a while, and if you can stop the bleeding, as many times it has happened;
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides;	Fix his arm, and leave him like this, do not move the wound area.
et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let it be for pain, do not move him until he is well.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient;	And if the wound is not stopped by bleeding and it suits you, and if medicine is not at hand, when you see an artery open, treat it because the head of the patient retreats.
et estainche li sans.	And stop the bleeding.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	And take an elm bark, and cut it, and take one half and bind it well up to the other joint;
se li sans estainche, c’est bien;	If the bleeding stops, that is good;
se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	If not, then treat it, as we have said, with powders that stop bleeding;
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	And the stoppages should not be excessive in multiple positions due to the small size of the wound, and the strength of the arm's connection.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	The purification of the vein in the middle requires that it treat blood from above the head and below the neck, because it is composed of basilica and cephalic veins, as we have said;
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	And it is necessary for the physician to beware of the nerve that is nearby, and if he does not go too far forward, and if he finds the nerve, and it swells and harms his health, and by chance cannot heal;
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil;	And this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in any of them due to its subtlety, then you must release the patient from the instrument before it.
et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	And listen to the nerve with your power.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there's a vein between the two nerves, cut it long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	The surgeon for the head helps, leading blood out of the head, and aids with eyes;
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	And it is necessary for the surgeon to operate near the olive oil flame or the mint flame, because this is the safest of all veins, as there are neither nerve nor artery nearby.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	Always, it is necessary to use the lightest force, and one should not take distress if the process needs repeating, and one repeats.
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	And by chance the muscles of some individuals swell during the first attempt, but one should not take distress in such cases.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of healing depends on your thought process.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	The first thing you need to know about hygiene is that hygiene is practiced solely for maintaining health and preventing future illnesses;
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute:	And have the sanitation done in one of the three veins, which include:
c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	This means, to be precise, the cranial vein, the facial vein, and the jugular vein;
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	And sanitation should be done at the beginning of Lent while kneeling, in autumn and after meals during winter, when signs of fullness are observed;
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	And one should cleanse it the first day or the third, after two hours or three full days.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	The treatment for diseases should not have a fixed time frame, but only when the need arises from day or need, at all hours and in every situation;
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	And it is not proper to cleanse children until they are twelve years old, nor pregnant women only for a quarter of the month until seven months.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	And one should not nurse the elderly who have passed sixty years.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	And when anyone wants to be treated in any way, it is necessary that they purge their intestines with a gentle enema, if there are remnants of food retained, so that the veins do not attract excesses into the limbs causing damage to the main parts;
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	Nor is anyone who is too intoxicated with meats or drunk treated properly, whether it be from strength or those with dropsy;
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	And if you worry about the health after cramps and passion, and vomiting, and abdominal pain, and frequent bowel movements in women, and from work, watching and joining forces, and that too much of the virtue, or due to things from the body or injuries;
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	Then refine the humours, because if it's large, due to meats and drinks and medicines, if you have the means;
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	Then in or during a bath, if nothing prevents you, for refining the blood, and healing from the vein down to the bottom of the backside, as we have said;
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	and protect yourself on that day of work and pain, and excess, and similar things;
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	and be bound and joined, and keep the shoulders higher than where you heal, and rub the arms two or three times, then gently pull the bandage up there, for when it's too tight or loose, it cannot correct the fluids;
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	And then rub the arm with hands, until the veins swell, and one feels them;
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	Then moisten the fire with a little old oil, then place your left hand's index finger over that vein under the arm a bit, where you want to cauterize, so the vein doesn't burst or break upon the iron.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	For there are veins that act like strings when cauterized, and some have fullness of windiness such that when you place them over the flame, if they retract to the flame, and cannot open the vein, thus one is among these;
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	And if it burns the vein, then the wound is too narrow, for which one must be skilled in these matters when it comes to cauterizing.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin;	And if they operate on the vein for the first time, it is good;
se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	If not, then start again slightly below or near that spot, if the limb is swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras:	And if the limb is swollen and the body parts feel tender, then let it rest for one or two days, without binding the arm:
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus;	by chance it may bring about abscesses;
ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	don't enter the bath, then continue the cleaning if it pleases you;
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	and if the wound is small, or if the artery is subtle and you doubt that it has not come out with as much blood as you see, then pierce that same cut all the way to the end;
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez;	And the operation proceeds somewhat hastily, thus that the limbs may swell;
car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	for this happens many times, when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	If you see the limb swells, do not repeat the operation again, and apply a little of oil instead, for oil alleviates the body's pain from blood, and it stays in that place where the oil is applied.
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	And do this for each operation you perform on veins, to stop the flow of blood;
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu;	And when you apply it to the limb, this same treatment should be done with garlic and honey.
si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	if the veins are too thick they need to be diluted and spread out.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	And if there comes about large pus pockets, which happen many times, even when it's not strong enough for that particular time or when the opening of the vein is small, then hasten and place on the body a damp sponge in water and wine and a little heated alcohol, and hold it for an hour;
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	And it must be that you do this after the discharge of blood from the vein, and if it stays in place for a few days without any blackness or greenish coloration, if it doesn't harm the individual;
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if you see it, place on something of myrrh or balm, rubbed in a concoction of cat's claw or similar substances.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique:	Many times pus and appearance manifest themselves during healing of the basilica:
met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	Place then your hand there, and if you find the neck soft under the pressure of the hand, that is the appearance of malady.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere;	Therefore listen carefully that you do not put on any of these things which we have said, for perhaps in the court without touching the artery;
mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	but make him be plastered dry to harden the neck, then treat with another treatment until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And lead each person to have blood according to the amount of its virtue and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges;	But if his skin is black, let him bleed out until it turns red;
et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez;	and if you see that it's large, let him continue bleeding until it becomes refined;
et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	and if he is too hot, let him cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	And for the one who is full and strong, needing blood extraction, you must make him have a larger incision, and let the flames be wide;
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	And for the weak one, do the opposite, and it is fitting to make them healthier slightly and often, and they must be made healthier by cutting across, not simply by pressing.
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And this method of healing protects against the spread of blood and constriction of nerve, and is preferable to healing from long rather than wide.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates;	And for the one whose body needs in healing, it is fitting to give them moist bread and the juice of apricot kernels;
s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	If they are overheated, then treat them with blood three or four times. If they have a cool complexion, serve them moist bread before healing along with syrup made of honey and spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, ensuring the syrup has a pleasant aroma.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if it fails at the surgery, after a little blood has flowed out, it should breathe in a broth of meat, and an aromatic syrup, and use other things that we have mentioned in the chapter or section on fainting, for the evacuation of veins.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if they wish to breathe more vigorously in their arm, and seek another bout of sweating, whenever they are weakened by extensive sweating, it should be that they sweat gradually, according to the strength of their constitution, continuously.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And if one wishes to fumigate their arm after the first cleansing, and it has strong odors, if they are cleansed seven hours after the first cleansing, or after the seventh hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And if one wishes to cleanse another part, then they should do it on the second day or the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre;	For there is much blood within the body which has become heated, causing fever;
si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	If large quantities need to be drained, and widen the puncture until it seizes in place;
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	Once you meet all the conditions of cleanliness, and place your hand on their heart when it heals, so that death does not come to him instead of healing; this happens many times, when the healers are negligent;
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	And it should not happen when you see the arm being pulled out, and blood is expelled a second time, and the puncture is closed, that you squeeze forcefully;
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	Nor if it's broken, to extend his arm quickly, for this would be badly done;
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois;	But let it grow until it heals for the second time;
ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	but when you touch the tip to the flame, until the frozen blood nears exit from the vein, and place it on a piece of cloth submerged in water, and gently press upon it.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if a vein has been cut, leave it unclosed and do not compress it until the abscess is relieved.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if there's need to draw out blood the second time, heal it in that same place, or on another vein, or on the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein inside the arm is healed at its own location instead of the neck because it's composed that way.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	And for healing this way, the patient immerses their hand in warm water, until the veins turn red;
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	then moderately tie it up, so that the vein appears clearly, then heal now through it, neither too wide nor too long;
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	and if the exit is too wide, heal well near the wrist of the hand, and if the blood doesn't exit, then place the hand in warm water, let the blood flow in the water, until you have enough.
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	And if it is in this state, if you do not reattach the hand in warm water, because you will put it more in winter than in summer;
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the health of this vein is more preserved than any other veins; there is neither artery nor nerve.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	The health of the preservation of the right hand is worth all diseases of the liver, and this is how it is done:
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	Strengthen the hand, and reset it in warm water until you see the vein, if it appears;
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	And if it's healthy diagonally, and if you handle it all along completely, without causing any discomfort;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	And do not get too close to the fontanelle, for the nerve is completely exposed in the flesh, and then put the hand back in warm water if it's frozen in the wound, and cannot come out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated the blood as much as your skill allows, place on the vein where and how to sew it quickly to close, and do thus with each case.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The cure of the one in his left hand corresponds to the disease of the mouse, and do everything as I told you for the right.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The healing of the liver is valuable for all diseases that occur in the body, such as female diseases, retention of fluids, and kidney diseases, as well as ailments of old limbs and legs, and similar illnesses.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet;	And the quality of its health is such that the patient bathes in hot water and rubs their veins until they cool down, and binds them over the joint on the foot;
et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	And if it's in the ankle, and above the foot, there goes much heat.
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	So then heal it or more vigorously, whether at the ankle, than the application would be.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant;	And if you heal it on the foot, beware of the nerves that are nearby, and heal it like when chopping wood;
et soit li flaimes anesil.	and make the heat last until it heals.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if it cannot come out without pain, put the foot in water and allow well to drain the vein.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	And if healing doesn't occur on the first attempt, try again for a second time slightly higher up, as the legs are salty;
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	Do not doubt a nerve, as we have said, and thus proceed with the surgery on the other side equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The legs of the sciatic nerve are at the knee joint, and its health corresponds to the pain in the hip, when it's due to blood clot.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne;	And the quality of its health is such that the patient bathes or immerses themselves in water, and then twists above the ankle four times, because otherwise the vein will not open;
et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	And if it opens, heal her in all the ways you can, and by crossing over;
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And it's better if you touch her, because the limbs are without pain, and she responds well to human hands.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	And if you cannot find it, heal no part of what opens or behind the foot, and towards the small toe, and guard against nerves;
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint;	And make such corrections to the blood that you see, and then release the knot, and put on cotton and tighten it;
ele est maintenant sanee.	It is now healed.
des sainies de ventouse	of suction healings
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre;	Vacuum cups are made from horns, or spiders, or worms;
et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres:	and cupping is done according to two methods:
ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	or by causing blood to come out and then attracting it away, or alternatively without causing blood to come out.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres:	And this cupping done by causing bleeding follows two methods:
ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	or it can be done instantly, or without using fire;
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief;	and cupping done by causing bleeding and extraction of blood is performed over the four corners of the body, from which one is entirely made of bone;
et li autres est emmi le col;	and the other ones are around the neck;
et II autres en II costeis dou col;	and the other two on the two sides of the neck;
et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	and the suction cup under the chin;
et li ventouse des II espaules;	and the suction cup over the shoulders;
et li ventouse sus les crupies;	and the suction cup over the pimples;
et les ventouses emmi les II bras;	and the suction cups on both arms;
et les ventouses des II jambes;	and the suction cups on both legs;
et les ventouses des II chevilles;	and the suction cups on both ankles;
et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	and suction therapy does not deal with blood, rather it's for small veins that are scattered in the body, and because of this it doesn't weaken you at all, just as we do with vein health;
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	and it is not right for it to be administered without fire or in any illness that comes from overfullness, until all the bodies are emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	And if suction is needed for diseases or by habit, if we do it every hour at the beginning of each month, or at the end, and throughout and in every phase;
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	For there are those who, when they have need to suction, if they weigh too much initially;
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	and for those who find congestion and redness in their face, and head, and neck, and there is cloudiness around the eyes;
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	and those who find a drop of blood in their mouth, and have swollen tongues, and spit out blood;
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	and for those who tremble, and see through cloudy blood and veined skin and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and especially during the last month before giving birth, we instruct to breathe after three hours each day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	The cure of the mouth helps in the relief of inflammation in the head ... affecting the eyes, and it should not be that it comes after the elimination of all over the body;
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	And this practice of blowing air is in the field of hygiene for the head, and it should not be used by those who have a cold constitution, or who suffer from dyspepsia, because doing so causes great harm to them.
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	And it should not be used by someone who practices watchfulness, or who has cold head diseases.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And he who often gets relieved from it, becomes oblivious, and because of this one must place the suction cup somewhat further down due to the confusion.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	Blowing into the neck is in the field of hygiene for the head and the basilic vein, and for this reason it is useful for squeezing the heel, and making incisions into the channel of the heart, and for everything else, and for fullness;
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	And it is better to do this with restraint, because if you hold too tightly, it can lead to impairment or indigestion and heart problems.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique;	The practices of blowing into the second ribs of the neck are useful for relieving head pains, eye infections and toothaches, and also effective in cases of stridor, and pain at the root of teeth, and they fall under the field of hygiene of the basilic vein.
et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	And you must instruct the surgeon to express his hand when placing it, not to touch the artery, and not to observe any breaks in blood flow.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche;	The ventilation of the area under the chin is worth to disease of the mouth, and decay of gums, as well as other illnesses that occur in the mouth;
et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	and it's part of the health of the inner lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	Ventilation of the shoulders comes from diseases caused by heat and congestion.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	Ventilation of the armpits is as important as three veins in the arms, for it draws blood from these large veins;
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	And instruct the surgeon not to cut too deeply because the chest is naked of flesh and contains organs and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire;	The suction cup placed on the back is worth to bleeding disorders in the abdomen and diseases nearby; it must be large and made of wood or bamboo for better treatment.
et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit;	And perchance, if she were subtle, she would break;
et i fai grans plaies.	and I make great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors;	The suction cups on the legs are applied directly because they draw blood from all over the body, and help with old pain in the kidneys, bladder, and lower back, also relieving swellings;
et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	They are in the locations of the two shins and the two ankles, and overall they weaken the body after long use, and cause fatigue in multiple conditions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc;	The method of applying the suction cup is as follows: you first place it empty and apply pressure steadily, then move it quickly and evenly, never stopping this action until you see the area turn red and swell, and observe the reddening due to blood.
puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez:	Then apply fire, and reattach the suction cups, and take care in the positioning of the horns, for there are those with thick flesh, and clear pores:
si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes;	It is necessary to cut only once, and it is proper to make large wounds, and somewhat deeper ones.
et suce legierement.	And suck gently.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois:	And if the one without is large, it may be necessary to cut twice:
la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	The first time for the subtle removal of a larger vein.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois;	And if it is very thick without, it may be necessary to cut the third time;
et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	When we wish to drain little by little from the blood, we only pierce once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent;	And if we want much of the blood, then we often reapply;
et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	And if the bone is expected, so firmly hammered, and the ends are such that the joints are pierced suddenly, it fits for those with thick skin and firm flesh, who have been long troubled, that you apply the nostrums of suck bulbs where an opening and disassembling appear:
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	If it's in this blue state, or from sweet almond oil, or from pumpkin seed oil;
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if it's yellow, from mustard oil, or from lily, or from chamomile, or other similar substances.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the excess is large and cold, take oil of melilot, or turpentine, or oil of nutmeg, and similar.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if the person to be treated has thick flesh and large abrasions, it is not suitable to apply oil at all, but after leeching with pink water, or cold water, or water from a rose, or water from a pumpkin, or water from porcelain, or other similar substances, you should wash them.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And to those who have much moisture, if they rise from sweat, or water of myrtle, and of sumac, and of similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	And those with excesses ascend from old wine, or from urine water, or from decoction of nettle or chamomile, or other similar substances.
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II;	And it is not appropriate to use suction cups before or during the bath, but after the bath for one hour or two.
et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And do not sleep after suction, it is necessary that he be aware, when he should be suctioned and when he has been suctioned.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	And watch over those who are being cured and are choleric, and if the patient is too hot and inflamed;
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	It is necessary for them to eat cold things, such as pomegranates, endive and lettuce, and similar items;
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	Eat eels, and pork, and meat with moisture.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	And for those with cold constitutions, they should drink honey syrup and fragrant half-aged wine, which is between old and new, eat some porridge, eat eels and small birds and chicks;
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	And on the day they will be suctioned, they should drink more than eat;
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	And it is necessary to give no one meat or garlic or mustard before or after ventilation, in order to strengthen the main limbs;
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And sieve the flour but it is not fitting that which is hot should drink it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne;	The suction cups that are placed to cause irritation are those placed on the liver, and on the spleen, and in gout, and on the belly and womb and kidneys and hip. But this member does not tolerate being irritated by heat, and one should do it forcefully only to draw blood from limb to limb, as we do with nipples when the child fails to suck.
por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	in order to thin the viscosity in the limb, as we apply suction cups on the belly and womb to reduce its thickness.
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	And for pain when there is an obstruction or stone, if it is attracted by its adhesive power to such obstructions, or if it empties the stone from its place;
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement;	And thus she does it when one puts her on the liver and on the stomach when there is retained wind, and these suction cups are applied empty for to expel wind alone;
et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	And they are administered together with fire, and sometimes filled with hot water, as in the case of pleurisy diseases, and in such manner one fills the suction cup with hot water or with water that has boiled herbs suitable for this.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The shape of the suction cup administered by fire is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	And it has II inches and a half in length from the tip, and at its middle third it is about as wide as one's finger, just like to insert an awl, and made of iron or steel so that it does not irritate the patient upon being placed on the limb;
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	And there is in the middle a rod across of an arachnid or iron, for to put a torch in possession, and it is used whether large or small according to illnesses and the age of those who take them;
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	for the suckling bottles for children are different from those for adults, and those for skinny individuals are different from those for fatty ones.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	And one must place this suction cup thus on the limb:
empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	take the wax candle or the heated rod, and insert it through the suction cup, so that the flame is at the bottom of the suction cup to avoid burning the patient;
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	and then place it on the limb, and you should do so at the point we have mentioned, so that when one wants to, if there is vapor going off, and remove the suction cup;
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And follow the same line as before, and repeat often, if you need to.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	Therefore, when it comes to the suction cup which is administered in pleuresin disease, during all types of colds, there should not be any pus or impurities; and it is only used fully once it is filled with coldness, then placed only on the body part.
et c’est li forme:	and this is its form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	Only suction cups are used in limbs where one cannot place suction cups due to their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar parts;
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	and in their naked places of scars, such as elbows or knees, and other similar areas;
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	and the quality of their application is that when you find suction cups that are in mild coldness without pus, then take them;
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	And place them in mild water, until they are familiar, with no bulges in their abdomens;
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	and then cure with bloodletting and suction cups, then rub the limb until it turns red, and place it on the sores;
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	and when they are full and weep, if there is a spot where suction cups can be placed, put them there, because this yields little later.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	If not, raise the arm then dip it in water well, and then incise;
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	and if it heals too quickly due to the effect of suction cups, moisturize with a linen cloth dipped in cold water, and place it there, until the suction cup wounds turn red;
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	And if the wounds are multiplied, then place powdered vitriol or garlic, and similar items, until they become stenchy;
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	or you place half the peeled hazelnuts inside the wound, and leave them until they heat up within, it will now stop bleeding.
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	and if you need more, take other veins.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	And if the veins are not to be found elsewhere, rub with fresh blood-soaked material, or you insert a needle until blood flows from it and then place it. Once they start smelling the blood, they will heat up;
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And when you see that they sweat, then powder a little aloes and ground grain, or ashes, and they will stop now.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	This begins the book on fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it restores fracture and alleviation.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	Know, dear son, that these matters of this chapter, they were not seen in any old books, nor did anyone read about them;
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	And for this reason, the knowledge has been lost in our land, because I have never found anyone who was good at it;
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	And I know nothing of it, because through the knowledge of old books, which I have studied so much that I have dealt with this science, and by experimentation, and through the experience of my life;
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	And I have described in this chapter what is contained within it, and summarized at the end, clearly showing the forms of the instruments used, as I did in these two chapters previously.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	So it is necessary that we outline or introduce this book's main points and chapters where the wise people use their understanding, and remain faithful to truth. Let those who have experienced this know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	I say that when fracture or dislocation or twists or pain occur in any part, it is necessary to quickly treat the patient from both sides, without letting anything prevent you, such as weakness, children, or elderly people;
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois;	If the place you're tightening is too tight, or too cold;
et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre;	and use cold joints, which means cold meats, and oyster flesh and venison, do not drink wine, nor eat any fatty meats, and let the body not be too full of meat that fills the veins with blood, until you have doubt about an abscess or spreading of matter in the limb;
si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	if the patient's body has adapted to its usual government as it was using it.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary that the patient be nourished with foods that cause a heavy digestion or have viscosity, such as cooked wheat in water, and onions, and nuts, and pies, and beef stomachs, and eggs, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For at times, after an operation, it can move again more quickly than the breaking.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	And know that broken bones in old and weak individuals cannot be properly healed or sutured according to their nature due to the dryness of the limbs, nor those which are too soft, such as the bones of small children;
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant;	But if there is no remedy, reset it on the broken bone and large thorns that stick out. Join the limb together as tightly as before;
et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	and do not finish his work entirely, and for this reason he should be nourished with large meats, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that fractures are varied in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the skull is different from the fracture of the heel, or of the leg, and in this chapter I will tell you all ways of fracture.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there are fractures that go to the marrow, and others through cutting, such as the length of a feather for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if it's a fracture with injury, or a fracture with just a small crack.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	And in every way has his own device and proper instrument for restoration, according to what memory brings to his mind;
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	And the breaking of the bone is known by that his hand hurts and opens well outward, and feels a press on it;
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	And when there is no twist or soreness in the hand, and the body does not feel great pain, if there is no breakage;
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	But it may well have twisting, or cracking, or a small break.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	But do not move it with your hand yourself, but apply the remedies that follow, and then gently constrain it now.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	Know that the break occurring in the journey, and where it splits into two parts, they should now place them evenly, just like when placing an abscess on its side.
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	And if it's a hard abscess that comes to the surface, so he lets no day pass until the abscess is alleviated;
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces;	Then place it evenly until you can do so lightly and skillfully. Know that the restoration of this is easier than those with pieces;
puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	Then tighten it, as it should be done hereafter.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	And if in the bone there are broken pieces, if it's split into two parts, whether they are hands or feet, or at your hand if they're small limbs, or if they are divided by two cords, or one cord and at your hand;
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	And place the limb according to its natural shape, so that when the injured parts of the limb are healed, you adjust it with every effort using additions in their respective places as much as you can, and be sure to avoid causing injury or pain through your actions to the patient.
et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And adjust well the two ends of the bones according to the best shapes.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien:	And test it thoroughly with your hand if you feel it is not quite right:
si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	If it is correctly aligned, do not overstretch or apply too much pressure. Do this gently as those who remove the abscess by their own efforts use heat and muscle contractions on the limb, as we have wished many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	And when the limbs are in place, ensure you take good care of the patient so they do not move them, whether awake or asleep, walking or in any other manner;
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And make sure the limb is so secure that it feels no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	For when he feels no pain, this is not enough; it must be placed in such a position that he does not feel any pain.
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	And see to it that it is put straight, so there is no distortion when it is restored;
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	And the quality of the broken limb should be according to what I am telling you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that limbs broken are varied by size and extent and shape.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans:	For there are smaller limbs, such as arms and legs, and others like them:
si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	They should be wrapped in soft, fine linen cloths.
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe:	And those that are larger, such as thighs and calves:
si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	They should be wrapped in a broad and firm bandage, for wide bands encircle the entire large limb, restraining it evenly from all sides, so that there is no awkwardness.
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	Then lightly apply the ointment for three rounds or four according to the limb, and hold your hand somewhat tightly throughout this process. Then move upwards beyond the breakage point and hold less tightness; allowing the breakage to move a little away from the breakage area.
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	and soften the area gradually and gradually, until you reach a substantial part of his healthy side, then take up another connection, and return back to where you began near the broken limb;
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	then return to the area around the breakage point, and hold it moderately, neither too hard nor too soft, just as we explained in the first round above;
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	then place the linen or cloth bands between the applied ointments until it's all evenly spread, then secure everything with a bandage. Lastly, position your well-made stars on top; if there is no pus or swelling present.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	And if there is swelling or an abscess, then apply something soothing for the abscess, and which alleviates the swelling, and leaves it in this state for a few days;
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	Then stretch over your ears, and let them be half the width of a hair tightly, or from a shaft that is used for making arrows, or from palm leaves, and they should fit according to this pattern:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	However, it is necessary that the ears placed on the gap be slightly larger and wider than the others;
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	And let them also be as long as is suitable for limbs of smallness or largeness;
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	Then stretch over the ears in the same way you did with the first attempt, then tie a supplementary thread on top, just like you did above the break in the first instance;
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins;	More constriction occurs there, as before, at this point.
et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	And it is necessary that the thread be medium-sized, neither too thick nor too thin, and be soft like linen.
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	for if the thread is thick, as in works of the folks who make their looped knots with linen cords twisted, and that's great error, because the knot can't be uniform if it's too fine, and it doesn't suit to have less than half a thumb's width between each pair of threads.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the wounds are irritated by the edges of the stitches after tightening during their healing, then place linen patches or raveled wool on them, so that they do not blister.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is inflamed and the ribs are broken, I will then describe the treatment below.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it is not proper to hold back too much of your efforts when healing broken limbs on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	For when the limbs are large, it's not suitable to place these loops until after five days or seven, or more depending on your tolerance of pus that comes each time a new one occurs;
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion:	and here is the method of ancient plastering to restore fractures, dislocations, and twists:
et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	And it is that you take some flour which stands by the walls of the mill, and mix this with plenty of eggs, and prepare this concoction neither too thin nor too thick, then use it, and this is the common method for plastering to restore fractures in various positions, just as much for women and small children, because there is no matter whether it's too expensive or too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion:	Another method for plastering that restores fractures, dislocations and torsions:
pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.;	Take ginger, garlic, nutmeg, and asafetida, and gum Arabic, add water to make X parts.
mirre et aloes, ana V З.;	Mint and aloe vera, make up for V parts.
alechil VIIII З.;	Allium (garlic) VIIIX parts.
et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef;	And make powder, and mix it with beaten egg yolk;
se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	If their body heat is hot, they should use this plaster, because it has a good composition and quickly heals broken bones, being beneficial for many people.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion:	Another method of applying plaster that is useful for twists:
pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.;	Take meat and vinegar, add X parts of salt;
mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.;	Myrrh and aloes, add nine parts of them;
acaice VI З.;	Add six parts of acacia;
bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Add ten parts of Armenian balm, grind well, mix with water or beaten egg yolk, and administer.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure:	Another method for applying plaster to dislocated joints and broken bones, it eases the pain coming on, and when they use the bone, it breaks the swelling:
pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Take a new lamb, and cook its milk with ease and oil, and place it under your head.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	Bandages do not heal completely, but they are better for soothing abscesses, and properly treating the pains.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez:	Another method of plastering which restores broken bones:
pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Take dried fig leaves and terrestrial poplar leaves, grind them together, and make plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another way to plaster is for the restoration of bone fracture and to relieve the removal of the abscess.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie;	Take the root of valerian, chamomile, flowers of violets, flour from rice, from each take a part;
et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Grind it, mix it with wine, and when the limbs are warmed, mix it with moist coriander water, or water, and use it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another method of plastering more forcibly than the first, when pus is returning to the recovery of the limb.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie;	Take the roots of valerian, and sesame seeds, balsam, melilot, and sorrel, and flowers of violets and chamomile, from all take a part;
et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	And grind, and mix with salt water, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb, and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	In his book, Hippocrates instructs that only beeswax ointment made of wax and oil should be applied to the broken limb for restoration without anything else. He states that it must not be too soft or too hard but just right.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems Galen that we should place upon the broken limb for restoration, substances slightly heated and somewhat dry, such as myrrh and aloes and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor:	Another method of plastering that is useful for injury and pain:
pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Take the brains and feathers of cooked men or bird feathers, and liverworts, and woodlice, and earth equal in quantity, grind them together, make a plaster from it, and use it.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu;	And then apply the plaster slightly later, and make sure that the patient does not feel any pain, nor is their bone moved out of its place;
si ne lou deslie par mains jors.	If you do not apply the plaster with your hands.
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant;	And if pain comes to the limb, or itchiness, without rest or swelling, then you should act quickly, remove the plaster, and apply the plaster anew;
et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	Take a light cloth, and a damp sea sponge, and dip it in water, then remove the moisture, until the itching stops and the pain is soothed.
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	Then let the limb rest for an hour, then place it on dry wool, moistened in water or oil, and secure it with a belt until you are sure of removing any pus;
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant;	Let the inflammation and pain in the limb subside, then relieve the pain, then continue with gentle manipulation, and a little plaster, but do not strain it as strongly as before.
et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	Gently until it is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you notice that pus is coming out and the area is red, painful, swollen and oozing, indicating inflammation throughout, then you will need to apply plaster and bind it, start again as you did initially, in exactly the same way.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII;	And if nothing comes to the limb that we have said, or if it is not released only after three, four, or five days;
et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	And never let it go for more than XX days, as we see, until the fracture heals and brings about alignment of the bone above;
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant;	Therefore keep it restrained longer than at first, and strengthen its flesh, as I have said before;
et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	And if you see that the bone is healing better than necessary, know that no remedies can come about;
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	Let the bone then be immersed in hot water, every time you untie it, and let that happen every third day, and clean a little of the wound;
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement:	Through this process then cut out the remedies from the limb, and quickly heal whatever the foolish eye sees that leaves the limb deformed:
c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	This is bad, and there are difficulties with it, and I don't see anything else but leaving it and opening it straightly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	Regarding various methods of breaking bones
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	Many ways of fractures exist, and various shapes, and the causes are distinguished;
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust;	because there are fractures that result from the impact of a sword, and in these cases, the collarbone breaks all the bone up to the symphysis which is at the end of the bone, like in the case of a mallet or staff.
et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	And for this reason, this type of fracture is called "mallet injury".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»;	Or the sword hits the bone from above without piercing it, and this type of fracture is called "absolute".
et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	And these two types of fractures have large or small injuries.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is sequential impact, or crack, or fracture of the stone collarbone, or under the stone, or other similar occurrences.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a fracture partly through, which approaches until it reaches the membrane beneath the bone, or above the bone, and this wound may be large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	And if there is a wound that has healed within the bone as delicate as a hair, and has small cracks, and because of this it is called this breakage "hairline";
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres;	And if there is a wound made or caused by striking with stone, or falling, or from something seemingly trivial, and it causes the part of the bone to enter the body, so that they are together as hammers would be when struck upon hammers;
si entre li piere dedens.	if within the stone.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	And this happens more often in those who have wet bones below, like in children's bones;
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles;	It occurs in all these ways of breakage where small fragments are lost, like with maggots.
et je em parlerai en son leu.	And I will speak about it in its place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And know all methods of breaking through the diminution upon them, and the examination by touch, and through the corrupt flesh that is upon.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The appearance of hair is known by this: when one has exposed the bone and rubs inside it, if the breakage shows black.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of a breakage, beware of any bad accidents due to illness, if you see no harmful incident, such as vomiting bile, loss of intellect, extension and rigidity, fever ague, and if the eyes emerge and turn red, or show other similar symptoms in various conditions, you cannot be certain of recovery.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see a terrible accident, and you hope for salvation, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the nose comes to you first, and it is in winter, then you should remove the bone before the fourteenth day after the month.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it's in winter, you should hurry to remove the bone before the seventh day after the month; so that when the pus around the bone becomes infected, and accidents as we said occur.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi:	And if the breaking of the bone reaches to the membrane that covers the brain, it is necessary for you to cut the broken part like this:
et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	and that you apply the hot tip of a needle to the raw flesh and expose as much bone as possible in all ways that you can, and at the shape of the wound more than you can, and if blood flow comes with the exposure of the bone, or pus appears, use what is necessary, and when you fill the gap with wet bandages soaked in rose oil;
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc;	and let the wound rest until the pus subsides, and ensure there is no blood flow;
puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige:	then begin digging into the bone, and this is done according to two methods of operation:
l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	One method is that you cut close to the front, and this is the shape:
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then make another cut that is larger than the first one.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde;	And the second method is that you have several different cuts, some narrow and others broad, they should be pointed, and made of iron;
et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	and perform the operation lightly so as not to cut the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os;	And if the bone is outside and hard, it must be pierced through internally, in such a way that cuts are made with thimbles, not all the way through so as not to pierce beyond the bone when tested, and there should be a margin or circle above the point, which does not allow the point to pass beyond the bone;
et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test;	and it must be that you have several of them, so that each returns to its place relative to the thickness of the bone, so that you have thimbles for all tests;
et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	And this is the form of the three ways of cauteries:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez;	The quality to pierce through the broken bone is that you place the cautery on the bone and turn with your fingers until you know that the bone is pierced;
puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures;	Then place the cautery elsewhere a little later, and do this all around. Then cut into the space of the bone that is between the teeth, doing so more subtly than you can, gently, just like we said, until you bring the bone to your hand or to any tool you have such as forceps;
et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	And make sure not to touch the brain or the pituitary gland.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	And when you have pierced and treated the bone, if necessary, resaw what was left of the bone with all another instrument like a tooth. But it should be sturdier and more delicate than the other tooth;
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens;	And if there remains no little bones, nor any scales, if you gently shake them with your tools;
puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	Then cleanse the wound of the bandages and ointments that we have mentioned.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus;	And another way to treat wounds is as Galen said, which is safer;
et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	and he uses strong ligation, and that's his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	Firstly, it is necessary to uncover a part of the bone, at the place where the fracture opens and moves, so that when you have uncovered this part, you will place under the tip of this lens-shaped incision, from which its shape is given:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os;	And do not cut from one side only, and divide the flesh into two parts, so that your cut is facing towards the bone;
puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	Then strike with a small hammer on it, so that you gently crush the entire bone, and be well aware of the wound material that is nearby.
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	If it opens to the bone, gently crush it, for the bone is well sensitive without harm and without fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the bone fracture doesn't penetrate just to the membrane, and the bone is cut only from above, with small pieces present, then after that abrasiveness, and remove the scales with a subtle razor you must have in various quantities, for administering the most suitable one to each area according to the treatise and the shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you are in front of large razors, and after even finer ones, and never cease doing this until it is done well.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement;	In each other type of hair cutting and delicate breaking, you must adapt according to its direction;
et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	And this is something that cannot be answered by the one who has devoted their study to this craft.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	And if the scab is discovered, it is necessary that you apply a linen bandage according to the size of the wound, and soak with rose oil, and place it on the wound;
puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil;	Then take another bandage doubled in two or three layers, and soak it with wine and rose oil, and place it on the first bandage;
et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	And do this as lightly as you can so that it does not weigh down the scab; then apply another bandage over it without pulling too hard that only the wound touches.
et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses;	And let it do so for one or two days, until the abscess has subsided, then release them, and administer medications such as roots of this herb, meal of garlic, incense powder, and myrrh, and similar things;
et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	And from these things make powder, put it on the wound, and administer those medications locally without causing irritation;
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice;	And see that the wound is kept clean, do not leave any ointment on it, nor let it become too swollen; because when swelling assembles under the skin tissue, it can move and constrict, causing great harm to the patient;
car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	And when one applies something sharp there, it cuts through from above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Then be careful therefore, if no accidents come to the patient as we have said, there is doubt without fear.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	And if no fear comes from that which we have applied, assuming it has this virtue, then you should take a portion of honey, and three parts of goose oil and one spoonful of glue, and spread them on the affected area;
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then apply the appropriate healing method until it is sound.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os;	Know that twice the parts above the nose are broken, or only one part by itself, for these are two bones;
et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	And that area is made of cartilage and does not break, nor allow bending or twisting forces, then it heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	And if one of the two parts is broken, you should bend your little finger or to the inside of the nose, and place an equal break within your index finger, and outwardly through the nostril, until the nose regains its natural form.
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And do this lightly, and beware that the patient does not feel pain through your actions.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is in the part above the nose and cannot come to the nostrils, it must be that you put it level with the tip of a hair a bit thick.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	And if the break is in two parts, redo the operation, and strive to restore on the first day, if you can;
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	But if not, after the seventh or the eighth day, when the abscess is dressed and calmed, then apply to the nose tip with a poultice of linen bandage, if the break is in one part.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est;	Or you may crush it from another side, if the break is there;
et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	And let them be as large as they fill out the cavities of the nose.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And they say no restorer thinks to moisten the warts with butter, and change each day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin;	I don't think it's quite right, but they should be moistened in the preparation of a mixture of egg whites and powder from grinding;
puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	Then leave the tent, until the bone is strong, and the cartilage hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi;	And do not use any goose feathers or ointments instead of tents, and if there's wind resistance, and the air stays stagnant, causing the patient to feel it among them;
or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	just do whatever you see.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if pus comes out through the nose as you work on it, then apply a wet cloth or cotton soaked in rose oil, or in a little pot of almond oil.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	And if abscesses do not come out, apply a plaster to the outside, made from ground frankincense and incense powder mixed with yolk of egg, then place it on light bandages and don't bind it tightly around the neck;
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	And if the rupture is small near the neck and broken into small pieces, use tools suitable for this task, then clean the wound from infected matter and sew it up, using plasters and ointments suitable for that purpose;
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there is no wound within the nose, then you treat it with remedies, and I place cloths soaked in vinegar, as long as it remains healthy.
de la routure de la mandibule	On the rupture of the jawbone
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jawbone is fractured and there is no wound on the surface, and only the breakage is external, not at all broken into two halves but rather split internally throughout, one can recognize it lightly.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide;	It is necessary, if the breakage is in the right part, that you bend your second finger on the inside of the knee;
et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	And if the breakage is in the left jawbone, then bend your second finger of the right hand and gently push the break inward, and do it with the other hand from behind, and place them evenly.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the fracture of the jawbone is divided into two parts, then it is necessary to provide extension for both halves, ensuring they are even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double;	And when tooth movements or rupture occur, stretch them with a gold thread or silver or silk thread, then place a wax on the broken jawbone, and place two layers of cloth on top.
et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And place on the cloth a well-made large slab or a piece of leather of equal size, long and wide according to the jawbone, and fasten it at several points with strings that you can find. Instruct the patient to rest and consume light meat portions.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet;	And if you notice the figure changing, dislocate it on the third day, then reset whatever has changed;
et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote;	and place them on top, using ground powder mixed with plenty of egg or saffron flour, after you have removed the wax.
et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez;	and place on the plaster a light cloth, and if the plaster hardens, and the patient's condition does not change, leave them until they are healed;
maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	Many times, it is healed within three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And when pus comes out during an incision, then apply what we have instructed many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee;	And if there's both breakage and injury together, remove any part of the bone that has been broken.
si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	if it is necessary to use instruments suitable for this task during the operation.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, widen it with fire according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all these pieces and there remains nothing, if the wound is wide, place one plaster suitable for it over it to promote healing until it heals.
de la forcele	By the power of
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres:	The forces break many times before, towards the shoulder, and breaking is according to three methods:
ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer;	Or it breaks and dries out in two parts, and there are pieces, and it is the lighter to restore;
ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	Or there is breaking with injury.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie;	And the operations are like when breaking occurs with injury, that you have two helpers, so that one slices off the shoulder where the strength breaks;
et li autres estende lou col vers la partie;	and the other extends along the neck towards the affected part;
puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	Then place the break evenly on your hands, so that the shape is as it should be, and there's neither appearance nor distortion.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit;	And if you need to extend further, then place a round sponge under the shoulder for the patient, of cloth or wool, and make it as large as your need dictates;
et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And they reduce it gently, restraining the spear with your hand, so that you make an even break, as is fitting.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot draw the head of the force outwards due to it coming forward, so that the patient lies on their back, and places a half pillow under their shoulder, and pushes the shoulder blade downwards, until the bone of the force is lifted.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus;	And direct the crack to your fingers, and if you find splinters, it's right that you split them;
et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as;	And pull out the fragments gently, and if the bone cannot join by any pressure, then cut to one of the incisions you have;
mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	but when you apply force to this tool, it helps to push out fluids:
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre;	and seems like a spoon, not completely inside, and be as wide as it needs to be, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the operation;
et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	and have two heads, as you see, and let one be wide, and the other narrow, just like the cut of the wound that you made when you treated the bones;
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	And when you are sure of the removal of pus, if you clean the wound, and if the rupture is small, or if you doubt about removing pus, then dress the wound with bandages and tents according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if pus comes out, if moisture arrives, apply oil roses and vinegar and wine, and place it on top.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	The grinding of the bone, when it concerns wounds and surgery, is to place on the bone a plaster made from the powder of the mill and some yolk of egg, and put light wads underneath, and apply a splint over it, if you need to.
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre;	Then take a very long band about the size of a palm in width, then place two layers of bandage over the wads, and apply plaster.
puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	Then take a strip of about three fingers in width and length, and wrap it around the bandage, such that only the edge of the bandage hangs down.
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide;	And set the candle near the burn, and turn the bandage up to the neck, and over the healthy elbow, and over the diseased elbow;
et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	And reset each part; and when you see that the candle's heat supports the wound growth, and you clearly see that the wax does not move over the fractured bone, then reward each day, and when it's removed, keep it restrained.
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut;	And let the diseased substance drain on his back, and place him with a small pillow under the elbow to lift the shoulder up;
si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors;	So ease the strain of the muscles by aligning the shoulder; or you tie his arm to the neck, and don't untie until such time as twenty days;
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez;	Then resume bandaging if you see it needs doing, and hold it in place and leave it like that until it is restored.
et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	And she is restored within the most 28 days, and in some cases does not exceed even one month.
de la brisure de l’espaule	Of the breaking of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement;	Sometimes it happens that the shoulder breaks or is wide at its end and not in the middle, and does not even extend as far as by touch;
si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	if you align it according to the shape of the break, and reset it according to its natural form, in all the ways that you can;
puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double;	then put on the shoulder powder from the mill with plenty of eggs, and apply gentle bandages, and place two layers of cloth.
puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment;	then place a wide and fine bandage, slightly larger than the shoulder, and where there is no movement on any part of the shoulder, use that hair from linen bandages so the bandage fits evenly.
et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor;	And then it restrains everything tightly into one large bend, so that the limb does not move from its place, and he checks each link every day;
et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit;	And every time when it dislocates, if it restrains, and puts the limb on equal footing if it is strong in its place, and lies the patient with their side on a table;
et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en XXV.	And the shoulder has been healed after 20 days or 25 days.
Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	And when these numbers have been completed, if it dislocates again and you are sure, because it is not an os that quickly takes hold lightly.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a bone piece appears first and not below the knee, then proceed by removing it, along with the abscess beneath, and do as we have instructed for treating wounds of muscle dislocation.
de la brisure dou pis	of the breaking of the foot
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc;	The limb is broken only once in the middle, but this happens rarely;
mais il brise sovent au defuer.	but it often breaks at the outer part.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in the middle, if it tilts downward and the patient feels intense pain throughout their body, along with loss of consciousness, immediately afterwards, and by chance vomits blood, and opens up the joints in the broken bones, and one can well perceive this.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient;	And in restoration if the patient lies on his back and stomach, then put your hands under his shoulders, press down his shoulders, and join the ribs of the two ribs together, combine them at your hands, and with skill make it equal to all manners you can do this as long as the shape of the bone is as it should be;
puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve;	Then place the plaster and cloths over the small salt pile, or another light stick, and wrap it in a cloth. Securely tie this around the broken bone so that it does not move;
et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint;	Then round out the binding on the back, and strain it appropriately. Every hour check the tension of this bandage; if it relaxes, then tighten it again;
et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures;	And if it seems necessary to loosen due to corrosion or itching that comes to the body, or pain or abscess, act quickly and loosen it. Remove the plaster, and treat with care whoever came into contact with it using appropriate remedies;
puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then remove the plaster, and hold it until it is healed.
de la brisure des costes	Of the breaking of the ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses;	The breaking of the ribs only comes about at their lower part near the back, and within them, and bend because they are spongy;
et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	And one feels it very much during the examination in the way it should.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And for the healing process, you should make the break equal, just as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And then apply plaster and bind with a bandage if needed.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile;	And if the breaking of the ribs is occurring internally, one feels great pain and piercing in the body, akin to weeping, because the bone punctures the membrane;
et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And it causes pain in the kidneys, everywhere and vomiting of much blood, and this is serious illness, and they used to treat it with a large amount of food.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if there are those who say that it is necessary to administer meats which swell the belly, in order to expel the wind from outside.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not follow this, for abscesses and pus do not come about unless they have arrived.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if they have arrived, heal them.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison;	And it is said that no one puts on the body suction cups for forming, as this appears reasonable;
toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	However, there is doubt as to whether the suction cup attracts the excesses to the body due to its weakness in placement.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they say that when treating the wound of an animal, one should cover it with moist wool in a hot oil, and place the bandages between the ribs to make the healing consistent all around. Then follow the treatment for pleurisy, meat, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac;	And if the patient feels intense pain that cannot be borne by the bone piercing through the skin, there is doubt as to whether it's safe for the patient to cut through their broken rib area and then place an instrument to protect the lung.
et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then one must cut the bone and gently drain it, and then stitch up the two edges of the wound if it's large, and treat with plasters until it heals.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu;	And if pus comes out from the abscesses, place oily bandages that have been moistened with rose oil on them, and place them on the wound;
et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And treat the wound while applying what is suitable for pus, and place gentle supports on the rib area where it should be applied, until it heals.
de la brisure dou col	of the break at the neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie;	No breakage occurs at the bones of the neck, and it does not bend;
et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	And similarly at the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to any person, and you wish to know if they will recover or not, take care; if you see their hands softened, swollen, and dead, and unable to move or extend them, and when you prick them with a needle, if they do not feel.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	You know that it is fatal in various conditions, and if they do not respond well when their limbs are restrained and there is no sensation, you know that the joint of the bone has been saved, and that the illness has been cured, as long as a treatment is applied.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit;	And if this sort of thing happens to the spine of the back, you need to know whether it is sound or not. Take care that his joints are softened, and if there are any symptoms they are with their hands, and on the back gusts of wind and loss without volition;
et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And when it has been affected on its belly, there is a loss of wind without volition.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when he is observed on his back and wants to sit up, if he cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz:	Know that these are deadly:
si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	if not attended to in its treatment.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this incident does not happen to him, then it is a simpler thing.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez;	And the treatment is that you remove any pus if there is an abscess, if you apply on the spine oil or egg yolk, until it calms down;
puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer;	Then place on one of the supporting plasters that are drying, and bind with a bandage, instructing the patient to rest.
et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And do not sleep on that part where he feels the pain, until it heals.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur;	And if any bone splits open, it is necessary to cover over its surface;
et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And sew the bone back together, then join the two edges of the wound if it's large with stitches, then treat with oil until it heals.
et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier;	And if the bone head (meaning 'the head of the bone') is broken, which is called 'the bone head', then pinch your pouch from your left hand, and place it evenly against your power with your other hand. Then apply the plaster and cover it up, should you need to do so;
puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Then they hold it. If there is any bone to be removed, they cut it out, and the surgeon treats the wound until it has healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	From the breaking of the bone of the hip
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief;	Sometimes the hip bone is broken, and if that happens, it might cause a small reduction in strength at the shoulder.
et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	And they continue for quite some time, reducing it until the shoulder is eased, and there's a sharp pain at the broken spot, and it swells where the bone was broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure;	And for the restoration, you extend your hand upwards as long as you're on the breakage.
et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li;	And know where the break is and what shape it has;
et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And if the break is only at the shoulder, put the break in an equal position, as long as it's in its natural shape.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the breakage is along the length of it or it declines towards the inside, then guide the patient so that they lie on their abdomen, as long as you are able to complete the repair of this breakage.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve;	And when you have set it equal, place it on a splint, then put it onto a staff or a rod, and keep the wound still, so it does not move;
et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	and place his arm under the ribs, until the rib is level.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on his side or on his back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit;	And if an abscess forms underneath and bursts, do not touch it, until the pain from the abscess subsides, and place something as we have mentioned before.
et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident;	and then return to the treatment, and apply pressure as needed, if there is no bad incident;
et c’est li maniere.	and this is how it should be done.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	From the breaking of the shoulder.
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres:	The shoulders are those that are between the collarbone and the top of the shoulder, and if it is broken, you should restore it according to one of the two methods:
dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The first one is to take a rod of medium thickness, according to this shape:
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege;	And tie with two shoulder straps, and lift them up, then position the patient on the seat;
puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval;	Then put his broken arms on the rod until they reach the waist, and make a bend of the rod halfway, then lift him up or let the assistants extend him downwards;
puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	Then place the brace so that it is evenly on both his hands until the splint returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other method is that you place the patient on their back, and tie their hand to their neck, then instruct two assistants to have one cut off from where it's broken in his hands, and the other cuts off everything up to one finger length, stretching each one to its respective side.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is more fierce, then bind it tightly against the wound pain, and above the wound, and extend each of the assistants to their share.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure;	And if the splint is near to the shoulder joint, it must be that you put one strap at the waist and the other towards the elbow, under the splint;
et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute;	And similarly when the splinter is directed towards the knife, if you must insert a thread lightly, without strain, until the splinter is even both at the skin and on the blade;
puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	Then place the splinter evenly, as is necessary, and extract it, if pus appears do not stop.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez;	And if pus does appear let it come, do not extract immediately up to seven days, and place on greased wool and oil until the pus is relieved.
puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein;	Then extract it, and the method of extraction is that you place the plaster on the splinter, then join the arm to the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or under the breast;
et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And put the brace, and hold it to the shoulder and on the arm, so that the arm is straight up instead of hanging down, without anything preventing it, or if the bone is not moving.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part;	And if you doubt that the bone does not move, use these tools, and place one on the break larger and stronger than the others, and have two inches between each tool, and make sure every tool is large enough to pass through the fracture three inches from either side;
puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	Then apply pressure on the tools as I instructed at the beginning of this chapter on fractures, more forcefully and less while spreading them out.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit;	And if you observe the setting of the tools and the constriction, as we have said, during the time that you restore the broken limb, and if there is concern about any pus, then leave it to be bound for up to seven days, as we have said.
puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	Then check the bandage every three days to ensure there's no itching or swelling around the wound, or that the surgical scars do not come down because it is too tight.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If the address, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac;	And if no such incidents occur, and the dislocation does not heal within three days or longer, let the patient sleep on his back, and keep his hands on his stomach;
et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens;	And place under the shoulder a cushion filled with even wool, and observe every hour of the day or after meals, that the shape of the broken limb does not move or that the joints become soft;
si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz;	if it is cured through the virtue of medicine, and give him the meat we have prepared in such a way that the meat reaches the finest particles;
et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	and when he begins to recover, if it becomes strong.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout;	And it is customary that the shoulder and leg should be re-established within forty days of everything;
et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	And thus one must release it and apply baths and remedies of ointments for the affected area.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the tightening is ugly and tangled, it should remain to be relieved for one or two months.
de la brisure du bras	of the breaking of the arm
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet;	The arm is made of two bones, which are called the "foscile" pair; one is small and it covers the pit.
et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi;	And the other is large, and this one is inside, opposite the small pair;
par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	By chance only the large foscile breaks, or only the small one, by chance they break together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations;	When the small fosciles break, the restoration is light, and healing occurs;
et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	And when the large ones break, recovery is difficult, and more painful than when they break together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If only the small bone is broken, it should be slightly extended and made even.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort;	And if it's a large distortion, then it must be held tighter.
et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor;	and stretch it over the knee, and cut the hand pouch above the others, and place the small fingers below the other fingers, and have the patient cross their own limbs, and have the knee in front of them higher than the limbs, so that the patient doesn't suffer any discomfort;
puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	then extend the ministers' arms to the part above their hand, or at the elbow, and have other ministers on the other side above.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then set the eyes even, according to their best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if in the break into pieces, you place each one in its own location, and if there is none that grabs onto the bone, and you cannot restore it to its location, then do it upon and through the bone, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler;	And if about wound pain, I've spoken in the singular chapter;
si pren la cure.	so take the cure.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz;	And if during the beginning of restoration, abscesses appear, then make a plaster wrap from rose oil and white beeswax, so that it is neither too hard nor too soft;
et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	And I lift it slightly from above, until the pain of the abscess eases.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres;	And then dress the wound, and I apply the plaster of the powder from the mill with plenty of egg, indeed place the wicks, for among the wicks, that of the healing is stronger, and a little wider than the others;
et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions:	And know that there should be six or more wicks or blades arranged in various positions:
soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II;	for if the healing is within one of the bones, or in two;
et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre;	and hold more above the healing than anywhere else, and all days less as I said at the beginning of this chapter;
et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres;	and let the bandages covering the healing be soft and moist, and not be hard or rough;
et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	And let the children, which he tightens with linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And restore the member and the link after some days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez;	And if any bad accidents happen to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, it is necessary for you to immerse the limb in hot water until the itching subsides;
et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	and let the limb not be left to rest.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then continue the process of ligature removal, and if the ligaments are loosened and the bones have been exposed, and similar actions are taken.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if precautions are taken so that no further constriction can come to the limb because it's too tight, it is necessary to soften it with heat and let it rest for a few days until the constriction ceases, then resume constriction.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, or if no untangling happens up to twenty days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos;	otherwise, when lying down, then place his hands on his neck, and if his necks are equal, and guard against movement and disturbance, and sleep on his back;
et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	and know that this healing is restored in 30 days or 35 days, and perhaps in 20 days, depending on the concoctions and temperaments of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of the breaking of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	You know that in the back of the hand and on us, few breaks occur, and only fold many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement;	And when the hand's foot is broken or bent, it should be treated by having the patient hold their fingers spread and straight in front of them evenly.
puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint;	Then place his hand on the extended table, and stretch out the fingers of the broken bones, placing them evenly, until they are well aligned;
et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu;	and apply the bandage and splints; if no pus comes out, then place a splint according to the size of his shoulder.
et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	and wrap it in an inner linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie;	And if the fracture is in the armpit near the belly of the hand, make a hole in the cloth, and instruct the patient to hold it over their broken hand.
et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And then there is tension in a long cape, and whether the shield's strength resembles the size of a hand plant as well, and it is tightened, just as it should be.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is at the front, it must be that you place one splint above and another below on the foot part. So that your hands are open and straight; then tie them entirely around the hand, and seal the joint between the fingers.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient;	And if the breaker comes to any of our toes, it's because he has hugged us, if he puts them equally, just as it should be;
et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve;	And he tightens with the heel, and if you see that placing a small shield upright helps to relieve the pain, and it doesn't move;
et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés;	And if the pain is at other toes, like in the index or any of the others, if he places them equally, and ties them with the healthy toe that follows;
ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet;	Or you tie them altogether in an 'I' shape, that is better, or you place a shield on it, as if you are holding;
et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And take care in the restoration and placement of each wound, and help those who come for it, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	Of the broken thigh
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier;	The bones of the thigh are often broken; and well one sees this when they turn both forward and backward;
et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	And for the restoration, it is tying above the breakage, and another below it.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment;	And the muscles lie over this face, then stretch each minister's ligament to its equal part;
et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	This is when the break is within the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the fracture is close to the root of the thumb, then one should apply the ligaments towards the knife, and the other ones over the breakage.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval;	And also if it's near the knee, then place its ligaments above the knee, and let its extension downwards;
puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	Then set the bones to their natural position with both hands, as long as it follows its natural shape, and then apply plaster, and the bandage, should there be any abscesses.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure;	And if there is pus at the wound, let it subside then return to your work and your treatment;
li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	The labor is performed in an orderly manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus;	It is necessary that you wrap around the burn with a bandage folded two or three times, and keep the excess. Then turn the leg until the heels reach the base of the foot, and thread the first piece lengthwise between the cuff and the leg, under the knee and upwards; tie the end of the string above.
puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe;	Then wrap the bandage around the leg and the calf, then place the stakes over the burn. Place a stake on the bone of the leg;
puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure;	Then use a loop of eight threads between the leg and calf of fabric to make an even pressure, then start to bind in turns of three or four around the burn;
et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint;	And when you go further beyond the incision, and loosen less;
puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet;	Then open the two knots of the thread you have placed between the thigh and the calf, and tie three points that are above it. Then return under the body of the thread until you see beneath the foot;
et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	And hold it so that it doesn't move from its place, then leave it like this. Then until no further abscess appears or swelling or other sign occurs.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois;	And if it happens, reset it and address what comes, as we have said many times;
et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet;	And if there are pieces of bone that catch, then it is to your advantage to use force, as long as you can;
et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer;	And if one cannot, then it is necessary to cut open the joint, and draw out force;
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And treat as we have said, until it becomes clean.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras;	And each time the heart is broken in such a way that one puts in the garlic, as in the shoulder and arm;
toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	Nevertheless, after this treatment made, there is no injury to the patient.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	Know that the flesh is restored within one day, or somewhat less, or somewhat more, depending on the variety of complexions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	from the groove of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	Know that in the joint of the knee, there is little breaking, but it bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, it's usually just a crack, or it might be lost, causing pain in all injuries and being felt well by one.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet;	And the restoration consists in making what is round at its ends equal until they move as can be done;
puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant;	Then apply the plaster, and if necessary, put a round garlic on it, and hold it in place as needed. Then reorder all the positions that we have mentioned for other fractures, such as abscesses and similar conditions;
si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If faced with each accident, attend to what it requires of you, until your mind is clear.
de la brisure de la jambe	Regarding the breaking of the leg.
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»;	Know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is called by right "malleolus", and the other is called "fibula".
et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	And if any injury or break occurs like in the arm, treatment for it is similar to that of an arm, equally so; and the operations are all one. And if both bones of the leg are broken together, then the leg turns in every direction.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the delicate bones are broken, then twist in front.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien;	And if the large bone is broken, one feels great pain and sees it clearly;
et torne desoz.	And it twists around.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement;	Then apply extension, and set them equally, and fix the joints in place;
mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere;	But still, it is necessary if the fracture is ugly, and there are many fragments, that the extension be smaller and more gentle;
et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	and guide according to your virtue.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz;	And when you have completed your task, take two wooden poles that harden and support the leg on both sides, and let them be as long as from the thigh down to the ankles;
puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien;	Then wrap them both with cloths above and below, and tie in the middle as well, and at this binding, let neither leg droop to the right nor to the left, and thus it is well done.
et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie;	And no one administers any bandage all the way down the leg, and it is made of wood, and you place the leg to guard against movement, and this is properly done in the fracture where there is injury;
et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident;	And move each leg every day to see if there's an abscess or any other incident;
si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	if the treatment continues as long as it is effective.
de la brisure des os dou piet	From the breaking of bones at the knee
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle it does not come from breaking, but when bones at the knee are broken, there is a break and in the legs, powerlessness occurs in multiple positions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus;	And if it happens with a bone in the foot fracture, and you see these bones mount one over the other, place the afflicted feet on the ground like they want to go, and then put your foot under his, where the bones are raised, press them so hard that their senses return in their legs;
puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	Then apply the plaster and place it upwards, put a small table under the foot with two shoulders filled, then restrain at the foot on the opposite side, then when you have wrapped it in bandages around, and other things you need.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days have passed, remove the bandage, for you will find that the bones are equal, whether they are broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main;	And if any of his fingers are broken, if you restore them, just like we have said about the fingers of the hand;
puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment;	Then place the broken finger at an angle corresponding to the length of the finger, and make it slightly wider; then set this over the board that I mentioned, and hold it firmly in place.
et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet;	And if there are two or three, or more, broken, for each finger place an applicator according to its quantity, wrapped in a single layer of linen, and hold the board firmly in place.
et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And while being on top of the board under the stomach of the patient, make sure it is well aligned.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit;	And you must not forget the other things that I have said about other breaks, once we have discussed them;
et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And assist with each injury as it is necessary.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	Regarding the breaking of the bone in the hand.
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier;	When the bone of nature in the woman is broken, if she is made to stay swollen, then she is laid on the lower part of the back, and held from behind.
puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto;	Then fill the cavity that is natural to the patient with cotton, and put in similarly large amounts as needed;
puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto;	Then stand the woman up, and raise her back gradually, and then jump out the cotton until it reaches the entry of natural anatomy, and return the bone with this action;
et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor:	And when she wishes to urinate, remove the cotton, and once she has urinated, let her return to it, and thus do this for seven days or more.
si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature;	If the break will be restored, and if you see fit, take a goat bladder, and fasten it at one end with a reed, and let the entire bladder fill into natural anatomy;
puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens:	Then breathe into the straw form, until the bladder is inflated inside:
la nature si revenra li brisure;	Nature will cause the break to heal;
puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then fill it with cotton, and let it remain for some days, until it is sound.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche;	And when the bone of the hand or foot of a man is broken, or of a woman, if you restore it as we have said for the thigh bone;
et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	And do not ignore these neighboring breaks that he who puts his study and use to it should attend to, and listen to my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration:	For the break signifies many different positions for the correct way of restoration:
enten le donques.	Understand it therefore.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge;	In the testicles, when they are broken, take a goose's neck and insert it into the testicle;
puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	Then wrap it with lint, and leave it for three days or until healed from the inside, and it will heal quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	By fracture with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for the one who has a fracture with a wound, even if it's large, like in the case of the thigh bone or shoulder blade or similar, that they be surgically treated now, so that the surgeries we have mentioned testify to this.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is clean, then seal it with vitriol, or if you have nothing else, then start to treat the fracture at that same hour, or on that day, assuming no abscesses appear.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if abscesses appear, then let the treatment continue until a new day, as long as the abscess is calming down, and don't touch it on the third or fourth day, for you would cause harmful accidents.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the bone is broken and visible at its exposed knee, then it should be put back together lightly with your hands, in a small extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie;	And if it extends beyond what you can equip with your hands, take this iron instrument which has seven or eight inches in length, and the width is according to the size of the wound;
et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure;	And for this, the surgeon must apply three or four times, according to how many times he needs it in each case of injury;
et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And make it round and slightly thick so that it doesn't bend under pressure on the limb inside your body, and make it pointed at both ends, and large in the middle forward, like this:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent;	And it is called "palainche" for this reason, so that the curved shoulder should be placed on the head of the visible bone;
et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And when it is put back once, as long as it regrows, and so that one is equal to the other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the break is subtle and the tools cannot properly grasp the bone, it requires that you place the tip of the bone until the tools have capability.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir;	And if you cannot return the bone back, as we have said, if you have access to an appropriate tool for this, such as a saw or file, by your power;
puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	Then remove the one that is stuck in the bone due to its hardness and small flakes.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is returned, and the patient feels intense pain afterwards, know that it has not been placed in its natural position.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit;	Do so until it is in its place, then wet the bandage in black medicinal wine, and properly if it is internal;
et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption;	and do not put tallow or any other thing that might smell on the wound, which could lead to gangrene and decay;
puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure;	Then administer these [treatments] when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound exposed, and cover it entirely, according to the size of the wound, and be sure to ensure that the wound is not constrained with bruising.
et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois;	And many times this has happened to the fool, and it brought either death or corrosion upon the patient every time;
et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	and let the compresses be softer and more soothing than other injuries.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles;	And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that harmful accidents have occurred there, as we have said, and you find pain in the limb, then it should not be placed under these [treatments];
mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	but wrap entirely around the limb instead of these compresses, with hard cloths and tie them in place.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see that after one or two days the wound is swelling, remove whatever you have put on it with vinegar, and apply healing ointment for wounds, such as the fourfold medicine and similar ones.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it must be that you dislocate the limb twice a day, morning and evening, until it is joined and sound.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it should have been so that the limb is bound in such a way that the bone slides down slightly.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if it continues for the whole day, and it cannot join anymore, know that there are small fragments of bone, so you must seek to open the wound with a probe, and remove all these necessary pieces that cause pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a sinus develops in the hand or any other form of corruption, it is necessary to treat it according to what was instructed in the chapter before this one.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse;	And when the bone is broken, and an opening made in the body, such as the bones of the shin or shoulder, or other parts of the large limbs, do not attempt to set them immediately because many times this leads to death, but leave it until they heal;
par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues;	By chance, wait for up to 20 or 30 days, then treat the wound if possible;
et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And if you cannot, leave it as it is.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	The burns that come from sweat
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre;	Many times after the healing of the breakage, especially if it's near the joint, there's something to observe regarding the shape of the limb;
et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	And by chance, the limbs cannot perform their natural functions.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres:	Therefore, take care if it seems that there is fluid:
si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil;	If they administer stiff medicines such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, as well as sarcocolle, caragana, and similar others, do so by taking any of these things individually or all together, and mix them with stoptive wine or in abundance of an egg or with oil;
et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors;	and apply them on the wound as wafers, and hold them well in place, and don't remove them with your hands during the day;
et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee;	and then reset it again, repeating until all dislocations have been removed;
ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite;	or you hold onto a well-made piece of plaster.
car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres;	for the property of plaster is such that it extracts all swellings from the limbs;
et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent;	and if the dislocation has turned into hardness like bone and needs extraction, if it has formed a lump underneath, and remove any excess that is visible.
ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	If you are handling it on any bone, as long as it is intact, and during treatment until it heals.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	Of the limb that becomes weak after an illness.
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes:	When the fracture of the bone has been restored and remains after the limbs are weak and fine, this happens due to various reasons:
de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit;	It's because when it was tied too tight and wasn't tied as it should have been;
ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre;	Or perhaps because there were too many ligatures, and the body couldn't come into its own in the limb;
ou por multitude d’arosement;	or due to excess bleeding;
ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre;	or because of too large movements, not in their time;
ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	Or perhaps because there is little blood in his body, it becomes weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui;	And the treatment involves you feeding the patient, making them weak, until the sickness has multiplied within them;
et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce;	and administer baths, and give them joy and laughter;
puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre;	then apply wax to the limb, so that the wax attracts towards the large artery, and often rinse it with tepid water, until the swelling aligns with the limb;
et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	and restores his natural appearance.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	The member becomes twisted after recovery.
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil:	When the limbs are twisted after restoration, and if bones were broken openly, even though the shape of the limb is deformed, still it does not lose its natural function:
si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre;	do not believe the fools who say one must break the limb anew entirely, and many people have done this in our land;
et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors;	And these actions are criticized, and they lead to great harms, and by chance one dies;
toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses;	Still, if nodations and torture are involved, they should be treated with hot water, or if soothing herbs are cooked, such as the leaves of the angelica plant, roots, and meadowsweet, among similar things;
et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus;	And you should apply a soothing ointment, such as properly prepared tallow, and take angelica oil, and mix it with lard or the oil of sesame, then apply it topically;
ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	Or you take dried figs and grind them with cow dung, and similar remedies that reduce inflammation.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And no time is removed the operation of rubbing continuously and for a long time with wet hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And let each body part move once an hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement;	And if the stiffness has hardened and become as firm as bone, such as in bones, and requires being treated with hot iron, if it's necessary to operate up until the bone, making incisions gently and delicately;
et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And apply concentration and study to the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	This begins the book on dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing great pain and injury to the patient.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation affects none, if now is needed bring back without hesitation.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu;	For if one delays, they swell up, and by chance, when one tries to reset them at the joint;
por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez:	By heaven, it is not right for one to move them at that time when they are swollen:
maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	Often brings on nausea and other pains;
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez;	However, when this happens, if you find the patient is ill, then leave them alone until all abscesses are relieved;
puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	Then immerse the limb in hot water and oil, then reset it gently, and treat each limb according to how the treatment should occur at its joint.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have organized the chapters about shoulder dislocations up to this point.
des mandibules	of the jaws
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres:	Sometimes the jaws are dislocated backward, and dislocations of both occur in two ways:
ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc;	These are somewhat hardened at their ends, and slightly softened;
ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	They are completely dislocated, hanging towards the anus, and they let saliva from their mouth which they cannot contain or close their mouth, and wrap their tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it can often return through several positions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	And if it is whole and complete, you must reset it quickly, without delay;
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars;	and in such a way that the ministers cut into the chief of the bad side, and thrust the sights from his pocket with one hand into the root of the dislocation of the jaw within the mouth, if the dislocation is two parts;
et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal;	and the other should be done with both hands to make it even;
et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And instruct the patient to soften them, his jaws, and move them in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And guide her until she settles back into its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement;	And if it is difficult to return them, especially when they are the two jaws combined, so that their heads are immersed in hot water and oil, until lightly resetting them;
ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	Nor be troubled to set them again, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	And when they are returned equally, and the mouth of the patient is closed properly with soothing, then place wet cloths in a poultice made from rose oil and beeswax, then bind them loosely with moist thread;
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	And let the patient rest on their back, and have their shoulders lying between two pillows, so that they do not move to either side, nor try to strain, but only consume light food, until the pains subside, and secure the jaws;
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And then judge if he wants to eat lightly, and there is no work in opening the mouth for eating and drinking, until the lower jaw is well healed and cured.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two mandibles cannot be properly aligned within an hour and are not converted back to their original positions, then fevers and recurrent swelling occur, along with occasional abdominal discomfort, and occasionally, vomiting of pure fluids.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions;	And when you see that, then know it's destruction;
et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	And many times has death occurred to those it befalls, within nine days.
de la forcelle	from the lever
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The strength cannot relieve from within the middle of the back and at its base, and is dislocated outwards every time, and one feels this well indeed.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras;	And the healing is that the patient lies on their back and extends their arms;
et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra;	And then press the limb against your palm, and it will return to its proper shape;
puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	Then place on the plaster and the bandage, and keep it in place;
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer;	And the head which is towards the blade cannot be dislocated;
se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit;	If it cannot stay in place even once, then reset it to its original position, just as we have said.
puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then place on the plaster and bind it tightly, then instruct the patient to rest until they are healed.
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And similarly, bring back the shoulder blades when it has returned to its place after being dislocated.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	Concerning the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres:	Know that the shoulder is only dislocated according to three ways:
de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz;	The first way is when it dislocates from the part of the clavicle towards downward;
et li seconde est a la partie dou pis;	And the second way is when it dislocates from the part of the base;
et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	And by chance dislocates from the top part, and this happens rarely.
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners;	And does not dislocate behind for the shoulder, and does not dislocate inside for the nerves;
et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment;	And it gets dislocated multiple times from above to below, even in those with little flesh, for these jump out quickly.
a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	For those who have enough flesh, it jumps to the bones and returns to them.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And by chance, some men suffer from impact or fracture, and the shoulder swells due to an abscess, and they believe that it is dislocated because of this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains;	So you must verify it, as long as you are sure;
et adonques encomence la cure.	And then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	And you will recognize dislocation when it moves towards the shoulder, and you'll make a distinction between the diseased shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find a clear manifestation of their diversity;
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes;	And you will find a hollow at the shoulder's head, and from the elbow to the shoulder, like it's an opening;
et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	And the patient cannot bring their hand to their nose, nor move it with any movements;
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	Furthermore, if it is dislocated at the top, as long as it isn't completely hidden, because you clearly find it at the socket;
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	This method of dislocation can only be resolved by repositioning, when it is new, or if the child has been injured.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu;	And the method is that the ministers lift the hand from the flesh at the top, then place their thumbs on the socket, and lift the joint upward forcefully to the shoulder;
et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz;	And the ministers lift the hand, then extend it upwards, before placing it on top of something.
si venra hastanment.	If it comes quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude;	And if it does not come out as we have said within several days after, it is necessary that the patient be bathed in hot water;
et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	and the attendant should apply gentle soothing treatments, such as a decoction of rue, fenugreek and borage in hot water, and it should be administered;
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	then sew the wound on the back of the patient, and place a pillow of evenly soft wool under their buttocks, neither too hard nor too soft. Then place the heel against the pillow, and raise the shoulder joint gently, and guide the hand towards the body of the patient;
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval;	and another attendant should keep hold on the shoulder joint from below, so that it does not move upwards;
celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	this shoulder should now return to its position, and if you see that the realignment is being done in this manner:
et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides;	And indeed you must have a space at home that is larger than the person;
et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	And make it straight toward the chest, and place your shoulder under the edge of the person, and lift the edge up so that the body hangs down below.
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	And another helper should stretch out their hand from behind the body towards the belly.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too weak, they cannot support anything heavy with him, and the dislocation returns immediately.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere:	And you can reset it in other ways as well:
et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	And you place the long stake in the ground, so that the shoulder is also positioned like a pistol, and it should not be too large or too greasy;
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust;	Then place it under the body, but so that it has straps supporting it from below, and the person should be lying long with the length of the stake.
puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	Then extend her hand towards the other side, form it, and the joint will return to its place quickly;
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure:	and if she does not wish to return through all these things that we have said, then perform this treatment:
pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	take two elbows of strong firewood and four sticks that are wide; have the head ready to be inserted from above into the opening, according to this form:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide;	then bind the head to the rod with fabric underneath, so that the rod does not injure the patient, then place it into the opening under the affected area;
et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part:	and extend your arms on the rod for its entire length, bind the shoulder onto the rod, and place the arm at the head of the hand, then put the arm on one end of a large stick, allow her hands to hang downwards, and leave her body hanging from the other side:
li jointure reva ens maintenant.	The joint has now been reset.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when she is there, in whatever way it may be, if you must put on the seat of the dislocation an equal thread, then place plastered with powder from the mill, together with incense and egg oil, all over the shoulder and around it. Then remove that which was placed upon the seat after a while, and retie the bandage on top of the plastering, and hold the hand at its neck, and keep your hands in this state for some time.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost;	And it is necessary that he eat little, until the limbs become stronger, for they will heal faster;
et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve;	and then eat more after about 5 or 7 days, and start moving them;
et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	and if it is hardened and not softened, then it is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is out of place due to moisture that has come upon it, or for some other reason, then you must administer three cauterizations to it, as was described in the chapter on cauterizations.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis;	And if you do all this, and it releases after about 7 days, but the joint does not hold, and cannot lift his arm up, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is compressed or stretched or weakened;
et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And know that the joint will never properly return to its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure;	The dislocation occurring towards the buttocks and breasts or behind, if it is caused by pushing and stretching of the hands, and another treatment is applied elsewhere;
et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And treat as long as it is clean.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after healing there comes weakness in the limb, and delayed movements, then the patient should take frequent baths with hot water until that weakness is alleviated, and returns to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	From the dislocation of the shoulder joint
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient;	It's dislocated at the elbow joint and with poking it returns;
et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien;	And it's dislocated from all sides, and in front as well as behind, and the dislocation is not responded to, because one can clearly see and feel it;
et desalue selonc chescune figure.	And dislocates according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the diseased skin with healthy tissue, if you can see it clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is knotted, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder to any degree.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener;	And it must be reset in this manner that abscesses are removed and flow away, for if they were to flow outwards instead, there would be blame for trying to reintroduce them.
et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier;	And by chance cannot be reset completely, even when it is behind;
si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	It's worse than other dislocations and causes more pain, and by chance death comes from it.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains;	And this restoration occurs, when it is such that one can bring it back, that you extend his hand to your two hands;
et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And his arms are spread out, and the hands are directed towards the center of the chest in all directions, forwards and backwards, and push the joint to its place on his wrists or at the base of his palm, as long as it returns to its position.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if there is a dislocation in front, it returns when they double their hand against their own and push from the base of the palm with the knife that has been inserted.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension;	And if it doesn't want to return to place, administer strong stretching;
et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension;	And if two ministers stretch the arm and keep it stretched by both hands, so that it does not move during stretching;
puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	Then turn the arm in all directions, then when you have wrapped a double flag long and wide around it;
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	And when the eyes touch the joint with their hand, if they apply some oil to soften the joint, then press the joint firmly, until it heals;
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And when it's in place, she places it on dry plaster with a poultice of an egg, holds it steady, and lets the arm hang by the neck towards the diseased area, and leaves it for some days, then releases it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse;	And if the joint is firmly in place, she releases the bandage, and leaves it.
et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis;	And if you see that the joint is not being placed well, then start the plaster and the bandage again, and leaves it like this for some days, until it's firmly set;
puis le deslie.	Then releases it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez;	And if they feel pain after the displacement of the joint is reset, and it moves again, then they should bathe in hot water and generously scrub, pressing until their discomfort subsides;
ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	Or you place a sheep's fat on the joint, then leave it for one day and one night, then the surgeon performs an operation, or the person enters into a bath;
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain;	And when it sweats, gently rub the joint, then put the fat back on, and then enters into a bath;
et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And do this two or three times until it heals properly;
et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus;	And if you see that, put on wet cow's dung mixed with butter and apply it;
si revenra a sa disposition.	If it returns to its normal state.
li dislocation de la main	the dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures.	The hand joint is dislocated, and the return is gentle, more so than other joints.
Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	Otherwise, it is necessary to bring it back immediately into its place while it's dislocated, so that the limb swells or there is pus discharge.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	And the process of bringing it back should be like this: you place the bad hand on a board and extend the helper's hand, so that when the patient puts their palm against the appearance of the joint, you hold until they recover.
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu;	Otherwise, you should check if it's correctly back in place;
adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	Then have the patient bend and stretch their back of the hand on a board during extension and retraction.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, then have the patient place the back of their hand on the table, and you mirror their hand onto that appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	If she returns now, that's quite well.
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	But if not, when the pressure of plastering material relieves abscesses, and it is left without restarting.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put her back in place after some days, if the joint remains twisted;
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout:	and it does not harm the patient for as long as the hand is immobilized, and cannot force anything at all:
adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere;	so you know that the nerve has been cut, or the artery;
si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	if there is no other way to apply force except with the cautery in this case, and by chance there is no other option.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when his hands are in place, apply the plaster we have mentioned, then strain it and leave it for five days, then release it and leave it as such.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he can't move it well and there's no crack, then apply hot water, and rub until it is clean.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	Regarding the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	No matter how many times the elbow of the hand is dislocated in each direction, no matter on the back of the palm or belly;
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	So apply pressure, and hold the dislocation in your fists until it heals. Then support the head of the shoulder, and gently guide it towards the part that is separated.
et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor;	and leave it for two days, and then place him evenly on that day;
et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut;	and bind it in the manner we have described, and remove the binding on that day, and allow him to move gently, and re-bind on the next day;
et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do this repeatedly, until it is properly aligned, and follow the same procedure if it has been dislocated in the arm pit area. Proceed in the manner you did before, until it heals;
et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	and do so likewise when it has been dislocated on the other side.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	of the heel, of the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the heel, or the back, or multiple heels are dislocated, if there is no treatment, because death rushes to the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I.	And the symptoms are that the discharges jump without being voluntary, and cannot be held back. Numerous times, they soften parts of any limb or both of his legs or arms.
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars;	And often, the lungs divide into four parts;
celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	That which divides at the back is called "gilbositez":
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance:	The treatment involves rewarding when the gilbositez has come from childhood:
si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	If there is no treatment or healing at all.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	And that which comes from falling or impacts or similar things, according to the old methods of treatments described in great words, it does not yield any significant benefit;
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	but I have abbreviated it according to my intention and formed instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	I state that when the gilbositez occurs at the belly frontwards, there is no danger or harm;
et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	And also about what comes straight into two ribs, and cannot be cured outwardly but only that which belongs specifically to the back, as I say;
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	And when the patient's health extends up to his face on one side equally, and has tension over him, so it does not bruise;
puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	Then place one ember at the head in the ground and make another on top, and tie a string under the buttocks with respect to the disease near the skin, and make another at the hips, and at the knees, and at the ankles;
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons;	And two assistants know how to handle the strings, one at the head and the others on top, among the two embers;
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	And be well closed, the ember as we have said, and the patient places her palms on the top of the formed ember until she regains consciousness.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	And if it doesn't return through this cure, take a board of three lengths long and place it vertically on the skin surface. If the illness is at the side, place the head of the board vertically over the affected area, then put the center of the board above the spine;
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu;	and place his feet on the other side of the board, and press firmly until he returns to its original location;
et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And if you see that it happens at the elbow which turns towards the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	And if you place two torches at the head of the sick person's arm, one hand's length apart, and in between each torch, directly underneath and above them, a palm's width of space that is half a hand.
et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent;	And place one piece of charcoal in each torch, where the elbow bends, and ensure that the torches are firmly buried in the earth, so they do not move.
et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	And between each two sticks there is one stick turning, since they turn when you connect them, and in the two turns there are two small sticks of the length of a palm, to turn the hinge;
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And then join the link that is among the screws towards the hinge near the head, and the other link towards the feet at the other hinge. Each of the assistants turns their hinge throughout the entire link, and the masters place the spine evenly as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when it is even, place a desiccating plaster with plenty of egg on it, then the hot rods, and then an emetic tablet that is three inches long. This cleanses the area around the boil and the healthy portion of the spine, then tie it with a string as we have said, letting the patient experience subtle hunger until they are sane.
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant;	And if no improvement comes at the end of health, it is necessary to administer softening and moistening medicines, together with the elixir that we have mentioned before.
et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations;	And whenever you administer an oak piece, and each time there appears the appearance in the lower spine of the back, and be careful that it is a dislocation;
et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption:	And it's the bone that opens, so we must not have any presumption:
par aventure feroit venir la mort.	By chance it would bring death.
des dislocations de la hainche	On the dislocations of the hip
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures;	Know that the hips and shoulder joints only come from dislocations, not like other joints;
et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties:	And the hip joint is dislocated according to four parts:
dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier;	From top to bottom, and from front to back;
et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	And more from top to bottom, and somewhat less in front to back.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	And the knowledge of its dislocation from within is that when you join the diseased leg with the healthy one, it's longer, and the diseased knee opens more than the healthy one, and the diseased knee cannot bend like the healthy one would.
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And it's where the limbs are swollen due to pus accumulation because the shoulder joint is coming into contact with it.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of him who comes to death is that this event is contrary to what precedes.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement;	And the signs for someone who has been injured in front are that their leg is properly aligned according to completion;
toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	However, it does not bend the knee without pain, and if one tries to make it do so, it cannot before, and retains its urine, and swells the ankle, and when it walks, it goes over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of him who goes behind, are that he cannot spread his knee, nor double it, and this leg is more twisted than the other one, and his ankle is softened, and the shoulder joint comes out under the ribs at the top of the back.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure;	The restoration of this semblance of dislocation involves that you recognize if the dislocation is old, and it remains according to its position, so there is no treatment;
et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	and it should not be assumed about it.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre;	And for those where the dislocation is fresh, and there are four ways of dislocation, you should quickly return the joint, stretching it inside and outside, moving it to the right and left;
par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	By chance if it returns, there is no need for further treatment.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	And if it doesn't return in this manner, you should apply strong force and press the leg strongly with both hands, or to one place bound above the knee;
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe;	And another attendant extends his hand over it in such a way that he pushes his hands under the axilla, then forces him with a single effort up to his waist.
et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	and another person holds the other end of the string;
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And they extend upwards and downwards all at once, until the patient rises from the ground in one go, and stays hanging.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This stretching method applies to four similar situations; and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is correct.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance.	If this doesn't happen, then treatment should be given according to its appearance.
Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	When the dislocation is in the shoulder joint, it's necessary to have the patient lying on their healthy side, then place the string under the root of the axilla. Afterwards, raise the leg which is out of the socket, and pull the string upwards towards the socket, using force;
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment:	Then ask for other helpers to hold his arms, and encircle the large part of the elbow muscle, and extend it towards the back in line.
si revenra a son leu maintenant;	If it returns to its place now;
et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	And this method of dislocation is lighter than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres;	And if you can't squeeze it in this way as we have said, then you should bind the two legs of the patient together with a strong and solid rope above both ankles and both knees, and make sure that the diseased leg is extended more than the other;
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc;	Then have it hung from the top of a post, and allow for two long lengths of land above it;
puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	Then command the helper to encircle the elbow joint, and have other helpers accompany with the patient, who should encircle the elbow in its form. For now, the joint returns quickly.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	And when the dislocation is at the front, if the patient lies down, as we have said in the case of someone with arthritis, and pulls on the leg's tendon directly over the painful area and also on the chest.
puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	Then place two pokers, one on the head and the other at the ankle, then insert the poker between the buttocks of the patient in a position near the painful area;
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And wet the bandages, to prevent burning of the patient, then have each practitioner stretched out towards him, and place the shoulder's position evenly with his hand.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it comes back, that's good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If it doesn't return to its place, put it on a surface like a table and press it in this manner as we described with glibosity, having the patient lie there, and have them rest on their healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit;	And when the dislocation is in front, it must involve stretching the painful leg quickly, and according to what I have said;
et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And place the shoulder in its painful position on the outer side of the leg, then press with the other hand, and stretch it downwards towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches;	And if the dislocation is at the front, it does not suit to extend the patient's back, nor lift them up from the ground. Instead, they should be in a position as if their hip was dislocated at the front like we have said about lying between two hips.
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	And place them on their face, and have the neck stretched out as we said before, and one should apply pressure to the joint at the table;
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz;	And it will be correct when the patient extends their legs and they become equal in length.
adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	Then adjust the thighs, place the plaster, and tie with a bandage so that the hip doesn't move.
et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus;	And let them rest for three or four days, then release them and place the plaster again.
et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors;	And if you see they are even, pull them as before, and let them rest for three days;
puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	Then reset it, and let it be well-stabilized, until the limb is properly set.
de la dislocation dou genoil	Of the dislocation of the hip
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres:	The knees are dislocated in three ways:
c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier;	This means, inside and outside, and behind;
et ne desalue point devant.	And do not dislocate in front.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	And the signs are that you instruct the patient to bend their leg at their knee. If they cannot straighten it to its full length, this indicates that the dislocation has occurred;
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	And the restoration of all this is that you make the patient lie straight, extend their leg if they can, and place them on their back with their feet on your feet;
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment;	Then take his thigh bone between your palms, and pull it between your fingers, then bend the two sides of the thigh bone that form;
et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	and also other attendants extend his foot until the knee returns to its place, and the signs are that he properly aligns his leg with his thigh lightly;
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie;	and place the plaster, and let the leg rest on the thigh, and join them tightly for three or four days, then release it;
et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	and do not let the muscles contract until the limbs are strengthened.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limbs are not at all, administer strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, as long as it is sane.
de la dislocation dou talon	From the dislocation of the heel
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heels are sometimes partially dislocated and sometimes fully out, both inside and outside.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	The signs that occur are when the ankle swells and tries to move forward at the part where it is dislocated:
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	The reinsertion should be gentle, and when it has been correctly placed alone by the person, one must gently extend it with their hands.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	And when it is relieved completely, then it must be made to stand the ill person straight, and hold them up by their right leg from above the ankle.
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	then pull the leg towards you with your right hand, and then also to the left twice, then lift them up high, and firmly hold the leg high.
et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet;	and do this twice, as we have said, pulling and moving the leg;
s’elle revient, c’est bien;	if it comes back, that's good;
se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	if not, start the procedure again because it will come back.
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	and if it cannot return in this way, make the patient lie on their back on the ground, and bury the rod firmly into the earth between their buttocks, and tie the cloth tightly around them so that they do not hurt the patient.
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	Then the ministers cut the fat, and some other ministers stretch out his legs at his hands or around his neck, so they tie them up on the neck of the animal.
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	Then each minister equally extends them, and the animal should be placed between the animal's legs so as to hold the patient when they are extended.
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	Then place the dislocated joints at his hands, and some other ministers cut the healthy leg at the knee, and the dislocation will return quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	And when it is at the right point, put on the plaster and bandage it up, then tighten properly, and tie the leg to the other leg, and guard the nerves that are under the ankle from behind, so that the ligaments do not become too tight;
puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain;	Then leave it for two or three days, and if the wound heals properly, then strain it.
puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors;	Then release it on the third day or quarter, and instruct the patient to walk for three days afterwards;
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And if it progresses until this point, it's not safe to assume that it won't dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when abscesses begin to drain, you should soothe them as we have said in other parts of the text, while they are still clean.
des dois	Of the cautery tool directed by fire, command the patient to let their hairs grow long and uniform; and if they start pricking at their base, keep the eyes steady so they don't move until they fully grow.
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the shoulders are dislocated, if they should be nicely extended for work, it is a simple task.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	And if the dislocation is in neither the neck nor the foot, it's necessary to have the patient sit on his full height or halfway sitting down, and place your foot where the joints are open. Press firmly with your foot until they heal;
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie;	And when it's even and nothing is popping out, place under the foot a shoulder support table. Then press firmly, and leave it for three days, then release it;
et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And make him rest, until he becomes well.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	regarding wounds and dislocations together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	When a wound comes with a dislocation and one seeks to restore it, many times death of the patient occurs:
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	if you are not presumptuous in the treatment, if you are not wise in the art and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not compassionate and merciful and patient, do not be hasty;
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	and begin with soothing things like removing pus, and leave the patient in God's hands, if you do not see hope for their recovery;
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	and when you see hope, immediately reset the limb in its place, so that the pus and its discharge can occur.
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	and when the limb is in its place, administer soothing things for pus removal, and treat the wound as it should be, using dried ointments;
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	And if there is a break during dislocation, and small bones are fractured, you should manage them as we have instructed in simple illnesses;
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	And guard against entering the path of fear, as I have said, for this befits you to act according to your Creator, and through knowledge arm yourself and protect your body.
