O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	You dear children, I have completed this book which is the culmination of the science of medicine, bringing together its completion through my explanations and declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in vision that I would complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is well established in our region and has spread everywhere, it has lost its science and been divided up, and nothing remains from it except for small descriptions in books written by the ancients that were handled by hands.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And because of this, there has come error and vanity, and closed are the minds, and the science is far away.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation;	It seems to me that I can revive this treatise as a whole according to the method of exposition and declaration, and abbreviation;
et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	And I will gather together the forms of the metal cauterizing tools, and other surgical instruments for use, along with their appropriate presentation and preparation, as necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because no good masters are found in our times, the art of medicine has been neglected.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And he who intervenes should ascend in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so long as they know how to judge members, and their forms and connections and separations, and have knowledge of bones and nerves and muscles, and the number of bones, and their movement and the moving and resting veins, and where their exit lies.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc;	And as Hippocrates said that inaction with no action is much, and with work is less;
et meismement en l’art de main.	And similarly in the art of manual skills.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes;	We will inform you at the beginning of this book that if someone is unaware of the matters previously mentioned, they might go wrong and idle people.
ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	As I have seen many times, those who interfere with this science and abandon their knowledge and experiments.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col;	For I saw a foolish surgeon who excised an abscess or neck sore of scrofula in a woman, and cut the arteries from her neck;
por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	because so much blood came out that the woman died in her hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans;	And I saw another surgeon treating a stone in an elderly man, and the stone was large;
si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	he took out with it a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I have already been called to extract, and saw the position of the organ and the size of the stone, and indeed if they had cut him he would have died.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie;	And I saw another surgeon who treated our local count who had his leg broken, and with the breaking came an injury;
et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine;	and the surgeons full of ignorance bound the breaking above the injury as it had been by strong ligature, and did not allow any salve to touch the wound, and they left him like this at the end.
et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie;	And instruct him not to dislocate it again;
et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	So he should stay like this, until the leg was fully extended and the feet reached their position, or else it would lead to ruin.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe;	I rushed to be called for him, and I hurried to come and reset the leg;
et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	And when I heard it dislocated so smoothly without any pain being felt.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner;	But all the corruption was already confirmed throughout his body or limb, and he could not be cured;
et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	And the corruption continued spreading through the limb as long as any part of it was still intact.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And there is another method that collapses an abscessed wound, and then inflames it through the wickedness of her lordship.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For a chancre, when it is full of melancholic humor, it should not be touched with iron if it cannot all be removed, what has been corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions:	And because of this, dear children, you need to know that the art of medicine is divided into two parts:
c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions;	This means "It's like this, where there are risks in various positions.
et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And I will show you in each section of this book where there is danger and risk.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	Because it's necessary that you keep them in mind, so that the illiterate don't have reason to speak poorly of you.
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez;	If you take your weapons with caution, treat your patients lightly yet firmly, and employ the best method so that through God's grace you may reach salvation and be content;
et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit;	and leave insurmountable complaints without health or cure;
et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	and use your weapons against those who make you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you may come from this world to the other with glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens:	Galiens states in some of his admonishments:
«Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Never undertake an inappropriate treatment for your illness, lest you be called mad instead of healed.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have composed this treatise according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez;	The first chapters deal with fire cautery and medical cautery, and are arranged from the head down to the stones";
et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	and the forms of the instruments, and the metal of the cautery, and all that is necessary for the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses;	The second chapters are about cutting and piercing, and suction cups and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar matters.";
et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	and these chapters are organized with the forms of the instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses;	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar matters.";
et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	And arranged are the commands for lifting the head until the neck, and concerning the shapes of the instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Just as we remember our work, it is necessary for me to tell you about the quality of each remedy and its harm associated with each temperament.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus;	I say that the qualities of help, and harm, is the longest speech and most subtle science and the hidden responses;
et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu;	And many wise people spoke about this, and they agreed on it;
et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	And their words bother me somewhat because I fear the length of them.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions:	I say that the cautery helps universally with all constitutions where there is matter, because there are two constitutions:
c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	This means to know hot constitution with matter and dry constitution with matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide;	In the combination of hot and dry constitutions with matter, they devised nothing and said that the cautery is great help;
et li autre dirent le contraire:	And others said the opposite:
que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	that cautery only works on diseases that come from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour;	For the nature of fire is so hot, and it should not be treated with hot diseases through heat or dryness;
et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	And those who say the opposite state that cautery provides great aid to hot and dry diseases that originate within the body.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the body of the person and their moisture to the aspect of fire, you find that the body is cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this word.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it true on every occasion by experiment.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens;	And in all matters, do not interfere except for those who have experienced it themselves, and who understand through long use the chapter of cautery, and the variety of people's complexions, and their conditions and causes of illnesses, and their symptoms and timing.
des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	For other types of complexion, we have none for them either, especially in the case of cold and damp illnesses.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the instruments gathered together with the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	Know, children, that when a fire cautery is assembled, it contains the secrets of healing, and offers more benefit than a burning medical treatment.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and does not come forth from any member except that which is cooked, and it harms no other member if you do not name it.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation;	The hot medicines travel from limb to limb spreading disease instead of healing;
et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	and by chance cause harm to the patient.
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	The fire for its height and due to the goodness of its substance does not make this if there is no excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses;	And this is what I have found through experimentation and the length of my service and study in the art, and it corresponds to the truth of things;
et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant;	And because of this, I apologize for the length of my speech, as I do not want to withhold the secret which lies in the fire and the quality of work, how it expels diseases from the body, as the philosopher demonstrates through demonstration;
or le recevez en vos pensees.	Receive it in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, child, that they agreed on when the cauterizations should be done, and read prayers.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere;	And I say that cautery is applicable in all circumstances, for the nuisances arising are minimized by the aid of the cautery;
et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And indeed, if the cautery is for necessary pains that cannot wait until the time when greater harm does not come to the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire;	And never think it, dear child, as foolish people do;
car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue;	for the disease cured by cautery does not recur;
et il le dient ensi;	and they say it like this;
mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	but it is not as they think, for cautery is only a medicine that changes the complexion, dries out the fluids that cause pain, and is worth more than medicine for the swiftness of its effect, and by virtue of its work and its power.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut;	And it is possible that disease comes in any way depending on the nature of the patient's illness and its strength;
et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie;	And they gather in him the excesses through the consumption of meats and similar things; if this is not done with cauterization where there is little excess and moisture, such as dense cauterizations for pain, and similar things, so that the pain does not return;
mais ce avient poc.	But this happens little.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir;	And few people understand why cauterizations are called after medicine, and it's to see;
mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	But they do not believe that cauterizations are after medicine; their understanding is false. Cauterizations are considered after medicine because when our methods of treatments in any disease don't work, then we administer the cauterization, and it does work.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore, it is correctly understood that cauterization belongs to the later stages of medicine, not according to the understanding of those who misunderstand.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance;	The old ones said that cauterizers made of gold utensils are more effective than those made of iron, and they stated this due to the quality of gold and its highness in terms of substance.
et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes;	and they say that the edges of the cauterizer do not cause putrefaction, but it is not visible because I have proven it and found out that it can be visible in some people;
et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	And gold cauterizers are better than iron ones, as they said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez;	And still, when you heat gold utensils, you do not know when they are heated by the color of the gold, and it is suddenly cooled;
et s’on le chaufe trop;	and if it is overheated;
si font au feu;	if they use the fire;
et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And thus there is enough hindrance.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And because we use our metal cautery that has been adapted to our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	So I have organized this chapter on the shoulder until this point, so that finding it may be easier.
dou cautere olivaire	The olive cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	A fire cautery is suitable for moisture and coldness on the head. There are two kinds that we do this due to the cause of an illness called 'soda', and because of many fluids that descend from the body like sweat, and from ears, and through a multitude of dreams and toothache and sore throat, and also towards all diseases that come from cold such as paralysis, soda poisoning and apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir;	The form of this cautery is such that the patients should be purified by a dissolving medicine, modifying it every third or fourth day according to what the properties and the strength and the habituation of the patient can bear;
et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	and then resume applying the medicine to the patient's wound.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis;	And then have him sit cross-legged between your hands, and place his hands on some hot stones;
aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz;	after placing the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his second eyelids;
et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	and leave it where your two thumbs come to rest; if there is bleeding, apply heat from the fire cautery called "olivare", which has this form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant;	And mark its place with ink on the left side, and apply it as you descend and steadily hold your hand a little at a time while turning.
puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit;	Then ease your hand slightly, and reward the left side if you see a small bone sink into it;
et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit;	And if you don't see it, resume the cautery until you see the bone as I have told you;
aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors;	After taking some silk, and place wet and soft cotton inside, apply it to the left side, and leave it for three days;
aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre;	After put on butter-soaked cloth;
et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	and leave it until the scab is removed;
aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treat the wound with ointment called 'tetrafarmac', until it heals normally.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge;	And if the old men said, that when a wound stays open longer, it discharges more;
et por ce si aide mues.	and because of this, they move in such a way.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And it was said by some that one should let the cautery burn until part of the bone is burned, and then remove what has been burned from the bone and treat it.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors;	And the other says that we should apply the cautery there and press so strongly against it as to match the width of a woman's belly button when she is pregnant, because fluids escape when this happens.
et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte;	And should we leave the wound open for an extended period;
aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	Afterwards, should one clean and stitch it up.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor;	And these two ways of using cauterization do not seem to be entirely good for everyone, except in cases where there is the risk of fear;
et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier;	It seems to me that I should leave it alone;
car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres;	For the shoulder is weakened by continuous exposure to nature's elements, as we have witnessed in other limbs.
et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And likewise when the shoulder muscles are weak by nature, and the first sign of cauterization is more healed and smoother for me, and using this method I perform my work thus gathering together healing.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of the old pain in the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres;	When chronic pain in the head comes about and lasts for a long time, then one must use the head's remedies and pills that are called "couchies", and treatments for clearing the head and ears and bandages;
et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	and if one performs the cauterization as we have previously said, and it proves effective.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit;	Take heed that if the shoulder of the sick person is very frail, and do not let it become too cold;
adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Then apply heat from this fire cautery a little as we have said above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»;	After you apply the heat to each horn up to the bone, as we said before, and apply heat at the part of the head called "wattles".
et est I leus en coi on met ventouses;	and place it in the area where suction cups are applied;
et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os:	and move your hand gently so that you do not see up to the bone:
li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors;	The patient feels much more intense pain in this heat treatment than in others, and I will speak of it elsewhere;
et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	It is necessary that the heatings of the horns be more subtle than that used to heat half the head, and this is its form:
dou cautere dou chief	For the fire cautery,
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie:	If pain suddenly occurs in part of the head and extends the illness to the eye, and the head is treated with purifying medicines, and other treatments are done as I said in the section on illnesses, but none of this helps:
adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	Therefore, apply cautery according to two methods, namely that of cold medicine and fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir;	Apply the fire cautery if you take a handful of herbs and peel and coat them once or twice on each shoulder. Then make a cut where the pain holds in such manner that you can place the herb mixture directly under the skin;
et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres;	and when it is placed, if it is held well and left like this for twelve hours;
et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III;	then release the hold and remove the garlic mixture, and leave the wound like this for two days or three;
puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	Then place a cotton wad soaked in butter until the pain eases.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	After the ointment treatment as long as it is effective;
et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	And if you see it fitting to use some of these burning medicines that I have written about or the tenth treatise on burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The iron cautery works like this.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cautery as shown here:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance;	And is called "bowed" because the head has the shape of an ogee arch, having a slight curve at the top and appearing small in the middle.
et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse;	and place it in the painful area, hold your hand and gently twist the iron until half of the thickness of the ear is burnt;
et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	and lift your hand so that the artery doesn't burn, it's exposed, and a large amount of blood flows out.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors;	After that, put cotton in salt water, and place it on the wound for three days;
puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	then put wet cotton in butter, and then treat the wound with ointment until it heals;
et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	And if you wish to cauterize this head wound with the cautery that is called "cultellare", across its entirety, and beware not to cover the artery in this head wound which isn't old.
de emigraine	From headache
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans;	When you treat a head wound as we have described in the divisions of diseases, if it does not heal and you observe that the cauterizations mentioned previously in medicine do not suffice, then it is necessary for you to heat the cautery which is called "cultellare" until it is white;
et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os;	And thus, while holding the length of half a diem in your hand, and having your fingers poised once, pull it out until you do not cover the artery and stop right up to the bone;
et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez;	And beware of the mandible that closes when you bite, and let only the jaw move and no spasms affect the patient, and be cautious about blood discharge from the artery when it is cut, or if cutting causes great fear and even to those who do not understand, and who are neither studied nor experienced;
et laisse l’uevre em mi voie;	and let the work come in my way;
mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	but I will tell you how to staunch blood when an artery has been cut, and I will show you where it is explained in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	And if you see that this cautery does not work against the disease, and the patient is suffering, apply the fire to within the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it heals;
et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz;	And if you see this, administer the cautery that we have said or from the chapter on extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has two knives;
et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And these cauteries are better than others and more beneficial.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	From the pain of the ears from coldness
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When pain in the ear comes from cold, and one has applied solutions of medicines and other treatments that we have mentioned under division, and if the pains do not subside, then heat this cautery which is called "points", as follows:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche;	After this, point everything around the patient's ear, or in both places where pain is felt, and move away slightly from the root of the ear after marking its line;
et ait X poins entor chescune oreille;	And has ten points within each ear;
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	after treatment until it becomes clean.
de la torture de la bouche	From the pain in the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie;	The torture that must be treated with cauterization only leaves those that move from blood, as we have said in the divisions of diseases;
et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	and do not use cauterization on appearances that come from scarring and inflammation of nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres:	When you treat this type of torture that comes from blood in urine and purges of the head and gargling, if it doesn't respond, then it is necessary for you to cauterize the patient with three applications.
l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres;	The first one at the root of the ear, and the second slightly beyond the temple, and the third at the adjustment between the two lips;
et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce;	And place the cautery at the healthy opening part, and apply the cautery to that spot over the tip of the ear a little below the head's horn, and another one on the temple as long as a hand.
et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse;	And let the cautery remain there until half of the cheek is burnt;
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And that is how it looks like using the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros;	And it is similar to the knife operation we showed before, but it's a bit more subtle. It requires that the knives be slightly larger;
aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment of the wound as I explained before, until it is sound.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres:	When the apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, and if it does not benefit, and if the patient has fever, then make four cauterizations.
II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac;	On the second horns of the head, and I touch the top of the head, and I move to where the neck is called 'wattles' as we have previously mentioned, and on the back cautery at the mouth of the stomach;
et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	and so treat it in the way we have said before.
de litargie	from liturgy
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil;	For this illness, one should give the patient large grains and round pills to improve their brain function;
aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres;	After the head of the patient is well rested, and one places the sinapical plaster on the occipital part, as written or prescribed in the treatment for plasters;
et c’est li maniere dou cautere:	and this is how the cautery works:
si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	if you do it as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est;	If he is healthy like this, it is well;
et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros;	And if it isn't done, you should make three burns below the neck down to the collarbone, and leave an interval of one digit's width between each burn.
et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu;	And the treatment is like with the others, and if you find it fitting, and the patient is suffering, then you should make one burn in the middle.
et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if there's need for it, two more burns on the two horns, and treat until it is clean;
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	And so, let the cauterizations known as 'olive' be as I have described before.
de la froidor dou chief	from coldness of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit;	It is necessary that the head be cleaned of old blemishes and what we have discussed beforehand;
aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col;	After cleaning the head of the patient, then make burns below the head and on each horn, and one behind and three near the spine at the neck.
et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos;	And if you need more skill, and the body is moist and the patient suffers, and the disease is present, make four fire cauteries on the spine of the back;
et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main;	And let it until the very softest wound heals, and lift your hand;
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	After the treatment until it is clean, and apply the cautery which is called "olivare" as we have previously mentioned.
de l’epilempsie	From epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	The epileptics should only use a cautery for those who are phlegmatic, and first modify the brain with years and other remedies that we have mentioned in the section when the patient is large and suffering from physical medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes;	And if it's a child who cannot bear the pain, give gargling and chewing with many good meats often to the brain;
aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne;	After the king of the head in the middle, and I make a fire treatment according to what we have said before, and one fire treatment on the vessel, and on each horn;
et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if the limbs are outside and suffering, you should apply cauterization as I have described for those with paralysis and muscular atrophy, on the spine across the back and neck area. You should perform an olive oil-based cautery according to the method that I explained.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is an infant, then you should perform one subtle cautery in this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When due to the cause of melancholy are excesses or fluids corrupted and full of pus, then the part cautery of the fire cautery as we have said to those who have paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if due to the cause of melancholy is the excess descending into melancholy, and the parts are moist with malaise, then this should be drunk so that the brain may be purified, as was discussed in the previous section.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide;	After you have examined the head of the bone;
aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief;	After that, make a linen thread well done, like a circle, and place it around the head.
et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars;	And when the limbs have settled, ensure they are firmly held in all directions;
aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien;	After applying the liniment, and apply a paste of old bee's wax;
et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir;	And heat it gently over the fire, so that it can be applied without causing pain or discomfort;
aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier;	After emptying out the space inside through the mouth, and letting it cool down.
et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And do this to the patient once every week with different types of governance until it is cleansed.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	Or, if you see that it is being cauterized by making marks on the entire surface of the cautery.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument;	This way of cautering moistens the brain more;
et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	Then place on it wet cotton in butter and animal fat.
de l’awe des eulz	of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the onset comes to the eyes first through the symptoms I have mentioned in the division, then start and continue making the patient drink things that purify the head, and keep him/her away from all moisture, and make them sweat or take baths several times on an empty stomach.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I;	After that, he commands it to rest on its head, and he applies the cautery through the head, and applies two cauterizations on the two temples where the descent of the arrow is at both eyes together, or in one it descends in one.
et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple;	And apply the entire cautery to all the veins and arteries that are around the knee, and make sure to cauterize them long according to the width of the temples;
et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	And beware of bleeding out, and if you see too much blood coming out, stop it by pressing with a piece of cloth as you can.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras;	And I will teach you about the extraction of arteries and incisions in the cautery, how to extinguish it;
et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	And never apply the cautery or heat over the two inner bones.
dou cors des larmes	of the tears' two courses
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors;	When the tears of the eyes have been long and accustomed, and are above the veins, or overlie arteries that appear under the head's surface;
et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz:	And it is seen that these are cold phlegmatic excesses, then do the cautery which I have said at the beginning of this work when descending to the eyes:
I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os;	I apply the cautery to the head, and two cauteries on the two temples, and two cauterizations over the two inner bones;
et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	And if there is need for more, cauterize carefully above the eyebrow with every small cautery.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	of the tears within the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies;	When you administer the medicine according to what we have said in the division, and it does not benefit, then give the patient three oxen' intestines to drink;
aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire;	After the king's head, and I make him cauterized with or in the middle of an olive oil cautery;
et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous;	and do two cauterizations with the cautery called 'claw' on both eyebrows, a little below the hair.
et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	and beware not to cover the artery as you work.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the shape of the cautery which is called "claw".
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the paper treated with oil becomes diseased and moist, then cauterize it with this iron known as "olive".
de coi ci est li forme:	of which here is its form:
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont;	And if you see that you do two cauterizations on both eyebrows as long as the eyebrows are.
et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And do not let your hand rest until a third part of the paper is burned, according to the method I have described.
dou poil qui point l’oil	The hair which pricks the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres:	No instance has occurred where the hair of the nose turns into the paranasal region and enters the nose; in such cases, one performs cauteries according to two methods:
c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	This means that it involves using fire or burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals;	With the fire cautery, instruct the patient to allow the hairs to grow until they are long and uniform;
et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	And if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so that they do not move until they are born.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain;	When they are born and if they are uniform, then put the patient in their healthy position;
aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz;	After on Sir upon the parchment of the eyes make a symbol that is as such like the leaf of myrtle, and let it be the beginning of the sign opposite the hairs;
puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Then place moist cotton soaked in egg yolk and garlic paste on the eye, then apply the fire cautery tool as shown here.
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit;	After that, gently and gradually apply the cautery to the symbol you have made, until the marks are burnt in that spot;
et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil;	And the signs of health in the operation are that you see the paper retracting, and the hairs lifted to the edge of the eye.
adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	Then lift your hand and leave it like this for three days, then apply moist cotton with butter until the scab is removed;
aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the application of ointment until it is properly absorbed.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers;	And when these have come about, and the skin has softened, then resume the cauterization on that same area, just as you did at first.
et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And when the hair is burnt off, then cauterize until the skin rises to its natural position and remains even, not allowing the hair to touch the eye.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte;	The fire cauterizing of medicine is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow until they are large and even, then make of parchment the shape of the bay leaf;
puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien;	Then take French soap and fresh lime leaves, each one spoonful, and grind them together thoroughly;
et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz;	And make haste, so that it does not cool, then blow upon the shape you have made like a leaf of myrtle, and place the eyes on paper.
et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi;	And if the illness lasts only in one part of the body, you should open it there; and if it is present equally in both.
et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef;	And put some damp cotton over the eye like an egg.
et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	And have the body of the illness on your healthy side and place your hand showing on the medicine, and press the paste with every application when the illness feels the medicine's bite; for it feels the bite also like fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When this has been done for some time, once you have exposed the medicine to your finger.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision;	And when the bite has passed, lift the part away and reward if you see the paper lifted also as it would be by constraint of fire or by incision;
et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And if it's like this, then do so well.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point;	And if not, try again with medicine at the shoulder or until the medicine has worked, as long as your actions are equal, and your eyes focused;
puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then place wet cotton and butter until the ears are covered with wax, after treating the shoulder with ointments known as 'dyafenis' and others, until it is clean.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if it requires that you take good care of your work by great caution so that no medicine leaks into the eyes.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant;	And if the paper becomes moist and the hair sticks in the eye, then apply medicine to that shoulder which is softened by clean paper properly, just as you did before.
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	After treating it until it is clean;
et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	and this is the shape of the leaf of the wormwood:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens;	And know that eyes of men vary greatly in size and smallness, and according to this be your constraints;
et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And do not have the right way respond to him who studies this craft.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	regarding the treatment of fistula with a cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and your treatments are not beneficial, then it is necessary for you to apply cautery according to this manner.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain;	Instruct the patient to place his head in your well-being;
et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief;	And guide the ministers so that his head is between your hands in such a way that it does not move or slide from his head;
aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil;	after put wadded cotton in the shape of an egg or garlic juice on the eye;
aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz:	after heat the cautery which is heated:
et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere;	and place it over the head as if it were a feather of a sparrow, so that when you have the cautery;
se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente;	If you observe, it might look pointed from one end to the other, and if you see, it may also appear like a tent.
mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	However, this is what happens in your work due to the nature of things.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche;	After pressing, if the fistula is opened, you treat the putrefaction and dry it out.
et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe;	And if it's closed, let it heal naturally, and remove from the body;
aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie;	After placing the fire cautery in position, hold your hand on the cautery at the part below the nose above the eye, so that your hand doesn't make a mistake.
et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	And place the cautery in the oil's grease and it will burn.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the beginning of the cautery up to the bone, it would be well.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors;	If not, then apply the fire cautery once more, and if necessary, do so again, letting it be for three days.
aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers;	After placing damp cotton and butter on it, apply the ointment dressing until it heals. Do this with a drying ointment dressing as long as it is not healed; if 40 days pass without healing, then apply an aqua corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed.
et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	And let the ruler follow as it comes in his chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a method for cauterizing fistulas that none of the old ones mentioned.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu;	Understand about fistulas, and make the wound;
aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	After placing in the slit a slender stick with this shape:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc;	and it should be as large as a thimble;
et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil;	And hold your hand or clench it firmly, and do not move the spots at all, that the wounds may heal properly.
et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe:	And it is proper to place on the eye a moistened cotton cloth in anticipation of pus or blood:
li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	The pus flows from the place of the fistula, and the healthy one through marvellous healing.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healed by the cautery as we have said, it's good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If not, it is necessary to administer pertussis to the child and return the fistula to the body of the child according to what is proper in its own nature.
des crevaices en levres	of mouth ulcers
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Occasionally, mouth sores appear on the lips which are called "whiskers", and similarly on the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these mouth sores with the methods we've discussed in divisions, and if treatment doesn't help, then use a small surgical tool like this to gently burn them:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font;	And place it quickly in those cuts until it becomes as full as possible;
aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment of the waxed area, while it remains healthy.
de l’aposteme de la goule	from the phlegm in the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule;	When an abscess comes in the root of the throat or in the oyster, or in the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, after it has turned rotten and swollen and becomes inflamed and develops into a fistula;
et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie:	And you treat them as we have said in sections, and they do not benefit.
adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule;	Therefore, it is necessary for you to have the cautery according to the size of the fistula;
aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu;	After the plug or obstruction of the fistula, and hold your hand until the metal reaches the bottom of it, and wherever else there is.
et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Do this once or twice after the treatment as we have described in treatments, until it is healed;
et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin;	And if it is treated like this, it is good;
et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	And if not, it is necessary to expose the wound and remove the decayed bone, according to what you will find in your chapter.
dou movement des dens	movement of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain;	When the gums become softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicines but it doesn't work, then apply pressure to the head of the bone until it returns to its healthy state;
aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent;	After rubbing the cautery, in such manner that you place a stick over the tooth;
et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent;	And place the heated cautery quickly inside, and hold your hand until the patient feels the heat reaching to the root of the tooth;
aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit;	After ease your hand and repeat the heating with the cautery according to your will;
aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	After fill the patient's mouth with ashes, and let it stay for an hour and then remove it.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this manner the moving tooth is repositioned, and the softened gum becomes restrained, and the moisture that was present dries up.
de la dolor des dens	from the pain of teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres:	When toothache comes from cold or there is coldness or inflammation and medicines do not help, then it needs to be treated with the use of a cautery in two ways:
et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	And the wax cautery and the fire cautery.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain;	Wax cautery is such that you take butter from a cow, and the tip in a iron or spider's leg spoon;
aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez;	Then take cotton and cover it on the tip of a tent, and soak butter with its moisture, then apply it to the aching tooth until it cools down;
et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	And thus do it often until the butter's power reaches to the tooth root. If you see moist wool and cotton after cooling butter, apply it to the aching tooth, and place hot iron on it until the heat of the fire spreads through the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide;	The fire cautery is such that you take a piece of iron or spider's leg, and make it big enough so that the heat does not come to the edge of the wound.
aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez;	After heating the cautery, from which its form will come afterwards, place it on your teeth and keep your hand there until the cautery has cooled.
fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	Do this often, because the pain will be reduced either on that day or the next day.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer;	And it is necessary for the patient to fill their mouth with good butter in anticipation of that cautery, and then push it out.
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	and this is the form of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir;	And make a cautery according to what you want, and according to what you have the ability for;
et c’est li forme de la caine:	and this is the form of the cane:
des scrophules	regarding the treatment of scrophula
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie;	When the scrophules are due to cold blood and moisture that do not respond to digestion with medicines, then heat the cautery as described below which will show its form, and make two openings for the vapors to escape from the other side of the cautery;
et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume;	And place the cautery on the abscess once, or twice as required, until it reaches to the bottom of the abscess;
et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors;	And if the abscess is small, apply the cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it like that for three days;
et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee;	And place on cotton soaked in butter until the splinter is extracted.
aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the wound has healed and the stitches have been removed, until it is completely healed.
Li forme de la cainne:	The form of the cane:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives;	When the moisture invades the channels of the heart, and especially when it comes from a cold constitution, then it is necessary for the body to be cleansed initially with diuretic medicines;
aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	After applying the cautery at the base of the throat, and make sure not to touch up to the throat, but only apply it moderately.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant;	After this, I perform another cauterization at the joint of the neck and head of the spine, and it is from these cauteries that we derive the term 'clavicle' which we describe in front;
et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat the head as previously described until it is healed.
de la toust	In respect to cautery by fire, it commands the diseased person to allow hair growth until it becomes long and uniform; and if they prick at their origin, it holds the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai .II cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis;	When all illnesses of the stomach are due to cold moisture, and patients do not have fever or dryness, if it is an old disease, then you should perform two cauterizations on their kidneys through their urinary passages;
et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles;	and apply another cauterization between the buttocks, at the place of the anus.
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	And it is from these cauteries that we derive the term 'clavicle', according to the description provided earlier.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles;	And if you see fit, perform cauterization by pressing on the entire area called 'points', as described earlier in the illness of the ears.
et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	Let the points grow until they reach XXX, or perhaps somewhat beyond.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After treating the area according to what was said before, make the fire cauteries in three stages according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And because of this makes the cautery lighter, because you make three at once.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	From the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit;	After that, gird the patient on their back and at their sides;
aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre;	After lift the kidney inside the testicle with your left hand;
et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	And if the joint is dislocated inside, heat up the cautery which has two prongs as described here:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres;	And cauterize the kidney until it pierces to the side, and let the figure of the cautery gather together four cauterizations;
et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres;	And for this, use the cautery with three prongs, because the figure of the cauterization consists of three cauterizations;
et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	And guide the nerve according to the subtlety of a tent, and it is the figure of the cautery with three prongs:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And always fix onto this single nerve, because there are seven heat treatments for it.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil;	After placing the fire cautery on, cut with force.
aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After making the patient lie down, and do not let their limbs stretch too long until they are well settled.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it has been relieved upwards, where little happens, then make the fire cautery on the thickness of the clavicle fire cautery, or a few cauteries by touching.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joint is closed, and the moisture is removed and healed are the patients.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	For when colds and dampness affect the stomach as long as they correspond to its constitution, and multiply his urination, and use of accustomed treatments, but he does not benefit from them, then it is necessary for the patient to be wrapped in a blanket on his back, and stretch out his legs and arms.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture;	From this on, I apply three fire cauteries under the tail with the force of two, for each fire cautery across the knee, and two fire cauteries behind each of the two sides up to where the pattern of the cauteries forms at three angles, ensuring there is enough space between them so they do not stick together when they get infected;
et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	And let the fire cautery extend sufficiently to turn both parts of the knee, and let the pattern of the cauteries follow this form without adjustment:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme;	And if you see that it has been burned down by a large cautery up to the stomach according to this form;
et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche;	And he who has doubt about this cautery, apply it firmly upon the stomach at point number one according to the amount that you see of it;
puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	Then cauterize over the entire cautery which is called 'points'.
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment we have undertaken, as long as he remains healthy.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez;	As for the liver, it experiences pain due to coldness, moisture, and excessive winds; until its natural constitution is restored through elimination.
et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil;	And the patients should be treated with what we have discussed in sections; if they do not benefit from this, it is necessary for the patient to fast until his urine changes.
et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient;	And signs of three cauterizations according to this form and this figure and this amount on the liver, beyond the hips, where the stomach's pain comes from;
et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi;	and keep an equal space between each cautery as large as two;
et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere;	let the cautery be as long as your arm, and do not pinch all of your hand to the entire cautery;
et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez;	let only half of the iron be heated, and have the patient lie straight on their feet;
et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais;	and if they can't, if they sit up, and extend their legs, and lift their arms;
et c’est li forme:	and this is the method:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors;	And if you wish to do so, cauterize these cauteries with surgical knives, if you are skilled and careful in the art, and remember not to burn all of the iron completely, for you would dry up the entire body;
et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	And let it boil until just before oil comes out, for the kidneys are very subtle in that spot, and you know how to see.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile:	When it has drained into the liver, and you know how to determine whether it is in the liver tissue or in the sinusoid.
s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort;	If it's in the tissue, the patient feels moderate pain;
et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	And if it's in the sinusoid, there is extreme pain felt.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste;	And when this treatment hardens the vessels, it's necessary that the patient is treated with caution on its head;
et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	And then guide your hand to the area where the drainage occurs, and then heat the cautery which resembles a raisin, as described below:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers;	And apply the cautery until the cheeks are seared, and proceed until the ulcer is completely out.
aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez;	after the treatment according to the treatment of the wounds as long as it remains clean;
et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	And it is not fitting to use this cautery except those who have studied for a long time in the art of medicine, and by whose hands these diseases have never been committed once.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Then he can boldly operate, and always it seems to me that movement is worth leaving it to.
dou cautere de pleuresin	apply the weeping cautery
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere:	The old ones said that one must do wet cauteries with roots of aristolochia, and in this manner:
pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois;	Take a long root of aristolochia, the longest you can find, let it be dry, and also make sure it is as big and as long as your fingers;
et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe;	And in the ear oil, and captures it with fire, and applies a cautery between the strength and the neck, and two small cauterizations slightly lower down on the part that is under the beard;
et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc;	And apply two cauterizations between the fifth and sixth ribs, slightly behind them.
et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules;	And one cauterization under the buttocks, and another on the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and two near the ribs further down from where the cauterization is between the two shoulders.
et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	And do not squeeze with your hand, instead apply it gently as you would when smelling something.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme;	And it was said by an old person that no one uses a fire cauterization at the armpit, they heat it and place it between the ribs until it reaches that abscess;
et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And once the pain leaves, as we have said about the abscess on the liver.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this chapter there is fear of when the patient dies now, or a fistula comes which cannot be cured.
de la mice	Of mice
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the illness of mice in those who have been instructed on dividing treatments, and it doesn't benefit, then they adopt three methods of cautery that are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant;	Among the methods there is one way such that you make three or four cauterizations, lining them up according to the length of the mouse, according to the shape of the liver cauterization as we have said before.
et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	and do not hurry your hand over the entire cauterization, and let it be that the sick remain under their back;
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule;	and another way of cauterization is to heat the cauterization that has two rods, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder;
et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	and lift the hook which is at the mouse location, where the disease's cost comes from the left side, and let the elevations that you lift the hook according to the hook, according to the length of the body, and the cauterizations should be according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII.	After light the two wicks until they are lit from the other side, and then remove the cautery, and so there will be four.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	And if you see fit, fully cauterize with the entire cautery on three wicks.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the cure when it has healed from a long disease, and this justifies that the other remedies should be applied as previously mentioned.
de ydropisie	From dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	The cautery is not effective against dropsy, except in the way it is called "asclytes".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis;	When you treat it according to the methods we've discussed in sections, and your treatment doesn't work, then it is necessary for you to make four cauterizations inside the abdomen, one above the stomach, one on the liver, one below the intestines, and two behind the back on the spine, and one place near the anus;
et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	and make sure that the cauterizations are close to the kidney's edge.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere;	After leaving the cautery in place to promote decay for a long time, and do not stop treating the disease with remedies after cauterization;
et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	And healing would hasten, and the two intents would come together with God's aid.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit;	The shape of the cautery for the belly is like the clavicle, which we have demonstrated in front;
et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	And for the back, it's olive-shaped, as was shown before.
de l’enfleure des piez	of swelling around the joints
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire;	When the joints swell in someone who is tubercular and filled with yellow bile, it's necessary to cauterize on the back of the foot between the index finger and the ring finger;
et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	And with your hand, apply the cautery lightly without turning.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter too far on the circumference, otherwise it would remove the yellow crystals, and apply the cautery according to this shape:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire;	After that, make two cauterizations on each leg at the heel;
et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe;	And let the cauterizations be long, one over the knee joint in front and the other behind, across the leg;
et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse;	And let the cauterizations burn for a long time without cure, until it produces this;
aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	after the treatments of other procedures that we have discussed.
de la menoison	From memory
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures;	When the belly's solution comes from cold or moisture, as long as the restorative and digesting properties are at work in the stomach and within the intestines, and cannot be treated through conventional treatments;
et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule;	and you see the patient suffering greatly and with much virtue, if perform the great stomach cauterization according to what they spoke of previously or the stomach cauterizer, in the circulating cauterization;
et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	and four cauterizations around the delicate area of the mouth with each cauterization on the subtle line, and two cauterizations on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see the moister being abundant and the patient suffering, do this: one cautery on the wrist, and one cautery on each elbow, and two small cauterizations on the stomach close to the large one. For the cure is beneficial when there's good help.
de la cure des emorroydes	Regarding the treatment of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres:	When the abscesses are at their origin or multiple, and are old with large cold wet corrupted pus, and are treated as we have said in sections, yet it does not benefit, if apply cauteries:
III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois;	At the spine of the back, that which is entirely outside beneath the spongy tissue a little by little in triangular formation, and apply the fire cautery under the skin twice.
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile;	And if you think that the stomach is cold and the meat doesn't cook, and you see the intestines swell up, then apply a large fire cautery on the stomach as previously mentioned, and another on the liver, and another on the spleen for the entire fire cautery.
et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	And let the cautery be applied for as long as necessary.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treatment until it becomes healthy.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	Regarding the inflammation known as 'thelul'
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit;	When you're working with metal, if it seems to be a good fit for the fire cautery, and then place all of it ablaze over the metal being worked.
et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort;	and let your hand and the heat of the cautery reach to the base of the vein from which blood flows out;
fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit;	Do this once or twice, and if there is much metal, heat each one as we have said.
aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez;	after the treatment of beneficial herbs while they are still fresh;
et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	and if you heat with a large cautery on iron, it will provide more help.
de plaie mal curee	from poorly treated wounds
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient's body cannot endure cutting or incision, as we will describe in its place, if there arises a disease that cannot be cured except by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	If there is no fistula, and it decays and festers due to corrupted pus and moisture, if you need to test it with a complete method, and ensure that you know the entire technique as to how many parts it has.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing;	After heating the cautery that seems to be of iron, insert it into the fistula according to the amount that your patient can bear when it enters, and continue using the cautery until that hardened, rotten part is burned, once or twice or even three times, depending on the amount you need.
et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	And you must beware of burning the nerves which are nearby, and large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans;	If there's a fistula going to the bladder and the intestines, beware of these areas, and don't do that elsewhere, only in the abdominal area, and remember it doesn't occur often;
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement;	After the treatment as long as it's clean, and if the area is inflamed, and the contents have been hardened for a long time, then you know that the area has completely healed;
et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font;	And if the contents are not hardened, know that the disease is still present, and the bone has been damaged at its root;
et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	And thus like one of those we will mention in their place.
de la maladie des reins	Regarding kidney disease
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit;	When abdominal pain comes from the lungs and strong winds, affecting certain women, then it's necessary to apply a cautery on both sides of the lungs and on the surgical area that we have mentioned before;
et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	And if we apply the cautery right in the middle, there will be three cauterizations in line, and it will receive more help.
de la vessie	From the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce;	When the bladder is swollen and weak due to cold and moisture, causing the kidneys to retain urine, then apply the cautery on the lower part of the bladder, where the hair nears the hand begins, both on the right and left sides. Each cautery should be as long as a fist that we have.
et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing;	And make the cautery behind the back, or two if you need it;
et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	And let the cauteries be as described in front, following the shape of a hand.
de la marris	Of the mare's urine
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde;	When the womb is cold and moist, and does not allow for conception to occur, and the flowers are rotten and their ends are delayed;
et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor:	And when they come, one feels great pain:
adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos;	And when they occur, then it is necessary to perform three cauterizations inside the mouth, as we have said or the bladder cautery, and two cauterizations behind the back;
et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	and let the cauterizations be of the clavicle, as we have said.
de la hainche	From the hip
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble;	When the thick fluids descend to the socket of the hip, and for this reason it moves out of its place, and the signs are that the leg is longer than the other when measured together;
et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle;	and find the lines of departure visible, then it is necessary to cauterize the hair on the hip socket at one cauterization seeming like a circle, and mark in front of the limb inside the socket where it turns, so that the socket be within the circle;
et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	And if such cauteries are like those used to cauterize the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs;	And if you do not have such cauteries at hand, make three olive-sized ones, and let the cautery be made similarly to all the others;
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And cure it as long as it is sound.
de la dolor de la hainche	The pain in the hip
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene:	When pain comes to the buttock of the thigh, and it is due to cold and moisture, and the patient has been treated with what we have advised in its division, but the cure does not work, and the disease is old:
adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	Therefore, you should cleanse the patient of the large phlegms with stinking pills, or other good and similar pills.
Aprés li fai cautere;	Afterwards, make the cautery;
et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres:	And the method of the cautery is according to two methods:
c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	This means 'and this refers to the combination of hot remedies, and fire cautery.'
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz:	Fire cautery follows several methods, among which one is such:
que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire;	You should apply the fire cautery on the buttock region, three triangular cauterizations according to this form, and make them deep and broad, with an area between each cautery equal to the size of two fingers, and let these be olive-shaped;
aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Never do you apply the fire cautery in the middle of the buttocks, for which there are four according to this form:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche;	And if you see that it needs treatment, apply the circular fire cautery as we have discussed earlier in the dislocation of the buttocks;
mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	But do it in such a manner that the circles contain all the hip, and all the ribs be pierced.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is the method used in sciatica, when pain remains in the hip and does not reach to the thigh or leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc;	And if it reaches up to the thigh and leg, then you should apply two cauterizations or until the patient's pain is relieved, and perform three on top of the ankle, with one slightly towards the left side;
et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur;	either use surgical instruments or apply heat to the ribs where they connect to the hip;
et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if the patient feels that the pain extends to the right or slightly below the knee, then apply cauterization where the patient feels the pain, three points or four at each point of the cauterization referred to as 'points'.
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus;	And if necessary, do more of this task;
et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if the pain is localized around the knee toward the thigh, apply a cautery with either an incising or circular cauterizer, and ensure strict caution in all your cauterizations so you do not let off steam until the cauterizer burns nerves and major arteries, and you do not cause more harm and constriction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I myself have seen many who performed cauterization on the ankle near the foot, and it worked until their leg was completely healed, and even the toes as well, causing them to be pierced and corrupted entirely.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After an abdominal treatment from which they died.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pains are in two parts together, make a cautery on one and on the other, according to this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce;	And the sage instructed on using a thigh cauterizer, which is as follows: make it like this rod and place its head also as big as a finger's knuckle, or slightly less, with joints in between and from one joint to the other cover an area equivalent to the size of a thumb's knuckle.
et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait;	And let the joints be made in two parts, and they should also resemble knots, and have a well-made iron hook;
et c’est li forme:	And here is its form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit;	And apply it until it becomes entirely red and emits fumes, and then place it onto the buttock of the diseased part, and rotate it over the healthy side;
et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors;	and once the cautery has been applied and heated, leave it for three days;
et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens;	then apply a poultice of butter, and keep the wound open long enough;
aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	after the ointment treatment until it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent;	Albucasim says that we use very little of this cautery for fear of causing harm to his patients, and few people use it;
et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	and nevertheless this is among the better cauteries, which can be tolerated, and it benefits where it applies.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi;	The medical burn tools are such that you make the instrument intertwining in which descends the edge of the door, and it may be made of skin or iron with one long surface, and at its height have two marks, and have between each the size increase of a thumb;
et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	and they must be opened both above and below, and join together in this form:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche;	After placing the loin of the animal lying on its healthy side, place your hand very close to the hip bone;
aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After placing it between the two hot circles which are heated by the fire for one hour to the end, allow the patient to feel the heat and the burn.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu;	For he finds a similar sensation as if of fire;
et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit;	And when the biting is past, lift your hand with the tool and raise the buttocks gently by two fingers, and leave it like this for three days, and apply butter until that which is black from the scalding goes off.
et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait;	And let it be for three days until the putrefaction proceeds;
et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	This would be the final treatment after wound cleaning as long as it is clean.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument;	And if the pain has extended up to the thigh or even to the leg, then you should apply the same tool to the waist in the same manner as you did to the buttocks;
et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And this is the way for hot baths, and I have written about it in my treatise on correcting medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take wood ashes and live lime, as much of one as of the other, grind them together, and mix them into a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir;	if there is a small notch ahead where a razor's tip might be able to fit in.
et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main;	and place another pot well filled with water and add alkali and salt and sweet water, as long as there are two layers of powders on top that you will have well grasped in your hand;
et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	and let it be like this until the water turns murky or the water becomes as dense as lead, then take all that liquid, and pour it over salt and alkali in the same way as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres.	And at that point, it will be quite murky and administered in the manner of various medicines' preparations and in other cauterizations.
Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	For it performs the same work as fire and can be used with other medicines for cauterizing well in the buttocks area like pepper, honey, anacardium and salt with soap, all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galen tells us of a treatment where some men were cured of the pain in their hip and sciatic vein, and all the joints, and he says that no other treatment was done, and it was cured in one instance when this treatment had been performed. And they bathed themselves as Galen instructs below.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie;	And instructs in this manner that you take finely ground green and dry vitriol, and grind it very thoroughly with a little fat, and apply it on the hip and thigh and leg where the pain is situated, and bandage it;
et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And leave it for three hours, ensuring that the afflicted area no longer feels the burn.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then make them enter or bathe until their body becomes slightly warm, and have them rest in bed. The pain will disappear completely and they will be cured.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And know that no one should use such medicine cauteries, if this isn't after the removal of pus.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout;	And Dioscorides states that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with the fat of a goat, if help must;
et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And the cautery should be made in this manner.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take animal dung and mix it with old oil, and apply this mixture to the hollow located between the thumb at the ankle and the other one called the sole.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains;	After taking dried goat fat, and place it on the fire until it turns to charcoal, then lay it on the wool, and leave it until it becomes sooty.
et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee;	And repeat this process again, and keep doing it in this way until you believe by logic that it will reach the hip, and that the pain subsides.
et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	And this method of cautery is called "sheep cautery".
de la dolor dou dos	of the pain of the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether by impact or percussion or from too much evacuation, or due to similarity of cold substance spreaded, none of these appearances warrants cauterization, because that which comes from the infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir;	After that, when the patient has been rid of rotten pills or similar substances, and when it's positioned on its back, at the spot where pain persists, mark three lines diagonally, and in each line perform V cautery sessions or more according to the effectiveness and quantity that the patient can endure.
et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»;	and let the cauteries be done with the type of cautery called "points";
et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	and if you see fit, perform three or four point cauteries halfway along the median clavicle according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor;	This disease often affects young children, and the initial symptoms are that they feel faint when they stand up, and fear;
et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	and you find in the last spinal nerve of the back and in us the manifestation that appears on other nerves.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and observe it being treated, if you apply the fire cautery according to this shape.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	So that the cautery pricks every part of the spine equally.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see it, cauterize along the spine with the cautery touching two or three lines, and make the points close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After the cure as long as it is clean according to what we have said, and beware that you do not apply the cautery on blisters which are in the vicinity of a nerve.
de la dolor des jointes	Of the pain in joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere:	When joint pains are due to moistness that spreads through every limb of the body, and when pain comes in the feet, which they call 'gout' properly, and when it is caused by cold, these conditions cannot be cured with medicines alone; instead, treatments involving cautery should be used in this manner:
fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	Make the mouth of the cautery at the joint of the foot, and apply olive oil in this manner:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if there is need that you touch on the face at the foot, if it makes you cauterize across the whole cautery saying "point" when done.
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire;	And if the pains extend up to the knees and other joints, which happens many times, apply the cautery on each knee three or four times for each part, with all parts treated using olive oil;
et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you need to do more, do it further, but don't let your hand be off until the pain's expected heat is cooked.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend to the knees and back, one administers the cautery as we have said in our chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes;	And if pains occur at the hands, do points inside the second faint lines;
et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main;	And if there remains any pain in the arms, make points on each joint and on the back of the hand;
et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	And if the pains come up to elbows or up to shoulders, cauterize each part, and give good care to the patient and apply medications.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	And if you treat him well and cleanse phlegm, he will recover with the help of God.
de la routure dou syfac	from the rupture of urine
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor;	When rupture occurs in the intestines, and the bowels descend to the kidneys; this is new, so it's important that when you are curing his eyesight, you don't let him fast on that day.
et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre;	And when he uses things that make his stomach empty, so that his intestines descend from his belly;
aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors;	After making him lie down on his back between your hands, and instructing him to shave his armpit so that his sweat glands are repaired, and then you pull out at his fingertips with your fingers, and watch over the cut along the bone as if it were a half-circle above the chest;
puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Then heat up the cautery of which this is the shape:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	As long as it is white and excretes gallstones.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu;	Then pull out the boils at their base;
et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier;	And let the attendants shave his hand so that it doesn't turn around;
et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains;	And work the thighs well with the patient, and place one of the servants on his thighs, and another above his buttocks where he shaves the hands;
puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os;	Then place the cautery on the mark at your full hand span, and hold it straight until you touch the bone. If you don't reach it on the first attempt, try again several times until you touch the bone.
et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere;	and remember that the boil should not escape when you use the cautery;
que tu ne le brulasses;	so do not burn it;
et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	and so that the disease does not die or any other illness occurs.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your procedures are worthless.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure;	And it is necessary that the application of the cautery to children be subtle according to their size, and for adults as well, according to their size;
aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	after three days, cure the wound with butter until the scab is removed;
aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee;	After applying other ointments until he heals, and let the patient lie on his back for forty days so that the wound is well sealed.
et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And it is necessary that his exercises be prolonged for some time, so that the sweat does not appear when he wishes to go into rooms.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors;	And after forty days, when he wishes to stand up, make him wear a well-fitted bandage, and let him do this for another forty days;
et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire;	And let him have good rest, work little and guard against excessive drinking and eating, and avoid shouting too loudly;
et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	And when he follows this instruction, he is completely healed.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will say about the treatment of clipping hair in its chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	of the rupture of the abdomen
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur;	When ulcers occur in other bellies and are known to the patient, and you see that they no longer grow, treat them with a cautery as needed according to their size, and apply it for one-third of a spoonful.
aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit;	After the treatment according to what we have said;
et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	And none of the old ones said that one should cauterize with a three-angled cautery according to this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	But the first sign is the direction of the wound and make a line across the width above the wound, and another below it, and hold your hand along the entire length of the cautery.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cauterizations are lighter and redder.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	from old pain in no limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes in any limb, due to falling or being hit, and this pain lasts a long time, and the cure with medicine does not help, then it is necessary for it to be cauterized using the cautery called "points", and make the cauterizations according to the length of the limb and its smallness and weakness and its usefulness and its location in twisting and its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien;	If it is well done by the first cautery, that's good;
se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If that name, reapply the second cautery on it, because these parts are such that they must move with the limb that is nearby, so you should make the cauterizations until the maladies are healed.
de meselerie	In mixture
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	Every time the wound is treated with a large dose of treatment, and similarly the disease that comes from the putrefaction of blood and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief:	Can't you see the cauterization? Take care that the disease is at the beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, without spreading or staying, and you doubt that corruption will spread throughout the malady, then make five cauterizations on this head:
I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous;	I place the head at the nose, and the other towards the forehead at the end of the hair.
et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel;	and at the two horns it is above them, and one behind near the spine;
et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir;	and hold your hand so that the cautery reaches to the bone and until the crusts come out fully, in order for the fumes of the large pus to be able to escape;
et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	and apply the cautery on the mouse according to its location.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse;	And if it is spread everywhere;
et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules;	And if it is evident, then you should apply these cauterizations with this method: the first on the neck and the second under the spine of the collarbone. Apply three cauterizations down the spine from the neck to the back, one large in the armpit and another below it, and two at each shoulder;
et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains;	And II on the heels, and II on the tendons under the foot, and I on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands;
et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler;	And be careful not to burn those nerves that are at the back of the heel, where you should not touch them;
et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	And never apply heat to the bone of the forefinger, and one application on the bone of the stomach, and another on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite;	Know that the more you apply heat (or cautery), the more help it provides, and it benefits him;
et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	Know that the sick do not feel pain from heat (or cautery) as those who are well would, because their body is already thoroughly corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is necessary that the cauterization be large and small according to the limbs and joints, as you will find in the methods of iron tools.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After the treatment, wash the wound with flour mixed with honey and other treatments until it is healed.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre;	When inflammation occurs in any limb and is treated with medicines, oils, and bandages, but remains unchanged, then you should apply heat (cautery) to the limb according to its size and degree of swelling.
et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur;	And let the cautery slightly enter the skin of the anus;
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then do the cure for ointments until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure;	And one cauterizes at the hand and foot and back, along the nerve where it makes the limb move, and thus there is an extraction of pus;
et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And always, no one should interfere unless they are knowledgeable about the limbs and the exits of the moving nerves in the body.
de albaras	From woad
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color;	When the disease called "albaras" has matured, and medicine treatments are of no use, then cauterize with a small cautery according to the amount of skin around the anus, until all the pus is extracted, and its color changes;
puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie;	Then apply a paste of oat flour and lentils with rose oil and leaves of plantain, and blood from calf and blood from quail, one part from each;
et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And mix all together, and bind it with a cloth, and let it be over the area until it is sanitized.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The treatment for the sore by cautery
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When the sore starts and you notice it, if you stop its growth, apply the fire cautery to the part that seems like a circle around the sore, all around its circumference.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre;	And the surgeons advised that one should also apply the cautery in the middle of the sore;
et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois;	And I don't find this to be good either, because I fear it might lead to the wound becoming infected and putrefied, and I have never wanted to do so before;
et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And a more practical thing is to apply the cautery internally, using what's called the "circular" cautery, as we have mentioned earlier in terms of different types of cauterizations.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	Of the swelling that cannot perish
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens;	When some have an illness which is called "adubelati", and it delays death or because of the excess it makes or due to old age when health declines (that is, when one is too old) and there's little blood present, or due to its length;
et tu la vues haster de meurer:	and you see it hastening towards death:
adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant;	therefore, apply the cautery between several small applications;
aprés le laisse ensi.	after that, leave it like this.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	Because it will hasten its death.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see her pierced through with the entire cautery, then heat up the cautery in accordance to what is described:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And place your hand in the middle of this illness that is called "adubelati" until the cauterization penetrates deeply, and make these cauterizations such that the patient feels discomfort in such a way that the process of decay accelerates.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	Afterwards clean it as long as it is perfectly healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	The treatment with a fire cautery using a iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another way of illness is called 'corrodens', and it is nothing else but a limb disease, for it damages the limbs as if they were dry branches being burnt.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est;	If you see this illness in them that can withstand the combined heat of a cautery, then gently apply small and large fire cauterizations, according to what is needed for the body or where the disease is;
aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	After applying the cautery from all sides until you have cleared away all the corruption, and leave nothing behind, that everything corrupted may be removed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	And leave it for three days, and apply with oil on the burned areas until the scabs from the fire are healed, and all of the corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the treatment that generates pus.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin;	And if after three days you see that no harm has appeared, it is good;
et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if not, then reapply the cautery to the one that has been left behind with its legs corrupted.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu;	And this remedy is not once cured by medicine in lieu of the fire cautery;
mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division:	but nevertheless, the fire cautery is more effective aid, and I have already described the treatment of the ague with medicine.
pren la quant tu en as mestier.	Use as much as you need.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of hernias that come to stones
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Sometimes it happens that a stone growing outside produces an illness that is called "cyst" according to our understanding, and it is a large lump that irritates the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cautery for this illness does so in two ways.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	This means fire cautery and water hot cautery.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges;	Fire cautery is as if you heat the metal of the cautery like a feather from a rooster, and it should be made of well-cast iron to fit over all parts, and there should be delicate margins;
aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou;	After you heat everything thoroughly on the nail, and twist your hand completely around the nail as it goes to the end of the nail;
et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture;	and leave it like this for three days until it begins to rot;
puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Then make him a poultice of pounded wild marigolds with vinegar, and leave the poultice overnight, and he pricks it and will be pulled out from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cure it with a greasing ointment until it has healed properly.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude;	And if they have turned from the inside of the heart, and often happen both in hands and in feet, then you must bring to bear a cautery of hot water;
et est en teil maniere:	and is done in this manner:
pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues;	take an arnica stick or iron, or a feather of a goose, and place it on the nail and the thorn, that is to say for warts;
et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine;	And place the candle on it until it burns through completely, then add a little hot water, and hold your hand firmly, and squeeze your hand as you rotate so that the edge of the candle smears to the base of the nail, and then may find the warm water way deeply down to the root;
et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre;	And let the patient endure a little of the hot water's immersion for an hour;
puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	Then leave it like this, and all its roots will be uprooted completely.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Start one after another, until you have treated all those within your body, then treat the inflammations that produce pus.
li cure dou trembler	he treats through trembling
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee;	When there are tremors from cold or nerves, or a fever of the fourth sort or any other illness, it is necessary to make four or four on the spine of the back, one cautery between each vertebra;
et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire;	and one cautery under the chin, and one on the stomach at the olive-shaped cautery;
si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	If you let it tremble, hasten the health of the disease cold.
des pustules puans	pus-sores
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	Once visible from outside the body bathed, or pus-filled blisters, that come from large decaying matter.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule:	It is necessary at the beginning when they appear that one performs a cautery on each head of the pustule:
un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	A fine fire stick cautery, whose points are taken by the flame, or a long root of sainfoin, or to the lentil-shaped cautery.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez;	And once they are cauterized at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and it cannot grow pus ahead, but they get rid of the excess from which they come, and they become healthy;
mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	But it must be done after the blood has been evacuated.
quant li artere est copee	When the artery has been cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses;	Many times great bleeding from the artery that is cut at the wound comes outwards or from incising an abscess, or from the cautery on the limb, and similar things would occur;
et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	And there's much inconvenience in stench.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus;	And yet, when this happens to none, if you quickly place your index finger on the wound of the vein, and hold it for as long as the pulse subsides under your finger, and no more droplet comes out;
puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge;	Then apply several small and large olive oil cauteries to them until they are all red.
puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	Then apply me, whether large or small depending on the wound and its location where the artery is located, place the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, and keep the cautery in place until the pulse has ceased.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it jumps out when you lift your finger from the vein, and the cauteries are off the fire, then take hastily another one of the cauteries that are on the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez;	And don't stop doing this one after another until the pulse is ceased;
et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide;	And see to it that you do not burn through the nerve which is beneath, and let no harm come upon the patient;
et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit:	And know that when cutting near the artery, it's hard to properly suture even if the artery is large; this isn't done through one of the four methods we've mentioned:
ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc;	or by cautery, or by extraction if it hasn't been treated yet, or by strong sewing with thread, or through medications placed which have the power to prevent blood flow;
et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	and so tied and restrained afterward.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Who will administer the reattachment by tightly binding with cloths or by placing burning things on, or other similar actions, if it does not help then it likely won't.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne;	And if this happens to anyone and they have neither seen nor medicine at hand, then they should place their thumb on the wound of the vein as we've said, and stretch it well until it's properly sutured over the wound and over the vein;
et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez;	And let it not move but moisten it with cold water often that is very cold until the organ becomes frozen and swollen and remains stiff.
et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And make inquiries about those who need cauterization and medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	This begins the second book of treatments for amputations
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres;	As we told you in the first chapter, about all diseases where cauterization with fire or hot medicines is necessary, and we discuss their causes, remedies, instruments, and forms of cauterization.
et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	And I have covered that chapter on the shoulder up to the elbow, and I will proceed with this chapter along the same path for what is found more easily for what you want.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And as I begin this one, it is necessary that you understand that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first section about cauteries, which means greater caution must be exercised.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses;	For in the work of this chapter, there is often bloodletting when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and treating wounds, and extracting arrows, and cutting into stones, and similar things;
ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For there is doubt and fear, and many die as a result.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I urge you that you do not embark on folly.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	And none of the ways of people come to healing.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice;	If they come from those who are so afflicted by their illness that they die lightly due to the foolishness they find in their disease, and the severity of their suffering;
et de ces doit on avoir paor.	And one should have fear about this.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit:	And for these I will give you their meaning, and say:
«atendez, je sui garis»;	Wait, I am here.
et li maladie est despitouse.	And the illness is resistant.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los;	It is not right for you to consent to those who come to your door with this manner, but rather invest more in respect than in greed. Do not act foolishly, but wisely about what you are certain of and can take knowledge from;
et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie;	And use prediction and guidance in your treatments for your patients, ensuring their health is transformed.
et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	And this will help you gain good reputation, fame, and lasting memory.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Dear child, our lords provide good understanding and righteousness to you, and if you wish to aspire from the holy inspiration of their hand, so be it.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or I have ordered this chapter out of discussion by chapters, according to what is before or the chapter about the cauteries, which I discussed from the head up until the foot, because you will find it easier that which you need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	from the head full of water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant;	Know that this disease often arises when the child is born, and when the mother holds the head of the child too tightly;
et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	And it never happens due to any other reason that we know of.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors;	And I have never seen this disease in anyone other than children, and among all those I have seen, death came quickly;
et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And because of this, it seems to me that dividing the work into partial treatments would be worthwhile.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir;	And I have seen the child of this, where the shoulder was full of water, and the head swelled each day until it could no longer bear it;
et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os;	And suffered so much from the moisture that he died, and this moisture is assembled around the bone at the elbow, between the muscle and the bone;
et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large;	And the operations were such that when moisture is between the muscle and the bone, and the abscesses are small, you split through the head with a wide crack.
et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre;	And make it as long as two of our lengths, while the moisture goes along.
et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	and here is the form of the splint:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If there is more moisture, and the abscesses are larger, make two cuts in a cross-like manner, according to this shape:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut:	And if the moisture is around the bone, and you see the signs where the head joints are open from each side, and when you press it with your hand internally, it makes a sharp sound that does not stop:
si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	So it is necessary that you split the head along its center into three cracks in this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after making the incision, remove all moisture completely outside.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor;	After restraining the cuts from powders and oils, and I put wine and oil, and leave it like this until the fifth day;
puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	Then release him, and treat the wound with poultices and ointments, and allow the head to heal evenly, and then let the patient eat dry meat from a source of moisture until the limb is strong and healthy.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue;	And another method of incision is to look at where the opening of the abscess is large, and to assemble water;
car aucune fois est elle devant;	for it never faces forward;
aucune fois derrier;	nor does it face behind;
aucune fois en destre;	nor does it face to the right;
et aucune fois en senestre.	nor does it face to the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir;	Cut accordingly to the size of the wound or abscess opening, and fill with water, and make a cut according to what you are able.
et warde que tu ne coper l’artere;	and beware that you do not clip the artery;
et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	and let blood flow slightly, so that the patient dies from the diffusion of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
de reume	Of cautery from fire, command the sick person to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When it comes to any disease which is called "catarrh" in the eyes or at the bottom, and this sickness is old, and the treatment with medicine does not help, then the last resort therapy would be cautery using which one cuts off the two great arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief;	Therefore, when you see them cut off, the patient must recover beyond their head;
aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel;	After rubbing the wound with a rough cloth until the arteries are visible, then pull out the patient's head to its entire length.
puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues;	Then look where the vein is located, and after the ears where both the eyes are, and they should be returned;
puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	Then mark the signs of the incision, then cut both with a sharp sword for two parts, until the vein size reaches to the bone, and this should be done through the width of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see it, hold the spatula near the artery and vein above, cut also as two inches through.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein has been severed, make sure to continue cutting upwards outward from there.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os;	And if the artery does not open to touch it, you should measure the size of the gap in three inches, then cut and proceed until reaching the bone;
et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere;	And what needs to be removed of the blood is six cubic centimeters, and by chance somewhat more or less, depending on how well the patient can endure it, and the filling of the artery;
puis regarde la plaie:	Then look at the wound:
s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	If there is a bone tip mark of syphilis, cut it off where no vein remains, then incise and remove any pus, stitch up the wound and dress it with ointment until it heals.
de emigrainne	"De emigrainne" translates to "from grain" or possibly referring to a process of sifting or removing grains. Without further context, it's challenging to provide an exact interpretation for this specific phrase within the medieval medical treatise. In general terms, in a medical setting, it could relate to procedures involving the removal of grains (such as pieces of gravel or sand) from bodily tissues or fluids.
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When old age approaches, and severe coughing occurs, due to moisture from tears and heat in the temples and elsewhere in the elderly body, as well as similar things, treatment is done using methods of medical cure and all this does not benefit it. Therefore, one should extract the arteries of the temples and apply a cautery, as we have described.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit;	And the way to extract them is that the patient should allow their hair to grow from their temples, and listen for the pulse which appears in the temple, because it opens well through its beat, and responds only in some who are too cold;
et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement;	And if it responds, strangle the neck with some cloths, then rub its head with a rough cloth, and raise it in hot water until the pulse becomes clearly evident;
puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	Then take the spatula of which here is the shape:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie;	Then scrape the skin slightly until you feel the pulse, then pull it upwards with needles, and remove well the webs that are off of each part;
et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	And if the pulse is subtle, turn it at the tip of the little finger, then scrape that part according to the quantity of the two shoulders.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it's not cut, neither will escape all without pain.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III;	And bleed from the sixth century onward, until the third.
et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc;	And if the artery is large, it is necessary that you tie it with two loops of a strong silk thread, to prevent putrefaction from occurring before the healing of the wound and to prevent bleeding.
puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez;	Then cut off the excess that is between the two threads at that same time. And then, if you see fit, apply the copper cautery up to the bone as long as the dislocated shoulders are cut.
et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And this is the skilled work, if the patient does not have fever and they have warm complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors:	For the cauterizing helps to complete the drying process:
por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	Therefore, it is of greater help in drying processes.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites;	It is necessary for the extraction of arteries; one must fill the area with old cotton and place it under well-made tents.
et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when they [the arteries] are released, if one uses dry medicinal substances that create heat and tents until it is healed;
et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez;	And if you leave the artery without stopping bleeding as you work, if you hurry with the copper by cautery, or you fill the area with vitriol and hold it in your hand so that the bleeding is stopped.
et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient;	And if you do not have that present, place ice on the area as long as the bleeding is frozen, and remove the ice with cold water until the bleeding stops, and hold it in accordance with what is necessary;
et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	And when the one who is bleeding and more fragile in extracting an artery is involved, you should apply this cautery to sear the vessel of that cautery by two cuts, but let the cuts be well apart to retain heat for longer.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instruments are too tight, they hold less of their heat.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus;	And there should be between the two knives about half an inch of space. Then when you mark to join the two ends together, and you place the hot iron until it reaches the bone, and cut open in two places;
et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout;	And let there be distance between the two shoulders, because this cautery does not weld completely from end to end;
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	and it is the shape of the cautery:
des larmes	of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis;	When the tears from the eyes are draining through veins above the testicle region of the head muscle, and no benefit is gained from any medicine applied, and you see the face of the patient turning red, and feel the forehead trembling as if with a heartbeat;
et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	And when they are so wet and moist that the paper hairs fall off, and the papers heat up, being scorched by the tears' heat, this treatment requires effort.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front;	And they named the old one 'healer of bruises', and it is that you make the patient who has this disease grow hairs on their head or forehead, then you cut three equal slits across the forehead according to the length of the forehead.
et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres;	Let one of the slits also be two and a half inches all across the forehead from bottom to top, reaching almost to the hairline, and for the others, two in length by two in width, cut them above the ribs through the sheets (a type of protective covering), and avoid cutting into the arteries which are above the ribs through the sheets.
et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins;	And keep your hand away from the connection of the two jaws, and each wound will have an area equivalent to three inches in length.
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	And have an absorbent sponge and cloth ready to wipe away the blood, then use a sharp spatula from two parts of which this is made.
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision;	From the incision made above the temple up to the second incision;
et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	And burn the entire area between the two grooves until you reach the line where it meets the bone, then cut along halfway down the second incision up to the other groove, and then remove that pus-filled part.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	If you use a tool in the first incision that is called 'culetter', and it is very sharp on one side, and on the other side is hollow, not sharp, and this shape:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And make the cut towards the fatty part of the kidney, and let the knife head face towards the bone, and the blade until it reaches to the middle crack.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer;	And cut all the blood vessels that descend from the head until the incision is continuous up to where they open into the skin, and then make another cut halfway down the groove up to the other opening;
et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris;	And remove the blood evenly, and expose the area for the taken blood;
puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne;	Then place a piece of old cotton in each groove, and put damp cloths soaked with vinegar, oil, and garlic over them, making sure no pus remains.
et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And on the third day, release the wound, and I administer large plantings of water turpentine, then the cure with basil oil and rose oil, and other treatments for wounds, until it heals.
dou reume des eulz	from the pus
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees;	When dealing with sudden severe catarrhs that are customary, and you see the eyes becoming weak and small, and weakening of sight, and burned paper;
et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue;	And the hair falls out, and one feels pain in the forehead, and the patient sneezes, and the body is affected;
adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	So know through these events that such matters and this catarrh come only from many veins, and the correct treatment is here.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And it is that you instruct the patient behind his forehead, then make a large incision within the forehead, and another somewhat wide below it.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os;	And start from the left temple fracture to the right temple, and make the incision up to the bone;
et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier;	And keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move during eating;
et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin;	And when the bone is exposed, all the blood will escape onto an sponge; then stuff it between the two lips of the wound and place old cotton, trying linen.
puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut;	Then cover it with moistened cloths in wine and oil, and guard against pus formation;
quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	When it is bone, you must rub the bone until flesh begins to grow, then treat with things that dry out and cause growth.
En teil maniere:	In this manner:
pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre;	Take two parts of wheat flower and four parts of clove, then make them into plaster;
et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	And he administers in these wounds to enhance flesh throughout.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Regarding ear piercing.
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses:	Everything that goes into the ears is one of the four things:
ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer;	or grains, or beast, or stone from mining work or anything similar like iron;
ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois;	or seeds, such as beans, peas;
ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	or flowing matter like water and vinegar and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When it discharges from the ear hole or in any other manner that does not fit to the ear, nor grows in the ear, then place the ear under the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction;	If you see the stone, if there is no drop of purple oil or camphor oil, then proceed with extraction;
et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine;	and you make him sneeze with condiments, and moisten his nostrils when the sneezing comes on, and place pieces of cloth or wool inside the ear;
et estent l’oreille au desus.	And the ear is above.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure;	The mouth often comes from this treatment;
et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	And if it doesn't come out, then it's handled through subtle pinpricks, about which there is this procedure:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin;	If it jumps out through the pricks, that's good;
se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure;	But if not, then proceed with extracting using a delicate surgical instrument of small curvature;
et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne;	And if it doesn't jump through this one, make an arachnid needle and press the tip of the needle or the ear root very strongly, and soak the part inside the needle with beeswax so that the wax cannot enter along with the needle;
puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit;	Then try to force it outwards, as often comes out in the manner we have described.
et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor;	And if it doesn't come out in such a manner, then one takes hold of the part and holds its sides, and places on oneself none but an instrument that is precisely suited for this task, and puts a little cotton inside.
puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	Then press the lump against the stone or whatever it may be, and use force.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme;	And if it doesn't come out from all these things that we have said, then hurry to cut the ear so that pus can escape, and spasms;
et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant;	And the way to cut is that you first make a surgeon in the face of the earache, and remove blood according to the measure of its virtue, then place the person under your hands and turn their ear upwards, and make a small cut at the base of the ear near the fat or where it hangs down;
et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche;	And make the incision as wide as a moon, until you reach the bone, then cut through the flesh according to your strength, and suck it quickly into your mouth;
et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And clean the wound until it is sound.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction;	And if there are grains and they swell up, administer extraction;
et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	and if it cannot escape, administer pus evacuation under this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and make an incision on that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces;	But do not do this when you think the grains are moistened by ear moisture, until you have done many pieces of it.
puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	Then extract with subtle hooks and suck at the source, just as we have said, so that the extractions are healed.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In an earache therefore that causes weeping in the ear, then it is fitting for the patient to perform first-aid by making a hollow with some old cotton and letting the ear weep out.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And be still over that same ear or where the ache is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If it leaps out through the sky, that's good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu;	If not, take many stones according to their lengths and lightly, and heat them a bit on the fire;
et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille;	And place the patient's ear one or both parts inwards, and draw from it on one side of his feet, and make an incision on another bone near to the bone that is in the ear;
et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer;	And continue this from bone to bone until all the strength of the cut has been made, and in this way it cuts away all its strength.
et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars;	And if you see this, take the twig, and push one part of the bone into the ear, and the other end with fire until the more tender twig is burned;
puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	Then do this to other twigs in the same manner until all the cut has been made through it, as we have said about bones.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division;	In the extraction of the beast, if it's small like a mite and similar things, treat it as we have said in division;
mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures;	But if it is of great size so one can feel it, proceed with the extraction of needles;
et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	And it's the easier thing to remove which is in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil:	In the extraction of worms from the ears, when you try treatments as we have mentioned in dividing and discussing distillations, if the treatment isn't effective, it is necessary to examine the ear under the sun:
s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	If no worms are apparent, treat with fine needles, and if none appear, take the form of wax from here:
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And make it narrow below and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine;	And apply the finest point in the ear according to the amount of suffering from the patient's illness, then fully shape it with wax.
fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	Let this often happen until all the blood leaves.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere;	And if they do not heed to leave, if you apply the end of the cotton wick as I said in the stone;
et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations;	And if they do not protrude as we said, administer distilled waters that the old ones have proven in the treatment of worms, and you will find a treatment for distilled waters;
et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if you distill your oils and medicines in the ear with all this instrument, as shown here in the form as you see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller;	And be it made of silver or rusty iron at the small openings, and above pour to distill;
et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton;	And to press within the distillation with an iron-made instrument well made for this, and if you see take the wick and envelop it around the protruding cotton tip;
puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille;	Then pour your oil or your juice, and whatever you see of your medicines in the wick, and let the wick be inside the ear;
puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille;	Then bury your cotton in the powder completely, and press your hand gently until the oil is distilled or at the point of entering the ear;
et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille;	And let the smell of the medicine permeate inside, and let the distillation be heated over fire as if one is distilling it in the ear;
et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And make sure it's not too cold, for the medicine would not be as good then.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Regarding ear piercing.
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles;	No child is born without any ear parts;
et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir;	And the same thing happens to many due to injuries from wounds or a fetus born inside the ear, and these injuries come into the ear at no other time unless one can see them;
et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	And never does any part lose its shape, and one sees this very well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil;	Therefore, that which comes upon them, if one cannot see it, is of concern for several arrangements, and in such cases it is appropriate that you place the ear to the sun on the sore.
et regarde dedens:	and look inside:
se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	if you see the superficial pus, if the work has this kind of formation as described:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille;	And may it be both cutting in front and behind all flatly, so that it does not hurt the ear;
se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	if the pus is of new flesh or from the ear, if you have subtle cuts, and gently scrape, until that flesh is entirely removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the ointments are well applied in the ear, take a delicate thin tool and heat it slightly over the flame, then place it inside the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille;	If you feel the irritation that causes discomfort in the ears of the patient, gently prick the earlobe, and ensure you do not damage the nerves of the ear.
puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	Then place a tent in the ear according to the width of the opening, and moisten it with the Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet;	Continue this for as long as the wound is healing or apply a tent and moisten it with pink water, and dust it with ground vitriol.
et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	And if you see the ear swelling up, it is necessary to remove the tent and replace it with another one that's moistened with rosin and beeswax, until the swelling has disappeared.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Continue to treat it as long as it is sound.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if bleeding occurs, soak a cloth and wet it with cold water, then put it on the ear, and use other treatments that stop the bleeding which are similar to those used for distillations.
de la char des papieres	From the residue of paper
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines;	The treatment for eyes when they are moist and dry involves spreading them with forceps and tweezers, and applying a hot iron to the base of their roots;
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	Then place sulfur on the burned area.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues;	And if it is not removed by peeling, then apply the small lens cautery to cauterize it, and then use a cauterizer after an incision; it will heal.
et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines;	And many times they can't find anything left from their roots;
et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And when they are cauterized by fire, those roots get burnt and do not return.
de la gresle	Regarding ice
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz;	Many times in the papers, one encounters things that seem to freeze in their form and hardness, and for this reason is called 'granulation', and it is a collection of moisture large on the surface of the paper.
li ovraiges est telz:	The treatments are as follows:
pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir;	Take care of the silence of the great bone on both sides, and it is a simple matter to know;
fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Then make it wide, then scrape each part slightly, then take it with forceps, and manipulate.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide;	If you can't scrape without piercing the paper slightly, if it doesn't harm the patient;
et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	And if there's a large crack, you put it together at a seam, and treat until it heals;
et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	And if it's small, don't use any force, because the ointment heals it quickly and nourishes the flesh.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre;	And if the great bone descends within the ear towards the upper part, you should turn the paper, and put the bone at one of the forceps, and manipulate it from both sides;
et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien;	And if the paper is moved by the incision, it causes no harm;
et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And when the large lump is removed, rinse with clean water and cleanse the area around where the infection was until the patient feels better.
de la graisse des eulz	of the grease of the lumps
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz;	Exinach is a fat that accumulates on the sheets of papers above it, and this happens more often in children than adults, and causes much discomfort to their eyes, and they have catarrh coming out during mornings, and cannot look at the sunlight because tears rush to their eyes;
et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	And because of this, they lie on their sides and sleep there, and have the papers under their eyes wet due to the sweat and appearance that turn over from the exinach which opens in the eye.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press your hand onto it and feel the exinach between your fingers.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain;	And the method of treatment is such that patients place their head on your healthy part;
et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li;	And take flax cloths, and set up a tent in the manner of a circle according to the quantity that can contain the discharge from each part, then place it on them;
et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle;	And press with your thumbs on both sides, so that the discharge is gathered inside the circle;
puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne;	Then make in the middle of the moisture at the spleen, cut a slit that is not much larger than the wound you do for the opening of the vein;
et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach;	And stretch the leather all around as far as you can see the discharge;
et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And in various orientations comes discharge from the slit, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars;	Pull out then take one piece of fine cloth between your thumbs at the back, and turn your hand to the right and left until it disperses;
et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	And make sure not to adjust in the slit, don't allow all of the pus up to the eye, don't cause any bleeding.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere;	And if it leaks out at the start of the slit, gently increase a bit more of the slit until it starts to open;
puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	Then pull it out as we have said, then soak in oil and water, place on the area, and apply binders.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if there are such people who grind salt and place it to corrupt that moisture which remains.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then he should be treated as long as he is sane.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it comes to cutting an abscess there, then a plaster treatment is applied until the wound heals.
des poilz des papieres	(of paper hairs)
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz;	When hair grows out of its natural place and becomes old, if they harm the eyes, they can bring about diseases such as weeping used to be and paper softenings causing impotence, all leading to the deterioration of vision;
et est li cure selonc IIII manieres:	And then the treatment follows four methods:
ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	or by fire cautery with the assembly of heat, or by medicine in water according to what was discussed previously in the section on cautery methods, and it will be done either through cutting and stitching or through bandages, as I shall explain.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre;	It is necessary for you to place the head of the eye in its healthy position, then turn the paper towel under your left hand;
s’elle est convertie, c’est boin;	If it has turned, that's good;
se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus;	otherwise, if not, then insert a needle with all one thread above;
et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur;	and let it be either outside the edge of the paper or where the hair grows beneath these hairs, and pull the thread upwards across the entire paper, then turn it with the razor;
puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit;	Then they do this on the part of the skin, on the aligned hair, all over the perfectly smooth area, from the big muscle down to the small.
puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	Then take one thread, and place a small cotton and silk tent on the paper. Then make an 'X' shape on the paper, like a bay leaf, always ensuring that the figure corresponds to the height you see. The paper should be placed diagonally according to this size.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie;	And if one needs to cut a large amount of paper according to how the paper is softened;
puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit;	Then proceed all over the smooth area on the two lines you have indicated, and start from the large muscle down to the small.
et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute;	And if there's a crack near the natural hair in the size of a root, then insert the thyme into one of the two corners close to soundness, and then remove it entirely.
puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce;	Then gather the two lips together at a stitch with a needle made of single thread of fine wool. Clear out the blood, and dry off the excess threads on both edges of the two cuts in all respects. If you see fit to do this;
et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII;	And if not doing that troubles you, or if it's not of concern to you, then leave the stitch and the threads until three or four days.
puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	Then treat the wound without stitches or bindings. Paper peels off at the healing of the wound and the joining of things together; however, the stitches remain moist (as the old ones say), and this is work without fear.
et si a une autre maniere:	And if there's another way:
et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	And it is that you seal the paper with a shape that resembles the leaf of myrtle as we have recounted, in three inches cut according to this form:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	Then cut the one that sits above evenly, according to this form:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure;	And if you don't have the ability to hold the forceps, and the thing isn't even, take a needle or where there is thread, and hold it in front of your face;
et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment;	and hold the other thread longer than the large artery, and the second thread shorter than the small one, and join the threads evenly between your thumbs;
puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then lift your hand evenly, and lift all the skin over which you've stitched, just like we have recounted, then join both edges of the wound by suture, and the treatment until it heals;
et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	and if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with tallow and similar salving substances;
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit:	and sometimes the paper hair gets turned inside out:
si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision;	If it is necessary for you to use what we have said about incision;
mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	but the stitches in both cases are more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme:	The treatment of canines follows this form:
et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est;	and you should convert the paper and the cut inward according to what I have said. Then make two canines by art, and also two ligatures as long as the paper is wide, as well as small in diameter equal to the thickness of the bone;
et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz;	and tie them as two pieces of two parts where you hold the threads;
puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment;	then delicately combine both on top of the paper where the oil is found, and tighten the two canines from each part in a symmetrical manner;
et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	And let it like this for a few days, and the skin that is constricted will die, rot and peel off, until it exits through itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	If it lingers, if the wound has strength, then he treats it as long as it is clean;
et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil;	And when the wound has healed, and if the scab is lifted, and no longer will grow hair;
et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	And this is the form of two hens that you will do according to this image, and according to this length and width:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil;	The operations consist in taking a delicate needle, and then you cut off a thread of silk soft and fine;
puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc;	Then join the ends and knot them finely together, and make the length of the threads as long as your palm in width;
puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil;	Then proceed with this hunt for a finer silk thread, tie it firmly to the end of the thread.
puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain;	Then place the patient's head onto your healthy side;
et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil;	And let the sun be over the operation so that all parts are seen clearly, for this is a delicate and small procedure. Then pull the needle out of every hunt into the root of the adjusted hair, and pierce through the paper as quickly as you draw it above the natural hair;
puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors;	Then pull out the hair up to the tip, and when you find one or two or three or more hairs in it;
puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	Then pull your hand until the hairs come out at the tip of the needle with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil;	And if the chase (hunt) is treated and the hair doesn't come out with it, you should pull the hunt to the end of its thread that you have ordered, until the chase feels forced above the wound and you see this through the eye's vision;
adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus;	Therefore, if you pull the hunt (likely referring to a wound or removed tissue) and the thread, cover the eye and leave it covered for two or three days, until the hair grows back in its place and flesh starts to grow.
et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the hairs are small, accompany with one hair that is naturally long, and raise it along with whichever you leave, until it becomes extended, then raise it.
de la porriture de l’oil	Regarding eye infections or diseases.
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres:	When this disease, called "Aleacrati" or the putrefaction affects the eye, if there are two ways:
l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	One natural, and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And occurs suddenly from wounds, or due to surgeons or cauterization, and through similar incidents.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	And the method of opening it is that you cut through that seam, and open the lips of it, and place linen tents inside, and bandage until it's healed;
et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And it is not right to use in treating it with things that dry and restrict.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere;	For if you do this, the illness returns worse than the first one;
mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic;	but use remedies that soften, such as fennel;
et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	and wash it with hot water or oil and linseed meal that has been cooked, and anoint with garlic melted in any oils, and make a tent, and treat it with this.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant;	And the treasures of your treatment are such that you must guard against it not joining together according to its former shape;
et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And these operations that we have described do not leave out directions for this disease, so that it does not return according to its former shape.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the fat which comes to the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease that is caused by worms is really called "axacrati", and it is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans;	Accidents come from wounds and cuts, and cauterization and similar things;
et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char;	And the method of performing this operation is that you take an awl in which there is double thread, and insert it into the flesh, and make a cut on the left eyelid as far as the right one, so that the threads go through two layers of the flesh;
puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	Then there is the flesh above all the awl, and it cuts into the wide spatula-like area.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin;	And if the paper figure returns according to what is required, it's good;
se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere;	If not, take it easy and place it in the groove, then turn the paper, and make cuts inside the paper;
et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»;	And make the two corners of the two cuts corresponding to the two angles of the incision you have made. Ensure that when they are joined together, the figure resembles the shape of a letter 'Y' or 'Griesche';
puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne;	Then position that flesh according to the size of its circumference and thickness as indicated by the paper, then adjust the two required parts, sewing them with thread like wool.
puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then follow the cure as we have described for softening medicines and baths until they are healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant;	And if the disease originates from a cut or suture or cautery, it is necessary that you make an incision filled with the hair of papers, and according to what was previously mentioned;
puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit;	then cut between the two sides of a tent, as I have said;
et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil;	and one must do the work according to the shape of the disease, for she is very varied in form, and the skilled masters equip themselves with all kinds so they know how to return the shape to its natural form;
et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	and the patients themselves, according to what requires treatment and instruments in various positions.
dou soudement de la papiere	suddenly of the paper
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut;	When this seam occurs between two people in such a way that the paper above is glued with the white of the egg and cannot move or do its natural tasks, then it is necessary to thus insert the tip of a razor underneath the paper, and lift it up;
et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil;	And in the incisions, until you have this one who is in pain under the delicate pus point, which should not be too sharp and not too piercingly dull, so that the patient does not suffer from too sharp pus points and they do not irritate the eye.
et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil;	and make your incisions on that which is assembled, lightly, so that the skin heals according to its natural shape;
et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere;	and heal that which is assembled entirely, and perform no sharp washing in the eye, but use salty water, and wear a colander.
puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef;	then place a linen tent between the skin and the eye, and put wet wool on top of the eye.
et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	and after three days, use a colander and other hot things until it is fully healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	At the eye's nail
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres:	Know that there are two ways regarding the angle:
elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om;	It is nerve-like and appears somewhat hard like dough, and another that isn't nerve-like but appears white like frozen moisture. If you touch it with iron and treat it by pricking with pins, then it cannot be moved;
et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	And both of them start near the large tear ducts and grow slowly, until they cover all vision, light and eye movement.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz;	And the method of incision is such that when the patient's head meets their healthy state, then they open the eyes;
et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus;	and lift the paper with your hand, then curl the nail with small pins, and extend it upwards;
puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort;	Then take a needle, and insert a horse hair, or a cow hair, or a bull hair, and a strong thread;
et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement;	and double the needle's point slightly and place it in the nail bed, then pierce through with all the needle, and bind the nail with a thread and stretch it above, and scorch all the hair at the edge of the nail which is adjacent to the cuticle and the tenderness of the hair up to the tip, then cut off the rest from the root near the hinge on all delicate areas and minor forces, and leave nature's sap if necessary, so that by incision there does not flow the body's tears habitually;
et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit;	And always stretch only the nail to the nail bed and with thread, as we have said;
puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	Then for the scorched one, all the hairless skin around which is of this form:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie;	And see to it that the hair doesn't touch the fleshy lining and tear it, and that the nose tip doesn't pierce;
et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	and after the cut pour a little of this ointment into the ear, and make a collar from silver, and leave it until the other day;
puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the one who needs it as long as they are sound.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines;	And if the nail isn't sensitive and you can't push in the needle, and it doesn't enter under the nails, this condition of the nail is often treated with medicines;
et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	and they grow like I have described in the section of separation, and if you see it cover, work on the eye with the patient, and take the hair carefully slightly sharp according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor;	And grasp the nail gently from above, and if you see that it doesn't diminish at all and your reason is quick, then drop a stream from your mouth into the ear canal made of argentum (silver) and red neckring, and apply a paste to the ear until another day;
puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	Then start the next operation in the same way, until all of it is removed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If there's nothing against your sight, for instance with pus-filled sores, then treat it by draining and start by curing the pus-filled sore until it becomes clean. Then resume the work as before, until it becomes clean again.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne;	And if the appearance of the flesh from the corner affects the eye with great harm, suspend it in vinegar, and carve out only part of it, not all at once, so that no tears come.
puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	Then drop the red neckring which is made of silver into the eye.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh that forms near the pupil
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste;	There are some who have the eyes of certain people born with a red eye, covering the pupil and remaining on the paper and turning outside, seeming like a sapphire rose;
et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force;	And the procedures are such that the patient puts their head into your hand, then move their eyes, and do this to all parts of the body, ensuring each movement is coordinated with what you're doing, and hold them with strength.
puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige;	Then start with the first part of the body and move to shave it all off until the end of the process, making sure not to hurt the eye during this task.
et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	Make the cut like what we have described for the cut in the nail and with the small movements of your hands when dealing with bone, just as the figure shown after this chapter illustrates;
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut;	And when the cut is completed and all the flesh has been removed, use turpentine oil or distill it into red colander and similar corrosive medicines, then place cotton soaked with this oil outside where heat can be applied to promote healing.
et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut;	And if it stays still, and you can feel a lump under the skin, and you doubt about an abscess, leave the eye alone and treat the abscess with things that soothe an abscess;
puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	Then return to your work as long as it is clean, and thus make several characters attached inside the eye by this resemblance.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil;	However, nevertheless, it must be that you adjust the treatment of each natural weak eye;
et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer;	and of the injured way, in the work of iron;
et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	and do not leave your hand in any of these works until you see that this limb endures that work.
des voines des eulz	of veins and eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	When there are red veins covered over the eyes, they tolerate their work and weaken the sight for several days.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel;	Thus the profession is at first to look where there might be a lump, in which it belongs, and besides, and there is no other disease besides that lump;
adonques le coil en teil maniere:	Therefore, perform this treatment like so:
comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	Instruct the patient to put their head in good health, then suspend all their veins throughout the body according to their wisdom, and have the sinews be finely doubled according to this shape:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And let there be two ounces in stages through one half according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil;	then carefully guide those fine veins, and let blood flow out the hour after another, until you see those veins being removed from the eye;
et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes;	and make sure not to damage the eye at the tips of splinters, and do this operation in midday sun, and be very diligent in your work so that you only remove the veins.
et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	And when you have done this, if you drip a necklace of green and red in the eye to corrupt what remains due to congestion.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if you don't have the ability to treat it at that hour, make a plaster for the eye with things that soothe the pain of the eyes, and let it be for several days until the pain is soothed and assurance can be taken that there's no pus accumulation, then start again following this method until they are healed.
et c’est li forme des forces:	And this is the form of strength:
de la fistule de l’oil	Of the ear canal
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule:	The stent so called "arissati" is a fistula:
quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	When you treat it with cautery and hot medicine according to what I have said before, and if it does not heal, then it is infected in the place you cut into the abscess, where it should die, and drain all the moisture that there is, until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme;	And when the bone is fully exposed, and you see the decay and darkness, if you remove it with all the tool that I described;
et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And call it "hard head", and shape it from iron inside the head ring, and make its points like a file as it is in this form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese;	And place your fingers on the affected bone, then turn it between your thumbs, and press your hand a bit as long as you know that this corruption is removed;
et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And do this once, then restore the affected area with medicine that has been prepared for drying.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez;	When the muscles are joined, and there is a new birth of flesh, and the veins of the arm are joined, and remains like this for 40 days, and it does not heal nor becomes abscessed, and no bad accidents come about, know that it is cured;
se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme:	If this does not work, so long as there is no other matter than to bring the fistula back to the neck of the nose according to this form:
et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	And when you uncover the bone for the second time with iron and through wet medicines, and when it is uncovered, take the cut according to this form, and place the iron point of three angles, and the shaft should be thinned up until its head as shown here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif;	Then place the metal against the bone in the eyebrow area, and keep your hand away from the eye socket for a moment, then turn back to fully apply pressure until it pierces the bone. The patient will feel pain because of the wind entering through that point as long as you hold your hand on their nose;
et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif;	And then restore the limb with dry medicines, as I have taught you, and when the sweat begins to appear and harden the skin, let the matter drain out of the nose;
si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	if it's something lighter for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	From the outcome of the eye
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide;	When the eyes open fully and completely, and there is no dislocation or thinning of the lung, you should bind the patient;
puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz;	Then heal him, then apply suction cups or reed without piercing to stimulate it. Then place on the eye a mixture made of acacia and aloe and incense and sarsaparilla, and then press on the eye, and plaster it with bandages and cloths;
et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier;	And the method of folding the cloths is that you take cloths sufficiently soft, and double each one in four, and then place them one on top of another according to the amount they require.
puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir;	Then fasten it above with a hard bandage, and reapply the suction cups to suck without piercing;
puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout;	Then leave the suction cups on and let the eye be held day and night, and if it becomes loose, you should tighten it somewhat.
puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin;	Then check the bandage after day and night, and if you see the eye healing, that is good;
se ce non;	if not;
si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	then redo the plaster, cloths, and bandage along with the suction cups until it heals.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	from the bursting of a blood clot
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir;	When tears come to the iris cloth, then open, and come out like pieces of resin, and is unbelievable to see;
adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier;	Then if you see it congealed, the veins are such that you pierce at the root of the part above just until below, then pierce another hole where there is double thread by the weeping area;
et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition;	and make her pierce it, and leave the first needle according to its placement;
puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef;	then grasp the part of the double thread and tie a section of the iris externally, and tighten well, then remove the needle and place wet woolen bandage abundantly over the eye;
et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee;	and leave it until the thread tears with the iris, then treat the eye with comforting things until the wound is healed;
et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And no less, the wound is restrained by the sleeve of each part of a circle of cloth, until it has healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost;	And if the eyes show a great appearance, if they pierce through the delicate fluid that flows beneath the eye and reaches the nose, and expel the moisture, then insert them quickly.
puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then remove it as soon as it has healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	From the field of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue;	This disease, which is called "alcunnati", can only be found where blood that resembles descending water accumulates in the eye, and it is not real water;
et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz;	And the way this disease appears is that you make the patient sit upright on an apparatus and straight, then take their head between your hands from both sides, and move them until you see the blood come up to your eyes.
puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit;	Then let it burn, do not descend and let light disappear, behold the wounds as they should be.
et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	And if it does not descend at once, know that it is severe, and if its descent from the eye isn't as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse;	If you make the patient sit between your hands, then take the delicate spatula and do this on the corneal membrane, cutting from the continuation of the conjunctiva with the corneal membrane and the crown, until the eye comes out;
et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when it has come out, if you pour in the hot water mixed with honey, or hot water boiled with fennel and honey, then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	From tears of the eye
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier;	We have the indications for the use of water in division and what needs to be pierced;
si en oevre selonc la santeit.	if conducted according to health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort;	It is necessary that you place the patient between your crossed hands, away from light in front of the sun, and tie the healthy eye tightly but not too tight.
puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres;	then place the paper of the eye on your left hand if the eyes are opposite each other, or on your right hand if the eyes are side by side;
puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre;	then take in your right hand, if the eyes are opposite each other, the instrument called "almagda", or in your left hand if the eyes are side by side;
puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide;	then place the tip of the instrument at the crown through the thickness of an inch in that hollow behind the eye to the lower part of the tear duct, then firmly move the tool called "almagda", and turn your hand until it pierces the hollow behind the eye, and feel as if almagda is reaching into the empty space;
et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour;	And it is necessary that the measurement of the conduit amygadal be at the fullness of the measurement of the space which exists from the corner to the end of the darkness;
et c’est li corone de l’oil;	And it is the crown of the eye;
si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	You will see the bone in that paper due to the transparency of the corneal fabric, and then place the tool up to it where its sharpness is, then express through one channel after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	Let the patient now feel it descending, so they see the wounds before them and the instrument in their eye.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc;	After having the patient lie down, and if the sharpness ascends on the second channel, apply force with the tool, and when it is firmly in place and no longer rises, then gently remove the amygadal tissue by twisting your hand slowly.
et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	And then insert a little bit of emerald water again, and remove the eye from there.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then place something wet like a woolen cloth or oil-soaked material over the eye and apply plenty of egg white, and secure it with healthy oil.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	Yes, and those which belong to our type, place them on a common grid with plenty of egg white.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if almagda cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, for there are some people whose eyes are too hard, then it is necessary that you take the tool called 'alberit', of which here is its form:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit;	And then pierce only the conjunctive tissue, do not go too far into it but make it subtle, then add alumina, as we have said.
et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous;	And at the completion of the work, provide the patient with a suitable aftercare, in which they should sleep on their back in a darkened room;
et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor;	And avoid all movements, and choose light meats for them, and do not move their head to the right or left, and tie them according to their comfort until the third day;
puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor;	Then let them move within that dark house, and test their sight, and make sure they see nothing, and then place the bandage again until the seventh day;
et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And it is not right that you perform this during the time of the treatment or after incision now, but you should apply this because the fever rises quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme;	For the removal of abscesses, you should cut it open on the seventh day, and then remove the pus from him who heals the abscess;
et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	And when it is relieved, you should release the eye and place it above its socket with a little gold to cover for one day, and then stay in that dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas;	And leave the house gradually and gradually, transforming into his own form;
et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	Know that no disciples should interfere in this situation.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens;	And one came to us who was from the East, who told us that elsewhere they would make gold into silver, by which one can transform water, but nevertheless I never saw anyone do this in our land, nor have I ever read about it in ancient books;
et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And perhaps this is something new.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie;	And these are the appearances of the forms of almagda, for those who do not know them see them;
et soient d’arain proprement:	and truly spider-like:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And these have the head of those from this very subtle thing, and at the back there are three angles down.
de la char sor le neis	Of the flesh around the nose
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez;	None of them produce or hatch mixed creatures of various kinds; some seem like scorpions with the feet of pies.
et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	And if there are such or if it has a mixed char with red color, and if it has a well-colored char.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil;	Therefore, for the char that is well-colored and not mixed, you must place the patient between your hands facing the sun;
et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers;	and open his nostrils, and apply honey to those characters, and expel them out;
pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	For hold what you are able to bear under the sharp fine tip on one side, until you know that this flesh is entirely bone.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien;	And if there remains anything that we cannot bear, if you open it all to extract the subtle and light instruments, so that nothing stays inside;
et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient;	and if it is without elevation, or if there's pus-covered, if you support it as it should be;
et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	and if it's malignant pus, then hurry and cauterize until the pus is stopped and all the flesh is bone, then pour or drain it with hot water or vinegar.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez;	If it doesn't heal and moisture reaches the palate, know that there is pus;
et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier:	And if moisture does not pass as it should, know that there is marrow above the bone, to which no instruments come to cut:
adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins;	Therefore it is necessary that you sew with a piece of linen thread slightly thick, and use your hands to do so, ensuring there's about one inch or at least this much space between each knot.
et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche;	And place the patient's head with the thread on its neck until it can be pulled through, and pull the thread gently until it emerges from the neck into the mouth;
et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire;	And this is often done with children in schools, and it is a simple matter for someone who wishes to do it;
puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	Then hold the head that comes through the neck with one hand, and the other head that comes out of the mouth with the other hand, and be aware to handle them one after another as we are or by the thread.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant;	Perform this until you know that the new flesh has corrupted that tissue, then remove the child, drain out the blood, moisten the child with Egyptian ointment, and place him back on his mother's nose as before.
fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char;	Do this for three days or longer, until the ointment corrupts all that is remaining of flesh;
et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use;	And then place a piece of opium on the nose for several days until it heals completely, and if it requires dried medicine, then use it;
et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	And this is the form of the instrument for purging the head, to which one distills oils and medicines or on the nose:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi;	And it should be made of silver or iron, resembling an open lamp or a cane, and guide it in the same manner;
et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief;	And if you see this, make a small incision, ensuring that the instruments are filled for purging of the head;
et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	and have your hand ready on the head so that when you heat the oil or any liquid, it doesn't move.
de la char sor le neis	Of the flesh around the nose
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder;	Many times, in the head under the nose, a disease is born which is called "Telul," it grows and becomes large enough to be seen;
et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant;	And because of this, you should prepare the wound at the beginning, and heat up the bone completely, then place either the cautery or the burning medicine onto it;
et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens:	And if you delay to cover it until it is large, take care if it is hard, if it changes color, or if it has poor sensation:
si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide;	If you do not touch it with iron at all because it is a trapped abscess, for when one cuts it once, it causes great discomfort to the patient;
et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	And if the abscess is of soft material, not of wax or something alike, and you see that it can be completely cut, then let the patient feel and cut it without fear, and treat him with things to dry and restrain.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	When the nose has been cut and sewn together
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Know that when continuity solutions come into one of these venous loops, profit is little, for in some people.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc;	Therefore, you should ensure that this does not happen to anyone else; if you see that the wound is still fresh with all its blood.
et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	And then adjust both lips to a stitch, and treat them until they become clean;
et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet;	And if the lips are quite dry on both sides, it is necessary that you cauterize all parts of their cheek until they heal. Then join both lips with a stitch and tighten them, and apply powder after powder of dragon's blood and ground incense;
et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And apply on the powders a piece of plaster of strength or another hardening plaster, and leave it until it discharges by itself, then treat with ointment until it is healed.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution:	The method of the stitch is that you assemble the solution:
ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre;	or with needles, as we have said in sewing the belly;
ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	or with thread, as I have made known to you.
des apostemes des levres	from abscesses of lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant;	Inside the mouth of abscesses one finds hard lumps, resembling seeds sometimes, smaller and larger;
adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie;	Therefore you should open the mouth and cut through each lump, and take them with forceps, collecting them in every part.
puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	Then use the hand after the vitriol incision, until the wound has healed;
et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then apply salve, and cleanse the wound of dry things until it becomes clean.
de la char des gencives	of the flesh of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»;	Many times, something white arises on the gum that is adhered to the tooth, which the old would call "albulus";
si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc;	So you must hold it with the forceps and remove it at its root, and leave to cure where blood or blood has flowed.
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives;	Then place on the wound vitriol powder or other drying and desiccating powders;
et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize:	And if this flesh returns after the incision and happens repeatedly, if you cut it a second time, and apply cautery:
si ne revient mie aprés le cautere;	if it does not return after the cautery;
et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	and these are the forms of instruments to be used.
des sordens	Of cauteries made with fire, command the sick person to let their hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres;	Sometimes they gather at the root of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, with scaly and rough layers.
et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant;	And sometimes they come together as black and yellow teeth with worms, until the decay reaches the gums, and the teeth stink.
si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien;	It is necessary that you place the patient between your hands, and their head in your holy direction, and pull out the teeth or scales until nothing remains.
et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees;	And thus make it black and green, and yellow and other shades, until they are all removed.
et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin;	And if we remove what is at the first reason, it's good;
se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis;	But if not, start again from the second day and the third, until you have everything taken care of;
et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens;	And know that teeth require various types of instruments to work, according to what the procedure demonstrates, because the root that comes out of the gum has other shapes than those that come between the teeth;
et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	And these forms and others be prepared with you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire;	It is necessary that when you cure the tooth of its pain, you keep the tool as long as possible, because it should not hurt at all;
car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	because this is a very sensitive substance thus one should not have any excuse for the irritation.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	So when the patient is constrained to bleed, it must be certain as to which vein to pierce.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent;	Many times during a person's illness, and fearing it might be toothache, and believing it to be holy toothache, they would draw the pus out of the good tooth;
et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors;	And yet, they never leave the pain alone for such reasons, until the evil is removed, because we have already seen fit to do this among the soldiers;
et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars;	And when you are quite sure of the tooth causing pain, it is necessary that you cauterize around the tooth to all half inches thick in order to keep the gum from spreading everywhere;
puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles;	Then move it with your hands or by the use of fine tongs at each click and click, until they are well locked in place, then firmly secure the tongs;
et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	And have the head of the illness in your holy place between your knees, and hold it well so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After extracting the right tooth correctly without breaking it, and if it does not jump out, take none of these tools and push them inside each part gently, and move it in the same way you did first.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont;	And if it is pierced and eaten, you should fill them with cloths where they were lost;
et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre;	and if it is gently squeezed with tongs, so that it does not break while being squeezed;
et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	It must be opened quite carefully between the gum for the extraction of the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And make sure you do not break it well, and leave a part of the tooth, awaken the patient to greater pain from the root than at first due to its cleverness.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit;	And beware that you do not act this way as the ignorant surgeons do, who break the bone every time due to their haste and boldness, and do not bring in what we have told you;
mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut;	but bring it once by the extraction of this great disease due to the roots that remain, or due to the bone they break, as we have often done;
et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil;	And when the teeth are pulled, if you wash the mouth with wine or salt or vinegar;
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet;	And when bleeding occurs during this process, which often happens, if you use vinegar instead for washing;
et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And if that doesn't work, then apply the cautery.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent;	The shape of the tools you use to remove teeth should be such that they have long points and large handles; this way, they won't bend when you are pulling out the tooth.
et ce sont les formes:	And these are their shapes:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And may have large members that do not bend when being pulled, and be made of well-crafted iron, and have teeth for holding as needed.
de la racine des dens	from the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou II, tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne;	When the root remains after extraction, it is necessary to place cotton soaked in butter or oil inside the mouth for one or two days until the wound heals. This allows you to use forceps called "algefi" which makes the patient seem like they are being taken care of;
et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	And they should be made as within a file, for this is its form:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if they do not want to come out of all these nails, it is necessary that you reveal the flesh entirely along the root and place the tool called "althalus", which means palanchet, as its form is shown here:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin;	And let it be strong and thick so that it does not break, and if its root jumps out of this, it is good;
se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	If not, assist with all instruments, from which the following forms come:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if one uses this tool which has two points, as its form is shown here:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and there are other tools placed according to the order of teeth, and this tool that appears to be large tweezers, as its form is shown here:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont;	And let these instruments be strong so that they cannot break, and know that very few bone-breaking instruments exist;
et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez;	And also other instruments, which are not even mentioned;
et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And the wise masters find their own instrument by themselves, according to what their works and disease indicate to them. For there are parts of diseases where the old ones did not teach any instruments due to the diversity among others, or if it breaks part of the body or other bones, or if it rots, so they search for the appropriate tools that I have mentioned and help with gestures; this is their form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster;	And make them large and firmly holding for holding the bone, so it does not escape, but can hold and remove;
et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	and then restore the right side with suitable medicines for this, and if there is decay in the bone and it is small, if you insert all of this instrument to it:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer:	When the tooth does not appear as natural to the body, and its shape is ugly, even in virgins, you must know whether the tooth was born after the tooth, and it is not in its right position, and one cannot see or file it:
adonques lou raie;	then the groove;
et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	and if it is next to the tooth, take this instrument as described above, and it resembles a small beak, and it should be made of steel that remains sharp:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the tooth is inserted gradually into one's hand due to its hardness and because you don't move others, and if it can be seen that we could grind it, then this tooth is ground with a single grinding wheel as it is formed:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles;	And also like the iron used to make needles;
et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece;	And with the file on his teeth, tapping lightly in my hands, so that it does not move until it breaks;
puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	Then in the end on all smoothing tools, and if it's too sharp and it hurts the tongue, it's necessary to smooth down the roughness until it's even, so that it doesn't hurt the tongue nor corrupt speech.
quant li dent lochent	when the tooth becomes loose
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut;	When the front teeth are struck or through impact, and if the patient doesn't vomit what he eats when they don't leak, and you've treated them with restricting medicines, then it's not valid;
si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques;	if they need to be restrained by a gold thread, for silver threads turn green and rot, but gold never changes.
et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens;	And let the children neither too large nor too small, according to the size of the gap between the teeth;
et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part;	And if you see the teeth moving, take the thread and the needle doubled between the two healthy teeth, then place the head between the molar teeth, as long as there is another tooth that feels properly to the healthy tooth on the other side;
puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point;	Then continue the dressing until you reach the part where you stopped, and gently and carefully tighten your hand, as long as it does not move at all;
et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	And tie your thread to the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue;	Then grip the heads with tweezers, and align them, placing them back between the healthy tooth, making sure they do not irritate the tongue;
et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil;	And then let it stay slightly restricted like it can endure for some time, and if it slips or the bands come undone, if they need to be held tight by another band;
si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	if it could endure for the entire time, and this is the shape of the roots and the arrangement of the healthy second roots and the diseased second roots as you see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit;	And when the tooth falls out, if it's removed and placed back in its original position step by step, as we have said;
et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And don't try to replace it with anything inappropriate that can cause harm and never make the shape of an ox's bone tooth; instead, place it back at its rightful spot where there is a defect, hold it in place as we have described, and let it remain and serve for as long as necessary.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	covering the wound of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi;	No time does it come from within the tongue or nature, so one is born thus;
ou par accident de plaie soudee;	or by chance of a缝ed wound;
et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue;	and the actions are such that you work at the mouth with the aid, have your head in good health, and lift the tongue;
puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement;	then cut the nervous bundle from the base, until the tongue is dislocated from its place, and if there is hardness or lack, this is a sudden wound, so force the hook and cut from the base that connection;
et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz;	and make sure the incision is not too deep by mistake, for there is an artery underneath;
et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin;	and when you have done so, if lift the wound that is pink and moist or cool, then put under the tongue a linen tent;
et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	And the disease afflicts the patient every night, so that his limbs cannot bear it.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet;	And when bloodletting occurs, place the blistering iron over the affected area;
et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu;	And if it doesn't heal with that, apply the slow-acting cautery to it, which is good for such cases;
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	Then continue other treatments until they are healed,
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre;	And if you see that it has turned red or black or hard, so that the patient doesn't feel it, do not touch it at all, because this is gangrene;
et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre;	And if it is deteriorating to the point of pus formation, and there is moisture present, then use vinegar, and apply a subtle poultice, and cure from both sides;
et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer;	And if you can't find it in your work, then apply vinegar to it until it's clean, then return to your work as long as you're extracting all force;
puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then lift up the aid and sail, and perform other treatments until it becomes clean.
des apostemes de la gorge	regarding throat abscesses
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde:	None of the nodes inside the throat called "godaths" come into being. They are correctly named as the two almonds, and when you treat them, just like what we have said in the division, and they are not healed, then take care:
se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	If it's hard pus of little sense and colored, don't touch it with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc;	And if it's red and the root is large, don't touch it with iron either, for the circulation of blood;
mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi;	But let it until it is heated, then you will take it away, or it would break by itself;
et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if it has a whiteish hue and the root is delicate, when you have prepared your instrument for use, but first check that the abscess cavity has cooled down and is calm.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme;	Then have the patient face the sun and keep their limbs warm. Let them open their mouth and place the surgeon's hands on their tongue, pressing it all along the instrument, as this is how it should be done;
et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	And may it be made of fine silver or steel, as sharp as knives:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues;	Can you press the tongue against this entire instrument? And you see the abscess. If so, take the thimble and insert it into the almond-shaped area, pressing harder than you can with your fingers;
et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces;	And take nothing from the cloth with you, then apply the paste to the tool, of which this is the shape, that seems like some strength;
et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	And always the head is mended, one place after another, and it's very sharp, made of iron or steel:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this tool present, then use forceps, as depicted here:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom;	And so be sharp on one side, and on the other also;
et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	And when you have applied the paste to one of the almonds, apply it to the other in the same manner. After incision, gargle the patient with hot and very warm water, and also with cold but still warm water, and if bleeding occurs, gargle them with cold water or slices of cooked pomegranate fruits, or bay leaves, or similar things, until the bleeding stops;
puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then proceed with the treatment as long as it is effective;
et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	And no other abscesses are born in the throat except for those resembling almonds, if they are treated accordingly just like the two almonds.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens;	And I treated a woman with an abscess that was born inside her throat, which is commonly known as the small senseless abscess.
et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And it was so tightly closed off that all the woman's throat, she could not breathe through the blocked passage, and therefore could neither eat nor drink, dying if she had remained in this state for a day or two.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscesses had ascended so much that they had caused two rows of blisters under each nostril.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe;	I acted quickly then, piercing it with an awl, and then pulled out the thread, extracting a large portion of the pus;
puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue;	Then I cut another piece under the other nostril, and on that one, I opened his mouth and pressed his tongue.
aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc;	After removing the bile from these abscesses, and I took a part of it, yet only a little blood came out.
et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens;	And so the woman's throat duct was opened, and she began to drink water and then wine from this moment onwards; I didn't stop cutting that abscess for a long time.
et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros;	And the abscesses would recur immediately, filling up once more the area that I had emptied out, until it grew very large.
adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge:	So I treated and cauterized inside the throat:
ensi demora sens croistre;	And it didn't grow again;
et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	And I depart from these parts, and may God make of him after me.
de l’uve	regarding the eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»;	When it descends to the eye, and it becomes elongated, if it is called "perpendicular";
et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	And if it is large and round, it is called "eye".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes;	When it is treated as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not benefit, and you see that the wound has calmed down and healed, and it becomes subtle, then it is necessary to apply it;
et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe;	And the one that is round and assembled, and is not lengthy;
et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	And if it is bloody or dark red or black in color, then it is necessary to avoid the incision of it.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger for the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant;	So when you see the person it is necessary to do as I have said about their shape and length; make them stand in front of the sun, and press their tongue with the tool we mentioned earlier.
puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	Then press the anus into the abdomen, and proceed from there, and cut towards the second organ as I described in the incision of the two glands.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil;	So it is necessary that you do not cut more than the excess which extends beyond the natural boundary;
car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle;	for if you cut more, you will harm the voice and speech;
et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	After making the incision, use what we have explained about the incisions of the two glands, and treat until it has healed.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patients have fear about cutting, it is necessary that you apply means to their sense of fear in the process of cautery.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	The way of cautery involves using an active instrument.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere;	And let the patients place their head in your healthy position, and then press their tongue with the tool that we have mentioned or described in the chapter on cautery, and hold it firmly with sharp forceps, so that they are neither too thick nor too thin.
et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	and when using the strength of this tool, as it is shaped:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve;	Have your head covered with a cloth or place the medicine there, like spreading on a spoon, and apply the tool evenly over the entire area.
et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece;	And let the patient lie on their side so that saliva and mucus can drain from their mouth due to the medicine inside, ensuring it doesn't descend into the throat, causing choking.
puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie;	Then hold your hand over the entire area of medicine and apply pressure to the affected area for half an hour, until you see it being absorbed and the irritation from the medicine is alleviated.
et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve;	And if you see this, take cotton and cover it on any tool, and moisten the cotton in the medicine, then wrap the tool with all the cotton on top of the reed, until the cotton dries inside the organ.
et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V.	And do this often, until the cauterization is perfect, then let it dry, and wash after three or five days.
Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine;	And if you need to repeat the medicinal cauterization, then do so, and after the cauterization go around inside the organ with it, using cotton dipped in butter, and clean the area that is inside of the medicine;
et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let it be rinsed with cold water, and also do gargling until it is healed.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere;	This treatment is safer than cutting, nor does the cautery cause harm;
s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir;	If it is treated with fumigation in this manner, take chamomile, hyssop, and rue, as well as basil, camomile, parsley, and similar herbs. Gather all or some of these into a single pot, fill it up, and bring the contents to a boil;
et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	And ensure that the pot is well sealed with strong earth, and inside the pot place the heating tool according to this manner:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie;	And it should be made of silver or iron, and if one of the shoulder blades is placed in the mouth of the sick person until the vapor rises through the nose to the womb, as long as the womb is necrotic;
aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent;	Afterward it often recurs, until the womb dries, and make sure you do not perform this at the beginning of the coming out of pus, for many things occur;
et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	And do not perform such action when there is an evacuation of pus from the abscess.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut;	And if this instrument is not available, take a reed and put a piece of an eggshell inside the patient's mouth, so that the fire does not get too hot on the patient.
car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	For the eggshell does not produce heavy vapor in the mouth, and this is a good treatment combined for health.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose;	Many times it occurs in the throat bone or spine of fish, or nothing;
si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose;	So it is necessary that you treat what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument, so that you see the thing move;
et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac;	And that which does not allow you to see it and is stuck in the throat, you should make the patient vomit this way that the meat be cooked in the stomach;
par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement;	By chance if it is pushed out by vomiting;
ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec;	or the patient swallows an sponge piece, or a belly button piece, or a lettuce root, or a fragment of dry bread;
et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse;	and attaches to the sponge with a thread, and then swallows it.
et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer;	and when it reaches its place, if it opens, and then expels force;
et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	and if it does not come out with the force that we have said, take an instrument of a plumber according to this shape:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit;	And let the instruments be curved at the head so that it can enter more easily into the throat, and have the head raised in height;
et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens;	and beware not to touch the epiglottis, lest all be obstructed, nor push any bone inside;
et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse;	And it is better for the patient to control the tool, because they should control or the thing becomes loose;
si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	If the patient is breathing properly, or if they apply force evenly to all parts of the tool throughout, as long as they maintain their strength.
de la sansue de la gorge	from the saliva of the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines;	There is no healing without surgery, as I have explained in the division, through the treatment of medicines;
et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	And if this doesn't prove beneficial, then look into the throat of the patient towards the sun, and then have them press their tongue with the tool I've told you about.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see blood, guide it out with every small fraction, or with fine tweezers that suffice for this purpose.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if this doesn't work, take a piece of a hair and push it into the throat of the patient, then remove or stop the bleeding with the end of the hair by twisting it. And do this often.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if you dye the patient's body with water throughout the day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent;	Then take a full view of cold water and open their mouth, then pour it in gently without them swallowing it, and move it often with their hand.
et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	And as soon as one feels the cold like water, they die.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve;	And if it doesn't relieve as we have said, subdue the patient with asafetida, using the tool I mentioned in the section on asafetida application.
fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	Do this many times, for it will relieve without causing harm.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument;	And the method of applying the heat involves taking an iron pot containing glowing charcoal, covering it with a thin lid in the middle, and placing the patient's head on that part.
puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue;	Then pour the steam into it, and have the patient place their head end in their mouth, then seal their mouth so that no steam escapes but only goes up to the nostrils.
et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois;	And now let the urine flow, and if it does not come, then start the fumigation repeatedly;
et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue;	And let the patient endure thirst, and consume salty things and such, and do not drink any water;
et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And then it's necessary for her to depart through this governance.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge;	And the shape of the tool used for the urine, when one can see it, resembles curved tongs to be inserted into the throat;
et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier;	And it has the appearance of a surgeon's hook, and it is rough like sandpaper, so that whatever she takes, she cannot leave it;
et vez ci la forme:	And here is the form:
li chapistres des apostemes	This chapter deals with abscesses.
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille;	No descriptions of pus exist, as per the recollection that comes after from one and another in this book, and they vary in puncturing and shaping;
et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	And this is in two ways, one being in its appearance itself, and the other due to moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second way is for those limbs they are within the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	For the abscesses of the head are different from those in the foundation, and the abscesses of the internal body are different from those that come into joints, and each has its judgment in action.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement;	And if it's about abscesses, one should not prick them until the body has accomplished its completion according to its nature;
et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And for those that need to be pricked when they are formed, and do not die according to their completion, like abscesses located near joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	And when abscesses are located at joints, and they remain swollen internally, by chance if the ligament and nerve of the joint have become corrupt, which is a cause of constriction in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil;	If the abscess is near the main member, and you delay the puncturing until it's fully formed, it will harm the main member.
ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs;	If it is near the base, and you puncture it or do so as if it were fully formed;
et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule;	And it is not proper to puncture an abscess that has not been digested and fully completed its development, except for those located near the base, which might inflame internally and result in a permanent passage;
et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	And cannot heal thoroughly.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes;	And it is necessary that you know the time of the abscess perforation which occurs according to completion, and this is when the pain subsides, and the departure of the fever, and the reduction of the pain and redness, and the movement and hardening of the head of the abscess, and other signs;
et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues;	And it is necessary that you allow the perforation to occur where more depends of the abscess, and at which it opens.
et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And let the perforation occur along the length of the course, and where it opens near the hands or feet, or at joints and necks and arteries, and everywhere else equally where there is no curvature.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In these cases, according to that member.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when abscesses are in the fatty part of the body, it is right to wait until digestion has been completed before making an incision, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure;	For if you pierce him in front of this, so that poison from his body flows out, and is full of little worms;
et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	and by chance harden the lips and deepen beneath him.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if in any abscesses they pierce according to the breadth of the body, as per what the body requires for its members.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus;	And it is necessary that you take small pus-filled spots, small cuts;
et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme;	and in large pus-filled areas, large cuts, and many fissures according to the size of the pus area;
et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper;	and if there are such pus areas where it is necessary to clean out the wound and cover it.
quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes:	when it has become as white as linen and is healing, and when it has softened, you should do this as one does for boils:
et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres;	and if there are such that split into three corners, and those that one covers like the leaf of myrtle, like boils;
et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And if such injuries or there is made a round cut, and other cuts and seeming to be cutting.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement;	For those who lack a head, such as an abscess on the surface, it is necessary to pierce them thoroughly;
et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie;	And it is necessary when the abscesses are large and have formed a significant boil; if you pierce them, do not drain all the pus at once, but drain only part of it;
puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief;	Then let the abscess subside up to the other side, then leave no further treatment alone;
fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute;	Do this repeatedly from big to small, until all the pus has drained;
meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	Similarly, if the patient lacks strength, or is a woman in her pregnancy, or has young children, or elderly and feeble people.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For when the attempt shakes every time with the expulsion of pus, perhaps causing death to the patient, and you do not notice it.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite;	Avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced the abscess, if there's an opening, observe if the wound from the abscess is small;
et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton;	And if it's a flat cloth, you may use linen or wadded cotton to dress it;
et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre;	And if it's large abscesses with many perforations, you should make a tent in each one so that they will press against each other;
et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor;	And if you have cut through some of the skin in the abscess and sealed it internally, you should fill it with old cotton or linen thread debris without moisture, and tie it until midday;
puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the meat, and treat with ointment as long as it is sound.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if there is bleeding at your operation site, apply cold water gently and easily, and moisten the cloth, then place it on the affected area repeatedly.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut;	And if the bleeding continues obstinately, you must apply government and treatment, and use the powders I have mentioned in this book for your hands. If it's or around a river, and either where your veins are or where your abscesses are is full of nervousness, then it should be that you put on moist tents and cloths soaked with wine and heated oil;
et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit;	And if it's an internal issue and the patient is in flesh, then you should apply moist cloths with water and oil or wine and cold oil until the third day as we have said;
et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then remove and clean the abscess, treating as it should be done, until it heals.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes:	And it must be universally known in treatments of abscesses:
or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	Or you have been told how one should prepare before performing treatments for abscesses, and here is this chapter.
des soros	of the wounds
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	Tiny abscesses come from the head, and they are in the form that we find them on cloths, like under a gooseberry's skin, and there are many that resemble these.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz;	There are those with much moisture as well as those where there is moisture too, like in puddles;
et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	And there are those that are hard and stony to the surgeon's blade, and there is no doubt that it hits an artery and does not go against this.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the procedures of cutting are such that you must test with all the instrument which is called "intromission", from which the following form comes, something it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, if you make the incision too long.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien;	And when the moisture is drained, one scorches without leaving anything behind that contained this moisture, because it returns immediately once nothing is left.
puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens;	then dip a cotton swab in Egyptian ointment if it's available;
se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	if not that, in water and vinegar, and apply it to the wound, leaving it until the next day;
et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And these concern those who are tormented by night.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit;	And continue with the cotton, just as before, on the second day and the third, until you are sure it does not last through the night;
puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the wound with ointment as is suitable, until it heals.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc;	And if the abscess holds its new fat content, shape it according to this form, along its length;
et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist;	And pour your wounds, and apply the scorched parts from all sides, and place your entire treatment for bleeding in the coat where it lies;
et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the artery does this differently, then do what I have told you after.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And similarly, treat if it's tubercular, and cut and cure as I have instructed you to.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And when it comes to cutting on the tubercular abscess and moist area, it's easier because they contain less blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme;	And if in any of these abscesses or heads there is no moisture, and of these newly formed abscesses that I made or came to be like a head of an old woman;
et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier;	And I found the abscess as hard as a stone, rough and white, and it could not be broken;
et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And even if we had let out none of it, we would have made the wound as well just like with a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe;	In other abscesses coming or going from the head, those that come from the neck and the roots of ears, the incision should be as long as possible depending on its location, so that the pus may easily exit;
et les cure si com il covient.	And the treatment should be done accordingly.
des scrophules	regarding the treatment of scrophula
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times these abscesses occur at the neck, and around the armpits, and in the throat, and never come to any other part or corner, they are soft and are intertwined with each other.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit;	Each scrofula is properly within its bone, just like a nut and an abscess at the head, as we have said;
et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And the appearances of these scrofulas are many.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are tele's that contain moisture, and some that don't want to comply with health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde;	In this then, that you see in good position at the shoulder pit, and it resembles the color of flesh, and mute from each side and is not pressed under the collarbones nor around the artery or in the conduit, and is not deep;
si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief;	It's necessary that you lift it from above, and scrape each part of it, and the two lips at the base should be exposed when needed, just like we have mentioned concerning abscesses in the head;
et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	Move it slowly and cautiously; make sure not to cut the nerve or the vein, nor let out too much pus but don't cut deeply either. Keep your hands steady and avoid cutting too far ahead, making sure you only cut what is necessary.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie;	And if you cut the vein or artery and it does not allow you to open further, apply vitriol or any powders that stop blood flow into the wound, and restrain the bleeding;
et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	And leave it until the abscess is soothed, and the wound becomes soft, and begins to rot.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses;	And when your blood is replenished, return to your task, until you complete it;
puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	Then follow your duty's sign if there remain any small warts, if you scrape and clean them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement;	And if there is a large vein at the root of the wart, it should not be that you scrape off that wart from its root, but tie it with a thick double thread and let it fall out by itself, without harm;
puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	Then apply old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment to the wound, then proceed with the treatment.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you remove all the pimple, it is necessary that you join together the two lips of the wound, and stitch them now, then there should be no excess left due to the size of the pimple.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	And it is necessary that you cut to reach the root of it, and draw out pus, and stitch it as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure;	Those warts that occur due to excess, puncture where they appear if it is fatal;
et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption;	And the puncture is done like the one before mentioned, in dependence, then he administers ointments and similar things with it, so that she (presumably referring to some medical treatment or substance) decays what has been left from the decay.
et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the wound is well cleaned, with ointment treatment encompassing flesh, as long as it remains clean.
de squinance	Regarding squint,
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge;	The old ones spoke and mentioned the surgery of the throat;
mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	but I have never seen anyone perform it in our land, and that is their written word.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee;	For those who have strabismus, it is necessary that the slit in the throat which is called "the epiglottis" be removed;
et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	And it is not advisable to do this, because all the veins and the heart of the patient are close to those who have pus in their mouth, or in the throat, or in either lung.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the illness is within the channel of the lung, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to prevent loss due to strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	Therefore, when we wish to cut the epiglottis, it should be cut through three circles or four with a small slit right across, between the second two circles. The size of this slit, according to its depth, not in the cartilage;
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	And if the lips allow for the division of the epiglottis there should be no fat, and the vessel is long outwards.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil;	And if the surgeons are fearful, it is necessary for them to extend the throat skin throughout the inch, then cut into the bone until they reach the vein;
et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	Avoid the blood vessels if you see nothing, and then expose the sinus, as we have said;
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	And demonstrated by the section of the windpipe that leaps out through the limb that is broken, and by the loss of voice;
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	Let the wound remain open for a space.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige;	And when the time has passed during which one doubts strangulation, gather the two edges of the wound neatly together, and sew all smoothly without the cartilage;
puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then administer medicines that promote flesh growth, as long as it is sound.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasim, instruct that this should be done until the throat is completely swollen, and the patient's life judged to be at an end, and when there is no further improvement.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	Then operate the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe properly, and they inhale through the wound, and thus you prevent death;
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	And to command the old ones to leave the wound open until the disease's illness passes, and it has passed after three or four days, and then they commanded to stitch up the wound and clean it, as long as it was being cleaned;
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	And I will tell you what I have seen.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	I see that a maiden took an iron knife and stabbed it into her throat, cutting parts of the windpipe.
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	And I was called to treat her, and found her just as dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound and found the blood that was issuing from it, and indeed, it wasn't accompanied by a severed artery or exit route other than the throat, and the veins bled through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	I hurriedly treated the wound, and after she was healed, I cured it.
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	And the maiden spoke with difficulty for days and eventually returned to her usual state of health.
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	Therefore, I say that in the surgery of removing the epiglottis, one should take care not to harm it.
de la grosse gorge	In the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	These abscesses are called "neck hernias," and they are large, dark-colored abscesses that occur frequently in women.
et est selonc II manieres:	And there are according to two manners:
naturez, et accidens;	natures, and accidents;
ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	or natural has no disease.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	And the accidents occur in two ways, of which one resembles that coming from us, and the other way resembles an abscess that comes from our veins;
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	and there is fear, and it should not have any cuts made except in those who are small, and the proof and search extend to every intervention:
se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	if you find it as soft as the back of our hands and cannot puncture any vein, then operate, just like we operate on our hands, and treat every part completely, if there is even a hint of disease.
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And search thoroughly then, and treat it as is appropriate, until it is healed perfectly.
des nous	from the bones
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	Many ways there are for us, of which I will mention all the similarities;
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	And it is fitting that I should mention all the differences that exist between us and them.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture;	I say that in the case of an infection and fever, until the body's eruptions have subsided, and after completion of the putrefaction;
adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	Then the fever and heat subside.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	In the case of us, there is no heat, fever or pain, and contains its own sack, which is akin to the flesh's cavity and starts out similarly as a gooseberry, and grows in size;
et sont selonc II semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	And they are according to two appearances, or greasy, or moist, and little color as I have said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	When you come to the treatment of new injuries, it is necessary that you first inspect and inquire about all the tool which is called 'the adjuster', according to its shape or chapter that follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	And the method of incising abscesses is that you take or find the more moistened part than you find in the abscess, and turn your fingers a little bit by little bit, until you know that the instruments have pierced the pus, then according to the size of the abscess;
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	Then extract the pus, and be careful not for it to jump out.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	If moisture is running down, whatever its color may be, cut it in the same way as I have said for other abscesses;
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	And if no pus comes out after the pus, you know it's greasy, then cut it in a cross shape, and hold it with tweezers, and gently burn each side from every part; guard the place where it lies that you may pull out the grease alive with the rest.
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	And if you cannot bring it whole, take it piece by piece so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	For if there is nothing left, the body will come back through many times;
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if there is a little left, and it does not trouble you, use powders that are corrosive and wet for the wound, restrain the wound, apply things that soothe abscesses heated, and treat it with other treatments until it is whole;
et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	And if the wound is large, cut the two lips of the wound, and treat in this manner what needs to be done with what is injured flesh.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc;	And if the vein is too large or another way you hurry, use the inside of a roasted grape peel and let it lie for two or three days, until the wound cooks, and rest with blood boiling;
puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	Then return to observe what has been delayed by the newness of it.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres:	Here are the forms of the interstitial organs, and they are in three ways:
grans et moien et petit;	large, medium, and small;
et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres:	and there are three pairs of them, which are called "albaret," and one is called "breb," and they come in three ways:
grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	large, medium, and small, to encompass the abscesses of fistulas;
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	and they are also like needles that one uses to cut the roots, and they can be of carnelian, or iron, or silver, and golden ones are considered better for cutting away at the swellings of fistulas;
et sont de III manieres:	And there are three ways:
grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	Large, medium, and small, according to the size of the width of the defects.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci:	The shapes of the horns resemble sheep, as you see here:
grans, moiens, et petis;	large, medium, and small;
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi;	and for horns that have two curves in three ways;
et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres;	and for horns with three curves, they also occur in three ways;
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres;	and for horns that have two curves, and horns with just one curve, they also occur in three ways;
et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	And all this must be considered in their location.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	The tip of this is to be sharp, and for some it does not cut fully but only from one side, which we shave because there is no vein or nerve;
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	And these interventions are answered with responses placed in gloves, so that the patient does not notice them during the opening of abscesses;
et sont de III manieres:	and there are three ways:
grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	greatly, little, and moderately, as you see;
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	and one uses none of them except in the sensitive parts such as legs, arms, nipples, and bones, and similarly to these;
et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	and no other small tool resembling whips' thongs is ever used according to this form, to which bleeding is stopped:
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	And it is placed in the healthy part of the body, at the junctions of veins and arteries, and never according to this large form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	None of the men's nipples swell until they seem like women's nipples when they begin to become corrupt;
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	And remain deformed and swollen, and those who wish to cure them should treat according to this form of this line .b. until .g.:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	Then scrape off the fat, and apply medicine to promote healing on the wound. Sew together the two edges of the wound, and continue treatment until it heals;
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures;	And if the mammary gland is deformed downwards and is flattened due to its size, like it appears in women, if she cuts it into two pieces above, by two similar slits;
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	Due to which the larger line contains the smaller one until both ends at last, so that this pattern follows according to this form, from this line .b. up to this line .g.;
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then scrape off the skin that is between the two edges and remove the fat. Apply what we have instructed about sewing and powders, as well as anything necessary for treatment until it heals;
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	And if it is not healed, or the incision has not been fully completed, because the patient does not wish to rest, or due to bleeding, it is necessary that you fill the wound with moist cotton in corrosive ointment;
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	And leave it until it starts to heal, by adjusting and massaging the wound with fat, then continue treating it until it has healed completely.
des apostemes des asselles	from abscesses of the armpits
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	Abscesses that originate in the armpits are manners of hard scrofulas where there are nodes, and if there are any containing moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those who contain moisture should have their limbs cut according to this form, from the line .b. up to the line .g.:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the pus in the abscess has drained out, fill the wound with old cotton and let it be for another day, then remove all the cotton, and apply ointment until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscesses resemble scrofula sores, make incisions as we have said in cuts for scrofula sores, and if the wound is filled with pus, apply a cautery as we have said previously.
de la routure de l’artere	regarding the rupture of an artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	When the artery is cut and skin is stitched above it, many times abscesses form, and similarly, this occurs with a punctured vein and abscess.
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	And if one knows that for the artery, such abscesses extend fully inwards;
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement;	And when you feel it with your fingers, if you sense the constriction;
et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	And when it's due to a vein, reasons of escape are apparent;
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	And it's madness to deal with this abscess, and similarly when there are boils and sores and in the neck or under other things, and they are very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	So it is necessary to avoid the iron treatment. One who has a head wound should also avoid this, and in the one who is inflamed by an artery, do so above the skin for as long;
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	Then work in small sections, and beautifully remove the artery from the tissues, until it is exposed;
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples;	Then stick inside one thread, and make it pierce to the other side, and bind the artery with a doubled string for two loops, just like what I taught you in removing the arteries that are in the temples;
puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	Then take the limb which is between the two loops of an introducer until the pus which is inside is released and thereby relieve the abscess;
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	Then administer the treatment that irritates the wound, as long as the thread enters.
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then treat this with ointment, as long as it is clean;
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	And if the abscess is due to the size of the vein, it is necessary that you color your hand with what you can of the pus all over the skin. Then pinch out the needle from your held limb, and pierce it, and place two threads, so that you lead them from the other side;
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil;	Then tie the pus or vein, just as I told you, or one part of the two shoulders with the thread;
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus;	And if you doubt that the child will survive, should you replace another needle with all its thread over the entire abscess at the incision of the first needle, and hold the threads in four places;
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	Then remove the abscess as long as there's excess, then remove the excess slowly and leave what is tied;
puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then place on the bandage a moistened cloth in wine and oil, then apply treatments of poultices and ointments until they are healed.
des apostemes des ners	Of abscesses of nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Also like abscesses appearing in arteries and veins, they appear on nerves when they are cut or due to too much work, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	This happens more often with shoulders and elbows and in all places where joints are, and this is the symptom of abscesses, and its color resembles the color of flesh, and it can be found in various positions without pain;
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	And when one restrains it in form, the patient feels pain, and is not completely satisfied by its harmony with the body, but over the heart;
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer:	And moves in all directions, neither forward nor backward, nor to the side or above, and that which is in joints does not fit well when covered with iron:
par aventure i vanroit contraction;	By chance it would result in tightening;
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And that which is on the head or forehead causes the skin to become inflamed.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	If it's an abscess and small, if you have tweezers, then grip it at its root;
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it's large, lift it at the spine, and scrape, then cut into the bone, and stitch the wound together when it heals completely, and treat until there is no pain.
des grosses boces pendans	Of large boils hanging down
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros;	No disease happens in wombs or anywhere else in this way, and it is a sickness that is called "fungus" by its appearance, and has subtle roots, and the knots are large;
et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	and there are both small and quite large ones;
et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	And I saw someone who had two or three in their abdomen that were more like fungi than anything else, and there was no difference, they were white, had small roots, and were cracked, and corrosion occurred right away with moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	I copied them and found that in one, it weighed XVIII ounces, and in the other VI З., and when you look at the incisions during surgery, if you see that the muscles are moist, and the color of the artery is white and moist with a subtle root;
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	If you handle it with a wide spatula, and have the fire cautery ready in your presence.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	For the surgeon often experiences excessive bleeding from the wounds, and if it exceeds your capacity to control it, then quickly use the cautery tool;
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors;	And if you see the patient frightened and fearful of the iron cut, then take a properly made silk thread, tie it around the wound as we have instructed, and leave it for two days;
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail;	And then hold it tight, and do not stop pulling the silk thread until you feel the bone, feeling by touch;
et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne;	And if the roots are large, if they scare you when handling them for the stomach, but you should only remove half well, then apply the cautery so it doesn't heal over;
puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	Then treat the wound, and ensure you do not remove the gland that is of a red hue and lacks sense and has milk in its appearance.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For this is an abscess, and I will come to the treatment of gangrene next.
quant li boude ist fuer	When the bladder burns
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	The appearance of the boil comes from a searing injury or tear in the scrotum, and it occurs on the abdomen. In some instances, there are boils found elsewhere, similar to what might happen in other cuts, where blood escapes from veins or arteries as one would expect, or due to wind-related issues;
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	And if it's through the scrotal injury and from the boil opening, its color resembles that of pus, like the color of flesh, and it is a mild thing without much pain, and opens through various exits.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it's due to the exit of an intestinal tract, then it is more varied. And when one presses it with their fingers, it returns and then comes back again, and by chance gets stuck, and enlarges quite a bit at the entry from the bath and through strong labor.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie;	And if it's due to moisture, it's a mild thing and opens well when you press it with your hand, not constraining at all;
et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	And if it's due to blood, then incisions are made through these signs with large and hard abscesses, and they are punctured according to a quantity;
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it's due to wind, you feel a twitching in the pulse, and the veins show when you look at their appearance as resembling blood from an artery, or vein, or windiness.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	It is necessary that you allow the treatment to proceed.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear in such matters, as I have explained or outlined in the chapter on abscesses, concerning arteries and veins.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	And if their appearance suggests it's the intestines or the liver issue, you should instruct the patient to scrape their bile ducts, and have them stretched straight out, then cut all around the belly.
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	Then instruct them to sweat between your hands, then proceed inside the body where you have indicated, spreading it throughout the entire area, and leave half of the pus above on all parts of the large curve;
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	Then bind it around with a strong thread or a firm cord of strong silk, and let the binding be tight.
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	Then have half of the pus spread out under the binding and press your thumb's tip down, and look at the intestine.
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	If you find it caught under the binding, release it and press the intestine to the back of the abdomen;
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	And if you find the boil, take it at the waist and remove the excess with it;
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	And if the artery or vein opposes you, then insert them firmly within, then return to your work and take two needles, and insert two threads, and place the two needles close to what you pierced;
puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	Then pull the pus three times over the needles, and if you see it, remove the needles, and leave the limb until it heals, and discard the dead flesh on its own;
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	when it becomes subtle and yellow, then treat according to what needs to be done, and cleanse the pus as we have said;
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	and remove the blood or moisture that you find, then treat and heal the limb according to what needs to be done, and stitch up the wound.
dou chancre	treat the gangrene
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer;	As we have discussed in section six about the symptoms of gangrene, and how to handle it with medicine, and how to avoid iron treatment;
et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement;	And let us say that gangrene spreads throughout the flesh, and great caution is needed in treatment, and it was said by the old ones: when gangrene is present within a limb or can be removed, such as in the case of gangrene affecting the nipples, in cooking areas, and similar conditions; one must remove everything when it begins.
et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner;	And when it is large and old, if you do not approach it, because I have never cured any with that method;
ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	No one has ever been cured of this in front of me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire;	And when it's in its place or can be removed, as we've said before, it is that you purge the patient once of black bile;
puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige;	Then make the surgeon do it if he shows signs of congestion, then prepare the patient well to perform the operation;
puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier;	Then remove your gangrene or ulcer, and shave everywhere, and cut the bone from all sides without leaving anything;
et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	And let the blood flow freely, and clean the wound well with your hand or nothing, and if sudden bleeding goes against the incision of an artery or vein, stop the bleeding by cauterizing until the bleeding stops.
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the physician performs another treatment until they are healed.
de ydropisie	From dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer:	We have explained the symptoms of typhus in the division, and how the aqueous assembly is made, and the signs for each symptom, and the treatment done with medicine, and that which is treated by iron.
si est eclites soulement;	if it's only swollen;
et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances:	and should iron be used at all in these two symptoms:
c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose;	This is to say, peritonitis and typhoid fever, for they are deadly conditions;
donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses;	So when using medicines for this symptom of typhus called "eclites" with medicines, and if the treatment doesn't help, then observe whether the patient is weak or has another disease besides typhus. Such as stomach pain and other symptoms;
si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance;	If you do not touch it with iron, for there is doubt;
et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	And if you see the pus very green and it has no other illness but just dropsy alone, and it's neither too young nor too old, then you should operate this way:
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	Lay the pus upright on your hands, and have assistants press the abdomen while pouring boiling water onto the lowest part of the buttocks. Then take the sharp lance according to this form:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And let there be two divisions of this.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	With the tip, and it should not be so narrow that it can only go as far as the intestine when you insert it, and you cannot bend it;
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines:	Then look to see if the dropsy has extended towards the intestines:
si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil;	If you must cut above the mouth of three quarters to the right under the knife;
et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois;	And if it drops down due to liver illness, then make your cut on the left side of the mouth of three quarters.
et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	And if it's due to the kidneys, then on the right side, and it must not be that the patient lies over the cut where excesses could flow into the weak one;
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor;	Then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and pull it out, and lift your hand from the sputumil between the skin and synchial just as when roasting in proportion to the size of a nail or until completely charred;
puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	Then pierce the synchial until the sputum flows out for eight parts; this is the water period, then pull forcefuly and use this instrument as it's been shaped:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus;	And it resembles a thin silver rod, or a nimble spider or weaver's shuttle, and in the part over there is a small nodule;
et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus;	and on one side, it has three notches;
et II d’autre part, et I d’autre;	and two from the other side, and one more from another;
et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	and when dislocating the shoulder, it is cut as if it were a feather, and this is the shape of the incision that writers draw the feather to represent:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument;	at its peak is the armpit, so when the surgical instruments reach the water (meaning the body), they now descend above the instrument;
vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	then empty out half or one third, for if you remove more than is appropriate in that moment, by chance the patient might die due to the release of their spirit from their body, or they could faint, or they could be brought close to death;
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz;	But adjust according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the virtues' dispositions signify in the patient, and its pulse;
puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere;	Then guide the instrument and hold the water, and it is now held due to the heat which anaesthetizes the tip which is on the spine, as I have spoken about, that you pierce in this manner;
puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	Then use the instrument on another day, if you see that the patient is suffering from it, and take a small quantity of water;
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	Do this every day, and refrain from using too much water until it no longer lingers but just a little amount of water.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre;	And if you doubt about the patient and leave much water, if the treatment of burial or sand becomes hot, and by a little sweat or bath in the sun, and if it gets dyed to drink;
et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	And the treatment of medicine dryers until it becomes dry, and cauterization on the stomach and on the liver and spleen after the removal of moisture, as I said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	regarding the stopping of the penis
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	None of the times children are born without foreskins on their penis, or if the foreskin is small, or it isn't in its place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If it suits to pierce immediately so that one does not miss much pus very finely according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet;	Then insert or attach a thin bladder pipe, and secure it in place for three to four days. Or until when it needs to urinate, remove the stops, allow urination, and then reinsert.
et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	And in case there's no need for this, because the urine that comes does not allow it to be closed off.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	Those who want their teeth to grow properly, if they seek a treatment with a cumin clove, as we have said, it will widen.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut;	Those who do not have a bladder pipe in their body become lame, because none are born with a bladder pipe at the tip of their penis, so they cannot urinate before lifting their penis upwards;
et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	And they cannot impregnate because the matter cannot come all the way to the spermatic duct, and it is a terrible disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient;	And the way to do this is that the patient lies on his back, then positions the head of the penis and the scrotum similarly as wide as a feather, so that they are evenly spread out in the middle, just like it should be.
et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	and protect yourself from bleeding that happens many times, and if it occurs, if you stop the bleeding of the one who stops blood flow, and treat the wound until it heals.
des pustules de la verge	Of the pimples of the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide;	Many times, lumps appear in the penis, and there is an ugly appearance;
et en i a malignes et non malignes;	and among them, some are malignant and others are not.
si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien;	it is necessary for you to remove them with great care, and cut and clean all of them, then apply Egyptian poultice on top with a moist cloth.
puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the ointment curer is effective until it is clean.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if bathing is malignant, with pus and discharges, it is necessary that you prepare the fire cautery for it.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier;	When you have done this, and if the bath is in his skin with the penis, and has part inside the skin and part outside, it is necessary for you to remove the bath that is inside first;
et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	And when they have joined, if the treatment is external.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion;	For when you treat them together, it is necessary to ensure the head of the penis so that it does not get infected, and leads to decay and corruption in his penis or anus.
si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is necessary to remove all that is dark and corrupted, then apply a plaster of honey and flour which is made from walnut shells and vinegar, then continue with other treatments until it becomes clean.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if there is bleeding during the operation, then apply the lunar cautery according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble:	The fire cautery assists with two dispositions together:
c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption;	It means, that is to say, during the expulsion of blood, and in case of decay;
et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi;	And if the penis head is corrupted and removed, it's necessary that you apply a rod of garlic to the penis or lead the penis down; and let the patient expel afterwards.
et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	And when the hair comes to cover the head of the penis which is found on those who have not undergone circumcision, or where it has occurred due to a wound or an abscess, then it's necessary that you cauterize with a heated instrument until the strings are released and the patient can expel the urine from all around the penis.
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil;	And if it's difficult to discuss such things, then you should cauterize on the foreskin near the head of the penis and the skin;
puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	Then, after two or three days, you should insert a thin linen pad soaked in cold water, that it may rest on the surface.
de la circoncision	Of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies;	Circumcision is not an interruption of continuity like other wounds;
toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Still, whenever we undertake this work of our own will and for the children, it is necessary that we perform the best work, and do so in the most gentle manner for their health.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the old did not instruct circumcision of their children, for they did not practice it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule;	For I wanted the majority of masters and surgeons who practiced circumcision during the day, and under force, and for every newborn baby;
si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	so it was made in a careful manner because there are two layers, and by chance if one is cut above the other it may leave an opening below.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre;	Or the patient receives heat, and the pain is doubled, and at the healing where it was doubtful there is not secure the point of the member;
et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	and during the healing of the nail by chance iron escapes and runs through the work, and many times they grow like that which do not require healing and I have noticed this.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	From the circumcision done in force on the entire length of the thread I have found the value of experimentation, because the forces cut as well above as below precisely.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens;	For when you squeeze your hand, if cut in the shape of an 'I' it will tense all around;
mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir;	but let the thread be well inserted between the skin;
et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	and let it be done in the way of the first operation so that you make the child think when they hear, that you are only tying the thread around the shaft of the penis only and then let them relieve themselves in all the ways that you can.
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens;	Then make him stand between your hands straight, and place the strength between your hands or beside your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments;
puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens;	then place your hand on the penis and blow or hold it firmly, and guide it upwards until the head of the penis is inside;
puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien;	then clean it well from the dirt that has accumulated, then tie its knot of the head with a double thread, and tie it gradually from one stitch to another;
et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	and hold it at two fingers' width by the second loop in the pouch and the index finger tip, and place your fingers between the two loops, then lift the knot quickly upwards and pull the head of the penis;
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres;	then let the blood flow gradually, as it is natural;
et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And put powder on and over the powder I apply glue of a half-cooked egg yolk mixed with rose water, stewed with oil rosy and fresh, and leave it until the next day, then continue to treat with other treatments as long as they are cured.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste:	The formation of forces in the universe is like this:
li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	Let the two shoulders be in harmony and cut them equally, and let the shoulders also be as large as the arms evenly:
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision;	The error in creation happens when the kidneys escape during incision;
donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme;	Therefore, you should extend it to your nail so that the blood will form an abscess;
et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	And shape it evenly, and if you cannot hold it at your nail, then keep it with pliers, and then shape it.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement;	And if they penetrate for three days, and the one who is in the middle of the penis swells, if he leaves them until the abscesses have subsided, and gently scorch him.
si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if he can withstand it like you can bear it, and keeps the part of the penis away from him, it won't harm him at all.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point;	So treat the area of sudden wounds with powder, as we have said or treated with powders, and if you endure a little more heat, it won't cause any harm;
cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Treat accordingly, as we have said, while he remains healthy.
dou retenement de l’urine	The retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	Retaining urine is due to obstruction by stone or blood clotting, or bowel obstruction, or a dead fetus, or similar things that we have mentioned in the section;
et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz;	And if his urine is not flowing, and you see there's retention due to a stone in the bladder or neck of the bladder, it must be that the patient should be made to squat.
et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet;	And have his feet placed on the back, and extend his belly from the part above the back, and restrain the patient so he bends as much as he can.
et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	And then the neck of the bladder is forced to express the stone above, so that the urine starts flowing again.
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme:	And if it doesn't come out, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you should administer an extraction with all the instrument called "syringe", which has this form:
et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil;	And may it be made of fine silver wire, like the feathers of a bird;
et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	And let the length of the cane be one palm and a half long, and be slender at its tip.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue;	And the method for directing urine flow involves taking a double thread, and attaching it to the small end of the fabric or cotton, then threading the fabric inside the syringe.
et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	and cut off the excess of the fabric and insert it up to the tip of the syringe, then grease the syringe with oil or butter and egg yolk, and have the patient sit on a chair, and massage the bladder and penis with wet oil and olive oil.
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude;	then gently place the syringe in the penis, until it reaches the base of the penis, then bend the penis upwards towards the tip.
puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors;	Then push the syringe ahead until it reaches the bladder, and let the patient feel the sensation going up to the empty thing, and this is not done exactly as ordered because for him who led her where she was going, she was twisted.
puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	Then stretch the thread all the way with a gentle tug, and let the urine follow the thread, then pull it out gently, making sure to properly drain the urine.
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And continue with the syringe until the bladder is emptied, and ensure that the patient feels the sensation of emptying.
des maladies de la vessie	Concerning diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When burns or blood come into the bladder, or putrefaction gathers there, and you see distilled waters and medicines, if make everything to the instrument that is called 'clepsis', and this is its form:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus:	It's sealed, and if it has been closed for three days:
II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois;	Two on one side, and one on the other, as you see;
et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	And let the legs be positioned where the medicine could correctly affect the penis without adding to its sensation. If moisture can be removed, drain it when necessary;
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens;	And when you see your medicine flowing into the bladder, place the patient under moisture and guide him to the one who is doing it.
si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens;	Then drain the moisture with the knife, and afterwards firmly set the guide in place;
si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	If the moisture enters inside now, and reaches the bladder, so that the patient feels it;
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie:	And this is the form of the subtle colic where one irrigates the bladder:
si est ci:	Here it is:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut;	And can be made of silver or lead, and the shoulder joint is higher up;
et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet;	And down to the breast or to the joints of the shoulder;
puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu;	Then take a sheep's bladder and fill it with the moisture that you are going to irrigate the bladder with, then tie it between the two breasts using a good strong double thread, and heat one end of this moisture on fire;
puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	Then apply a potion to the head of the bladder in the penis, then hold your hand over the bladder until all moisture is present, as long as the patient feels that this moisture has reached the bladder;
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor;	And if you do not have a bladder, take a piece of parchment and make it into a circle, then pierce it smoothly around.
puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument;	Then thread a strong string through these holes, then join the circle like one would join a loop, and place inside what you see of moisture and water and steam, and tie it with the tool.
et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And do this like you did for the bladder, pressing with your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
de la piere	of the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines;	We have spoken about the methods of stone extraction and combination of medicines in this section.
et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille;	And I have explained the difference between a kidney stone that is wet and another, and all the signs, and in which kidney one should operate with size;
et en la vessie, et en la verge;	And in the bladder, and in the penis;
et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	And I will explain it to you clearly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit;	I say that the stone in the bladder often occurs more frequently in children, and this is a sign that there is an obstruction of the bladder like an obstruction in its subtlety;
et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist;	And at the urethra opening, and massage the patient's penis, and let it harden many times, and then return to its original state;
et a mout de ces saut li fondemens;	and in these cases of obstruction there is a base;
et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece;	and the healing is lighter for children until they are four years old, and becomes more painful in elderly individuals, and it's somewhere between childhood sicknesses and aging conditions;
et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	And it is easier to treat those with large stones than those with small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to treatment, it is first necessary to cleanse the patient by laxation, in order to remove all the bile that is within the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	Because it clogs up every time when trying to cut into the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut;	Then take hold of the patient by their limbs, and lift and move them downward, so that the stone descends into the bladder and comes out only once below their waist;
puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval;	then have them sit between your hands, with their hands on their thighs, so that the bladder is fully tilted downward;
puis la quier et la touche dedens;	then inquire and touch inside;
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	if you feel the stone in space, then hurry to cut on the stone now.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis;	And if she doesn't urinate upon touching her whole length, moisten your index finger of the left hand with oil, for if the patient is female; or your middle finger, if the patient is young and mature.
et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie;	And place it at its base, hold the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, if it moves in the neck of the bladder;
puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	Then press with your finger, and push the stone outward where you see to cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille;	And instruct the surgeon to press the bladder with his hand, and command him to spread his right hand upwards over the kidneys, and use his left hand to stretch the skin beneath the kidneys in the area where the cut will be made;
puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	Then take out the mucus-filled stone, which has this shape:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre;	And make the incision between what is between the kidneys and the base, not in the middle but at the edge of the left lung;
et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	And be straight on the stone, and your hands either on edge or foundation, and be tied such that it passes through, and is wide outside but narrow inside, according to the size of the stone, not too large;
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail;	By chance if the press is made on the base or foundation, it might leap as though it were doing its own work;
et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges:	Know that there may be stone parts with corners and edges:
si est griés a issir;	If it is strained to exit;
et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	And if it's on parts below, resembling a thorn and round, from which the exit is light.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant;	Above, where there are corners and edges, make the size larger;
et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe;	And if it does not jump, then you should pull with the tongs that are like a file at their tip, to force the stone so it doesn't escape;
ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief;	For you should use a sharp curved instrument to remove from beneath the head;
et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	And if you cannot use it like that, if it's large or small and blunt, and if it doesn't have a smooth surface, then coat it with vitriol;
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	And if there are more than one stone, remove the larger one first from the neck of the bladder, then proceed upwards, then pull it down forcefully, and after that, remove any smaller ones if there are more.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if she is very large, then it would suit to let her out, and make a larger wound.
Car II choses avienent au malaide:	For two things happen to the patient:
ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder;	or he dies, or his urine comes out immediately when his kidneys cannot join;
mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	but try to do it with the forceps, or using them as pincers, until you pull it out piece by piece;
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut;	And when you have completed your work, apply the incision with frankincense and aloes and dragon's blood, compress it, and place above it a wad of moist cloth in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the inflamed wound;
puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	Then bind the hair on its neck, and don't untie the knot until three days.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you remove the bandage, wash it thoroughly with water and wine vinegar, then apply a diaper ointment and basil ointment until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine:	And if abscesses occur in the wound and blood congeals in the bladder, and is kept there by this means, causing retention of urine, which is known to do so that without jumping with urine:
boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	So burn in the wound, and remove that blood, for if it remains, it will inflame the bladder, and damage it;
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then cleanse the wound from water, pus, and scum, and assist in all manners that you find, until it becomes clean.
et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And it is necessary that when you treat all the wounds, you tie both legs together and apply the remedies to the body.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir;	And if the stone is small, and it comes from the penis, being lodged inside, and cannot allow urine to pass;
si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	If you treat as I have instructed, cut him many times, and forgive the loss caused by this treatment.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I already know this experience like this.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take one iron branch according to this form, and have it pierced at three points on each side.
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie;	Then take a thread and tie it around the penis near the stone, so that it cannot come back into the bladder;
puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere;	Then cut in the penis lightly until you reach the stone;
et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part;	And turn the drill with your hand in the stone little by little, until you can penetrate the stone from another side;
si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	If it comes quickly, then press your hand on the one that is stuck inside the stone which is within the penis.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	If it breaks soon, and jump with urine, and the patient will feel relief;
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie;	And if you cannot do this for any reason that obstructs it, tie one thread around the stone and the other over it, then place the penis between the two threads, then force him out, and untie the thread, and cleanse the congealed blood that is in the wound;
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And treat it as long as there is bleeding.
de la piere des femmes	From the stone of women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses:	A situation arises where a stone might be found in women, and when it happens even once, the treatment is difficult, and is forbidden for three reasons:
l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge;	One reason is that perhaps the woman is still a virgin;
et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	The second reason is that one cannot know who is naked even when she is modest, even if she is pure.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains;	And the third way is that perhaps one cannot find a woman well knowing this art of hands;
et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil;	And the fourth way is that the stone of the woman might be larger in circumference than the stone of a man, so it requires deeper cutting and great fear. If necessity leads to this, then you should seek out someone very skilled, and lead them to see where you are, and if you don't find a suitable place there, not even from a modest woman.
et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	And it addresses a fine task in the life of women, where a woman who understands part of the art, and is commanded to do what you command about the incision into the stone;
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge:	and carefully consider if that woman is a virgin:
adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere;	therefore, she must push her desire or foundation and seek the stone;
et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	and if she finds it, make her follow the path or direction of her desire and seek the stone; I advise her to push with all her strength or power under her desire in the body, and press and urge her left hand against the bladder in its form.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse;	And if she finds it, it's necessary that she move it from side to side as she enters the bladder until under, as long as she comes to the root of the thigh;
puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie;	Then cut on the stone near the root of the thigh in the middle of the bone, right where muscles are attached, and feel the stone in that area.
et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	and don't move his hands near the stone or beneath it, and cut him at the head first with a small incision.
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont:	then open the incision to the head, if you feel the stone increase the wound as long as the stone can come out forcefully, and know that many types of stones exist:
c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	This is to say, there are small and large ones, rough and smooth, long and round, and that they have corners.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	If you understand the signs to know the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	And if it doesn't hurt you, put lime water on it and keep it there for an hour until the pain subsides;
puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	Continue with your work, as long as the stone is strong, and have at hand the tools I told you about for extracting stones in your home to assist you in your task.
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide;	And if it does not weaken you, and it's an artery that has been cut, apply the powder to the site and hold firmly with threads or strips, and do not repeat this procedure. Leave the stone alone and don't try to extract it, in case the patient might die.
puis cure la plaie.	Then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood has calmed down and the limbs are restored, then return to your work while the stone is hard.
de hernie carnouse	of fatty hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef;	Rice in water is nothing else but a mixture of moisture or white slime, which resides under the skin that contains an egg;
et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef;	And it is called "slime," and in no case is it truly within the egg membrane if one considers that it might be another egg;
et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit;	And this is the skin between the white fat, as we have said;
et ceu n’avient se poc non.	And that does not have that pit.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the formation of this gelatinous growth is due to weakness that affects the kidneys, and spreads that substance.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors:	And whenever there is percussive impact on the testicles, and this moisture has many colors:
ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	or it turns yellow like jaundice, or it lacks redness, or is black, or watery white, and this happens more often;
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	and these are the signs to recognize this assemblage, for if it is white like what we have said, then it indicates pus, and its length is similar to that of an egg, and does not protrude from the testicles, because there is moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	And if there is moisture in the actual fabric, then the pus comes with part of the egg, and because of this we think it's another egg;
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien;	And if moisture is between the skin of the kidneys and the white fat, one will feel it well;
donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	Thus, when you know the color of the moisture, if it proves to be throughout the entire insertable square area, from which its form was previously.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	Following then those who come after the preparatory step, judge by what is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors;	And when we cure it with iron, it is necessary that the patient be treated according to our ability and the fullness of their body;
puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	then place it on its back, on something slightly elevated, and cover it with cloth.
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions;	then sit on its left side, and instruct the minister to sit on the right, and extend the penis to one of the two ribs under the kidneys;
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	then take the spatula tool, and hold the kidney skin between it long until beyond the penis, and make the cut all straight along the kidney skin up to the white fat, and gently burn through the fat slightly according to your ability;
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont;	Then pierce it completely with a sharp needle, and remove all the water, and then insert your forceps, and there will be no water upstream.
et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement;	and do not touch the vessel of the kidneys, but only let it be the needle.
cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	remove everything or piece by piece his intestines, from his stomach, for if you do not remove it carefully, the water will return.
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac;	and if the egg jumps to your work, then reposition it in its place when you have completed the work with the needle.
puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then join the two parts of the kidneys' vessel with a stitch, then treat it like other wounds, until it heals.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc;	And if you find the egg corrupted by another disease, then it is necessary to tie the veins that are hanging, in case there's a risk of blood loss.
puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	Then cut the cord above the scrotum, and remove the egg, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices;	And if the fever is assembled into two parts together, know that these are two branches;
si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	And if you treat the other part in the same way as the first, then drain the blood, and apply wet wool soaked in rose oil to the wound;
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	Then put another piece of wet wool soaked in wine and oil on top, and place them over both the foreskins, then cover with double cloths, and secure it all along as per this form:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil;	Then take two cloths and fold them into strips according to this resemblance, have them assembled by sewing in the waistband of the trousers, one of the shoulders being placed at the foundation up to the back, and the other at the part near the elbow;
et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	And the other two heads at the second angles, and let all assembly restrict in the loop of the winding.
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	And then this rod of the cautery is medicated in the place of iron size, and you take the subtle fire cautery tool, and remove the skin from the horns, and heat it as we have said, so that the white fluid containing water becomes visible;
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	If you take the cautery in this form, and pierce that white spot like oncinas, and scorch it with this subtle fire cautery:
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout;	And you remove it in all the ways that you can, as long as you have not exhausted all possibilities;
et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef;	and remember that the fire should not touch the egg;
et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve;	Know that this work is more safe;
et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	And be careful to prevent the flow of blood, and heedful that the cuts are made properly;
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And if anything goes against your wishes, or an abscess occurs or bleeding or any other issue, then address the thing that goes against you according to what was previously explained.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit;	And if the patient is fearful, and does not wish to undergo this operation due to its horror, then proceed with a perforation, as I have instructed you, and know that when you are well assured by the meanings we have explained that the watery part is there, make the patient sit on the raised seat;
pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors;	Pierce the abscess in the part under it, across its entire spongy area, and make the puncture long along the artery;
et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	And let the cuts be wide enough, so that all the pointy tools fit;
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	Then place cotton on the wound, bind it, and leave so that the removal of the water can occur, then treat until the wound is healed.
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant;	And if the white bandage does not allow water to escape from the wound's opening, it is necessary that you press a feather or a tool used for draining water in dropsy patients into it, as its shape was described above;
et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And if the wound is open, know that water returns and it will be gathered after six months or so, and when it gathers in the same way as before, then this is how the disease passes during its course.
de l’aposteme des coions	Regarding the abscess of the testicles
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	Know that in this branch of the tree there is fear in multiple arrangements, which is why I believe it's better to let them alone;
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	And I will tell you about the work and appearance of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions;	So then, I say that many abscesses come from horns or animals; similarly with birds;
et c’est par mout de cas.	and it's due to some cases.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	This means that it is due to the spreading of sour and feverish substances, which affects birds, or from impact;
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors;	And the color of the abscess matches that of the horn;
et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	And you won't find any pain, and it's an abscess of discomfort;
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	And sometimes an abscess of hard and stony material, with a reddish color, never comes from the heart or from within a vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	When it's due to blockage of an artery, if you recognize this by the characteristic abscess, when you press on it with your fingers;
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	and it is not right for you to touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	This type of swelling caused by a vein bulge can be identified by its layout in relation to the touch response when pressing with your fingers, and one can properly measure this on this sort of appearance, and on other parts as well;
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	And when you feel the smoothness of the veins, then they are at your wrist, and have a white spot beneath them, and release all suspensory ligaments from the egg.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	If the veins are already stuck to these limbs, then it is necessary that you remove the egg, and take the pulse.
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	And if it is at the liver or within the vessels, then it must be that you remove all this tension, and round off the cut.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birth of the child is behind you, then you should take it all in hand, and extract the egg, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your operations are completed, then fill the wound with moistened wool in oil and wine, then continue other treatments until it heals properly.
de l’aposteme des coions	Regarding the abscess of the testicles
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	This is an abscess enclosed by a wrapping that looks like a collar around it, with the softening of the lymph nodes, and the patient feels severe pain when it moves;
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	And the treatment for this disease is as thorough and lengthy as what was described before, yet still, we will explain the procedure for it according to what the old ones did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	It is necessary that you make the patient sit on an elevated seat, then pull them upwards with your hands under the lymph nodes below the waist, to all the vessels close to the penis, and press gently on their masters, and stretch them out in a formed manner;
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	Then cut deeply and broadly through the vessels in their place, while they are exposed, and then scorch from each side, as we have said about the removal of arteries which are in temples;
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	Then prick with a needle where there is thread and tie it at the original place where the thread came out, and tie it right away to the other end.
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	Then cut straight through the middle, according to the length of the body, and remove the corrupted moisture;
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	Then treat the wound in the same way as others or wrap it with bandages, so that no vessel bleeds or fills one of the lungs;
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	for nothing wrong comes from this, and if all the vessels come into view, then it is necessary to drain both lungs with all the vessels;
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	If the lungs lose their elasticity due to cutting of the blood vessels, dry out, and cannot be helped.
de la routure dou syfac	from the rupture of urine
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	The events concerning this branch occur through the division where it splits or twists, or by extension on the belly in the area of the galls, because the intestines descend from that pathway to one of the kidneys;
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes:	And this pathway is where the twist occurs or from the extension of it, and these two ways of many reasons arise:
ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	or through impact, or by jumping, or by bellowing, or by the lifting of a burden, and in similar ways;
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	And the signs when it's due to extension of the twist, are that they occur little by little over a long duration, and do not come suddenly;
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	And the pus is even up to near the forehead, because the syphilitic pressure affects the intestine.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the symptoms are when it's an obstruction by suffocation; it causes sudden pain at the beginning, and the pus appears varied, close to the skin, and this is due to the pressure of the intestine and the body behind suffocation.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And the bile never descends with the intestine, it is retained there, and causes great suffering to the patient when pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these treatments with iron for fear, because it is advisable to avoid them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	And the way to treat is that you order or instruct the patient to have their hand inside the wound, pressing on the intestine if it can fit in;
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	then sew up his neck. Between your hands, lift his buttocks;
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	then stretch the back upwards, and remove all the skin around the genital area until long;
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	then insert into the waistband one inch according to what you need to open the wound, and do it in such a way that he could be able to pull them out;
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	then burn the syphilitic lesion that is under the skin of the genital area until the white part of the lesion is exposed from all sides;
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac;	Then direct your finger tip to where the heart beats, to the area between the white yolk sack that lies under the egg's skin and between the second yolk sac, and displace the one behind the egg, also in-between the second yolk sac;
et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	And then guide your right hand inside the area of the heart beats, and place the white yolk sac at the top on your left hand, and gently move the egg towards the belly using all the yolk sacs;
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	And instruct the minister to extend the egg upwards, and untie the one behind the connection;
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	And check with your fingers if there's any part of the intestine wrapped or hardened white yolk, and should you find nothing, release it inside the belly;
puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions;	Then take a needle or it have thick thread made of many threads, and insert the needle in the rear part at the syphilitic sore, which is after the skin of the thighs;
aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz;	Afterwards, cut off the hairs that appear from the threads, until there are four threads;
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars;	Then join them one over the other in a manner of a cross, and bind the syphilitic sore, as we have said is under the skin of the thighs, with a strong bandage of two parts;
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	Then cover the hairs of the threads, and bind them tightly in two parts, so that none of the vessels that are being sewn can enter into them, preventing any pus from spreading;
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	And make the binding according to the first line long two fingers of that length, and after these two bindings leave a space for the sore under the skin of the thighs, as wide as one finger;
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte;	And after all else according to the roundness that the eye bears;
puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	Then cut in the area beneath the skin of the buttocks, until you reach the bone, and the buttock, as we have said earlier;
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	Then apply wet wool in oil, and place it on the wounds, and use the thread that we have mentioned.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And not once is the white scab burned that we have said, after incision, by fear of blood loss.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui;	For this happens many times, and leave the bandage until it leaks from it;
et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	And if it takes too long to bleed, then immerse it in hot water, and place on it what we have said, until it bleeds;
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	Then treat the wound with other remedies, until it heals completely.
de hernie carnouse	of fatty hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this part of the treatise, I never see anyone who dare to perform surgery with a metal tool.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	And the old ones said that it is made like a bundle of twigs bound together with string, in such a way that you bind the vessels after gently cutting under them.
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient;	Then come to me, and clean out the abscess of the one who is working, while his vessels bleed;
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat it as we have said, until he is cleansed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus;	Never release the air during an operation, as we have said, and open his wounds;
et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	and do not remove any of the intestines accidentally, and if they do come out, it's a little, repair them every hour;
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	and always, if he stays too long in this position, suspect the wound or gangrene, until the intestines come out;
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	this happens due to the extension of gangrene which is within the intestines, as we have said, because it has extended, then softened and swollen his wounds and opened;
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit;	And the treatment involves the use of a cautery, as we have previously mentioned;
et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	And it is treated with iron in this manner:
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois;	And when the patient lies on their back between your hands, then lift the upper part of the swelling according to its size, up to three times.
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	And then remove the fat that is under the skin where it follows, and take hold of it and put it in front of the fat.
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	And press it towards the front of the abdomen, then cut the two protruding parts of the fat under the fat above the root of the hair with the knife, and cut both.
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	Then remove the root of the hair from the fat, do not touch the fat nor spread the egg or any other thing, as I have instructed you in the treatment of removing worms from the intestines;
puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	Then he heals through the treatment of wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you handle the children, if you cleanse and treat the wound, until it heals.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The surgeon is constrained, and does not appear in the operation, and the cauterizers are burned in this place, and closer to salvation.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the skin around the anus
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir;	Many times the skin of men's genitals becomes soft in some individuals, because the fluids within are softened, and it can be seen.
et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil;	And it's necessary, when one wants to treat it, that one allows the infection to spread over his back, and one stretches the soft skin on the natural skin;
puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement;	Then join the two lips at one seam, and if you see fit, make the first cut to remove the excess of the soft skin in three or four firm seams;
puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Then stitch between the seams, and treat it like other wounds, until it heals, then remove the thread.
dou chastrement	of sexual restraint
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre;	Know that castrations have been forbidden in our law, and because of this I would prefer not to speak about it in this book;
et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres:	And it is necessary for only two ways:
dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure;	One way is for the doctor to be knowledgeable about how to respond when asked, and know the treatment;
et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	The other way involves needing to know how to restrain certain animals for our assistance, such as goats, sheep, and cows, and others.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres:	So, I say that the art of restraint is done in two ways:
ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	One way is through attraction, or through creating an opening.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant;	In the method of using attraction, we make the animal sit in hot water until its horns soften and during that time;
puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	Then take hold of it with your hands, until they are healed and you no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille:	For the tail correction:
covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez;	It is necessary that you dye the beast and press its flanks with your left hand. Then tie the breeching, and operate on each hoof when you have well scalded them;
et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz;	and let no wound or subtle wound exist under the vesicles;
et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure;	And this method of correction is safer than that done by attraction because with attraction there might remain some remnants of the genitals causing the beast to crave lust.
puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Then treat the wound until it has healed.
des hermofrodites	Regarding hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes:	Hermaphroditism occurs in two ways at home:
l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	One way is when between the two genitals opening as in the natural figure of a woman, or having hair, and sometimes passing urine.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	The other way is for women, having at the wrist like a penis and two openings.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies;	And the treatment for fever and illness is such that you treat all the joints properly, and the healing process like other wounds;
en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	In the second way, for men whose urine jumps through the skin of the kidneys, if there is no treatment.
de la tentigene	From the scab or soreness
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir;	A tenting joint is an improperly placed joint in the natural part, as long as it looks too ugly to see;
et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	And some women have it as large as a hand, and this is the treatment.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement;	It is necessary for you to remove the excess of the tenting joint with your hand or thumb, and do it gently;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	And don't cut too deeply, lest blood spill out, then proceed with another treatment until it is clean;
et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	And there is another form that arises at the mouth of the womb and vulva, and anus, and by chance it jumps forcefuly, and according to its appearance it resembles a cow, hence they called this old ailment 'Cow Disease'.
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If it is necessary for you to perform it, just as we said about the scabbing process and wound care, until it has healed.
de erratique	Regarding the irregularity
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis;	Erratic if the essence of the female is not understood, or if the parts are small;
et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est;	And is natural by birth, or accidental due to illness that has come about;
ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit;	Or it's due to the nature of food, or subtle deficiency or excess, and is prepared externally on the vaginal area, or in the chest, or below, or wherever.
et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir;	And to conceive, and during childbirth, and by chance the flowers of having.
et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	And the knowledge of this one is through the observation of bile.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the blows are near and visible, direct your hands or stick to them.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi:	If it's sweet and delicate, and close to the two hearts, if you hurry, then do this:
met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes;	Place your two fingers together, and have the woman on her back, spreading her legs;
puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens;	Then form both hearts until the delicate syfac is done, and it covers the burns;
puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	Then take wool and the grease of oil, put it on the heart, and make the woman lie each day in bed, so that it cannot weld.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if it is hard and dense, then you must crush it to resemble the shape of a hazel leaf.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope;	If the burns are from flesh, then suspend them under the oven and cover;
et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef;	And have the medicines to staunch blood, such as these, dragon's blood, incense, mixed abundantly with one egg;
puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder;	then administer a thick layer of beeswax, so that the wound does not stick together;
et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec;	and do this for a while, and then cover it with a tent of dry linen;
puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then perform other treatments until the wound heals.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when there is new flesh from the wound, if it needs to be treated according to this method, provided that these abscesses are not drained.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For an abscess in the wound that has become infected, one should not touch it with fire.
des emorroides	Of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul;	Thromboses are openings of veins where without proper care, and when thromboses become old they turn into varicose.
et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	And we have spoken about the appearances of this in the division, and the signs, and I will speak here about those that result from treatment.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that bleeding and sourness, when they occur through the anus, do not appear by smell, only is their treatment with iron indicates them.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those which are at the mouth of the anus, one can smell, and those are what one can treat.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses;	It follows that you should put the woman in a cold house, then prepare the altar for the tongs, and place the copper on its roots. Then dust with medicines to restrict blood flow, such as achillea, dragon's blood and incense, and similar items;
puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide;	Then bind her limbs to the frame for an hour, then immerse her in cold water;
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	And when the bleeding stops, if it occurs, make her sit in a decoction of sumac, bark of pomegranates, and oak galls, and similar things. Then take millet flour, mix it with honey and garlic, and use this poultice on her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if it stops bleeding, this is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir;	If not, if she is to apply suction cups to the back and breasts without causing injury;
puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	Take wool, and mix it with the juice of plantain or aglantier with old wine, and apply this to your wound.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when the abscess rests, you should treat the wound with ointment until it becomes clean;
et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul;	And that which is called "albathir" is red and resembles the head of asparagus; if it suits, cover it as I have instructed for the thigh.
et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then continue the treatment until it becomes clean.
des apostemes de la marris	The treatments for abscesses of the arm
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many types of abscess come up in the female body, such as gangrene and pustular abscesses and herpes and tumors and fistulas and hemorrhoids and inflammatory abscesses, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in the section.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe;	Therefore, I must explain in this treatise the discharging abscess that occurs during pregnancy, which is not among those abscesses that are sealed by pus.
et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	And if you want to understand the work of iron, look at how these abscesses are hot and feverish at their onset, and full of heat; and if it turns red, you can see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie;	So don't rush to pierce immediately, but let it die until the pain is alleviated;
et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe;	and then have the patient sit on the bench, and place two small stools under their knees so they can lean forward, supporting themselves with their back and bringing their feet up towards the body.
et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien;	and spread his buttocks widely, and place his arms under his knees, and bind them well with a strong bandage.
puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme;	then have him turn his head towards the right side, and prepare the tool that will be used to open the mouth of the furnace, which comes next in this process;
et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide;	and it is important that when you see the tool being prepared, you mark the depth of the furnace first to know whether what enters within the tool should not go deeper than its应有的范围, and not hurt the patient;
et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve;	And if the instruments are larger, it is necessary to cover the depth of the skin with cloths, so that the instruments do not harm;
et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	And it is necessary for him to place the nozzle of the instrument above and to sharpen the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit;	And when the abscesses open and one performs it by hand gently, if it is necessary to cover at the head, at the base of the ear;
et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec;	And when the wound is emptied, it is necessary to place in the wound moistened wicks in olive oil or in dry green oil;
et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites;	And place the wound cloth at the bottom of the skin, and place it forward on the skin and on the bottom of the linen cloth that is moistened in water or vinegar be cooked;
puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then the surgeon, after two days of ointment application as directed, until it is healed;
et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites;	and then each time raise and drain the pus and wound with a concoction of water and honey, and afterwards with water or roots of lily and aristolochia which have been cooked;
puis reveigne a l’oignement.	then resumes ointment application.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is placed on the marron herb, you should avoid heating with iron, but treat it as we have instructed in the previous section.
de l’enfantement	Of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar:	The first step in childbirth is to recognize the shape of natural labor, and you'll notice signs when a woman approaches full dilatation, and it's best to wait for her body to signal its readiness.
adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir;	then the baby forces itself to be born;
adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui;	once you recognize that this birth process follows its natural course, and is exiting from its head, and the rest of it accompanies it;
et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost;	And when you see these signs, it must be lightly pressed on their belly, so that the child comes out soon;
car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification;	for when it descends on its head, there is the second with it, and it is born with his excesses eliminated through good purification;
et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	And this otherwise does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises;	For it comes only on his feet, and emerges in the head or the shoulders, and in the hands, or on its belly, or in the groin, and is transformed by chance at its neck, and through other malevolent configurations;
si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	it requires that she be wise and subtle in these matters, and aware of error and deception, and I will show you all the configurations as to how one should assist them.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent;	When the child comes forth from its mother by natural process, and the woman labors greatly in childbirth, and her strength is weak, if she sits on a chair, or women hold it;
et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	and from her nature derive the essence of fenugreek when cooked, and then place the baby between her fingers the small spatulum which is described here:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers;	and cut through the secondary bone, and scrape along her nail until all moisture within it is removed;
et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament;	and keep massaging her belly until the child descends; if it doesn't descend, then one should administer a treatment with fenugreek poultice and sesame oil to the woman.
puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre:	then make her take a deep breath and sneeze, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour:
si istra maintenant l’enfes.	If you are now caring for an infant.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc;	And if his two hands have strength, it is necessary that you gently and gradually straighten them;
et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut;	And if they cannot enter, make the woman sit up and lift her legs up;
puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement;	Then pull down the chair onto the ground, and shave the woman, so she does not leak upon standing up;
et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And if his hands cannot enter and the infant is dead, cut off his hands with the knife placed beforehand, and extract the child, straightening them equally.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	Of the birth of the child above its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	When the child comes to its feet, it is necessary for him to lift them up;
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	And then turn them gently and gradually, until they are even;
puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	Then gradually stretch the fingers a little at a time.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	Can he jump up to his thighs, if the command is given, and make him snort with consideration;
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	If he can jump, may God will it.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it does not jump as we have said, if one makes it move little by little, until it is according to the natural form.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it will be slightly.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier;	And if he doesn't come as we have described, tell him to take the extract of a tree, and oil of juniper, and ground gum, and grind everything in a mortar;
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	and place the mixture of the woman's nature both inside and outside this ointment, then have her sit in hot water up to her ribs;
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	and when she is moistened all over, have her wear the myrrh collar, and place it on her, and let her keep it for an hour;
puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	Then make them sit on the chair, then make them sneeze and hold their mouth and nose, and stroke their belly lightly, for the fetus is jumping now.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	From the child's position on its knees.
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	When the child comes in this form, if you place his hands gently and gently;
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit;	then support him at his neck, and let his feet hang down below, and rest in bed;
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	and bend his hands gently and gently, then place his hands on the belly, and remove the cushions as long as she is hanging down below;
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	and if the child is not jumping, take his feet and move him gently, then move his head upwards, then I squeeze your hands;
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc;	and guide the baby gently and gently;
et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	And instructs the woman to bear as much as the child comes forth.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	From the birth of the child that comes out with one hand on the way,
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	It is necessary to engineer to bring back the hand:
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	If one cannot bring it back, then make the woman lie down and walk;
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	If she can't walk, have her sit up on the bed, and force her legs into position;
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	Then apply the massage that I've described;
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	And if she doesn't give birth, have her sit on the stool, then try to guide the hand back;
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	And pull out the child according to its natural shape, have her sneeze, and instruct her to bear as much as the child comes forth completely.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	From the baby's exit through its neck, and let her spread her hands, and her buttocks turned towards her mother's back.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	It is necessary to apply a medicated ointment on your hand, then turn it gradually and gently, and stir it lightly.
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	And when it is even, if you place on the muscular texture of elevation and oil, as we have said, then instruct that she moves gradually and gradually;
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne;	And when you have done this, if you make her sit on the seat, and instruct that she prays;
et la fai esternuer.	And make her sneeze.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	In the same manner for the rest of the second part.
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	When it comes in this manner to the end of the first part, if you perform the second part on your finger until all moisture is drained;
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	And if it grows both on her face and around her neck, when you perform this task at the belly button, ensure she is not restrained, and may die the infant;
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	Then pull out the child inside, as long as you have placed it in such a way, and instruct the woman to not try at any time:
adonques si istra legierement.	Therefore if you gently handle.
de l’issue des gemelz	from the delivery of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII;	Know that sighs often occur, and every time three or four are born;
et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	And this is not an unusual thing, and little happens.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	Two are unusual things, and do not live at all, if there are fewer than none;
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	I know that they multiply and are destroyed by the sun which devises them, which is bound to the belly;
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	And every time emerge as naturally as all under, just as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	And if they are gripped harshly, as we have said for treatment, and there's a subtle opening, then do it quickly and gently in the way she does.
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And proceed like this so as to promote health.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	They are not made in the Maris I, II, III, IV, V, VI, VII or more than XV times, and they are all formed like an infant by the measurement of their glory size, and it is necessary that the hand knows all this, for such a thing might happen to them.
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	Do it according to what is proper.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	When you treat the woman who has lost her dead child or whose abdomen is affected, as I have explained in the division section, and if it doesn't come out, then you are forced to intervene with your hands.
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	It is necessary for you to know if she possesses sound virtue, and if she has not experienced any accidents or fears of death;
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	It is necessary for the woman to be attentive on her back, and have her shoulders tilted forward, and her legs lifted;
et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	And let the minister prepare in two parts, or bind her to the bed so that she is not treated during the descent of the child;
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	Then rub the lips of the pregnant woman with moist olive oil using a mixture of rosemary and fenugreek seeds and flaxseed, then smear her hands with these oils and spices;
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	Then let her move lightly on the pregnant woman, then place her in a position where she can easily move her hips, and prepare to ensure that when the child descends through her head;
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	If the hairs are stuck in his eyes or neck or mouth or palate or under the beard or on the collarbone or near the ribs, and if he descends into stones, then they should be pricked or pierced near the middle of the back.
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	And it is necessary that you cut the hair with your right hand, and place the bend between his fingers of his left hand, and he pushes him with all his hand lightly, and insert the hair into none of these parts that we have mentioned, until it reaches the empty thing.
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	And this is the form of the hair:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	Then insert against another hair, or the third if necessary, so that the extractions may be equal;
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	And then extend them equally by moving on one side and the other, to facilitate extraction, and make sure that the hairs are toothed for holding during extraction, as this is how it should be done:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	And if there remains a part of it, let someone oil some of its skin from elsewhere, and place it on that part, and draw out the other part.
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if there remains nothing at all, place this onion or higher up the body, and do this until it exits completely.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	And if one hand comes before the other, and it cannot be pulled back due to being squeezed, then you must wrap around the first, until it exits completely;
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	Then apply the paste at the joint of the sole or in the crease, and similarly do this with the other hand, and for both feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	And if the child's head is large and it becomes obstructed during delivery, or if its forehead is assembled with sharpness, then you should puncture the bony spatule with your fingers and make the forehead and remove the sharpness;
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	For you will find it in the instrument which is called 'almidach', whose shape comes with the instruments or chapter that follows this one.
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	and thus let them pass naturally at birth by the same means;
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	and then pull the bones with tongs, and if it breaks and is held by force until it splits, as long as the moisture or worse comes out;
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	and if it cannot come out, then cut it piece by piece according to what you can do;
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	and if it is swollen in the belly or under the ribs, you must let it out as long as the moisture flows.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the fetus is on its feet, there is a slight attraction, and the movement to the mouth of the birth canal is also slight.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	And if it is stuck in the belly or under the buttocks, you must extract it through the skin that covers the hand.
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	And they perform on the belly or the buttocks wherever there is moisture present;
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	And if the other bones are affected by osteitis and the shoulder remains dislocated, he takes hold of his patient's arm up to the elbow joint, and guides it until it reaches the opening in the joint.
puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer;	Then he performs either the first or second method, and forces him to move;
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	And if the opening in the joint is narrowed due to an abscess that has formed, it is not suitable for manual labor; rather, it should be treated with moist and greasy substances.
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	And the patient is administered plaster, and if there is an aqueous softening agent and moisturizing substances.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	And if the child is on its side, you can make it lie flat, and administer what we have said about live infants;
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if we cannot manage it, then divide the patient into parts, and do not leave anything of the remainder.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	And when you have done this, it moves towards that which we said about apertures where abscesses emerge in the marital area;
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And if there is a draining of blood, it should be immersed in water and restrained, and he moves towards other treatments.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman who had given birth to one child in her belly, then another followed from that womb, and this other one also died.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, an abscess came out in the belly, and it swelled so much that when it opened, it started to cause severe pain.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was summoned for treatment, and I thought for a long time, and couldn't provide proper care for the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I placed a strong plaster on it, and out came a bone, and after some days another one.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was greatly amazed, for the belly does not have any bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point;	I want the wound, and by guiding my hands to bones, until the woman was in the best state;
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	And I covered the woman long enough like this, and it would be somewhat better by the end.
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	And I have included this chapter only because when the masters find an unusual thing, they should know how to provide help.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to bring back the wife to her place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres;	After this comes the explanation of the presser, which is included in the books;
et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	and at the second turning of the two shoulders of the two beings.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	Always, let the horns be more subtle than that of the restrictor, and be made of ivory or wood;
et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	and let the mouth of the pipe be twice as wide, and the margin of the trees must be long, and at least one and a half palms.
et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	and between the two limbs there should be two attachments of this same pipe, which must be firm in one and the other, at least half a palm long or slightly more.
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	And these two attachments are fixed in the mouth of the maris so that when one turns the two horns, they open.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	Another form, more subtle and lighter in appearance, might be made from a cane or buckthorn stick, according to the likeness of tongs.
et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large;	and has two shoulder joints, as you see, of the length of a palm, and two bones wide;
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	and when you see the elbow opening to the entire tool, make the woman sit at the bed, with her hands hanging and her legs spread apart, then position both joints together in the elbow, and hold the handle of the instrument under her armpits;
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	then guide your hand over the entire tool in the same way as with tongs, according to the amount you see opening the mouth of the elbow, until the force makes what she desires.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances;	This tool consists entirely of mountains and is multiplied like its likenesses;
et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	And when you have equipped them, then the work proceeds more swiftly, and they lift individuals higher because of their quantity for those.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	Do not lose hope in the tool you have not equipped, because its necessity is not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	When the second stage is retained during childbirth, it is necessary that you instruct the mother to retain her urine, and then make her sneeze with consideration, and keep your hands on her mouth and nose;
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	And if she jumps because of this, it goes well.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	If that doesn't work, take a cup and make the patient vomit or cover it, and place herbs that can open the mouth of the wife, such as poppy, rue, fennel, chamomile, clove and thyme;
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu;	All these herbs, or none of them, whether cooked or steeped in water on the fire;
puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris;	Then place a reed or a small straw in the opening of the pot, and put another end into the mouth of the patient, and blow until the steam goes inside the patient;
puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	Then make them sneeze, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the second one leaps quickly.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine;	And if she still has no power after this treatment, and it is not strong, instruct her to moisten her left hand in sesame oil or rosemary oil, and then use the hand as nature intended, seeking out a second one;
et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	And when she finds it, grasp and extend it slowly and straightly, so that the patient does not vomit during extraction;
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie;	But you must gently move it to the right and to the left, and then pull;
si venra et se desaerdra.	If it comes and gets relieved.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	And if the mouth of the sore is salty and there is constriction, as we have said for the treatment of sneezing and herb vaporization;
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	and if it is not relieved by all that we have said, be careful not to overly pull during the treatment;
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	But it is necessary that the one at the mouth of the sore be tied to the woman's ovary, then anoint with a fourfold herbal ointment enema;
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer;	If it is applied and will cure, and will come to power;
mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	However, if there is a bad smell coming from the stomach and head and reddens the skin, even when it should be curing.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu:	Therefore, then you need suitable fumigations for this:
aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	None of the old have experienced fumigation with sow's ears and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the tool with which one fumigates the woman during the retention of flowers and the afterbirth is thus:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	And imagine it as a cane, and place the subtle head in the fire, and have the shoulders wide above the flame;
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And let the fumigations be over the coals, and stay until the head is exhausted, then repeat another one.
de percier lou fondement	To pierce the base
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	Many children are born who do not have the foundation pierced, but rather have subdued one subtle and misguided:
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	Therefore, then at the birth let it pierce that misguided element according to its nature, and do not allow it to be pricked by sharp pain, and guard against it so as not to touch it;
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then place on wet wool in wine and oil, then the application of ointment until it's clean.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it won't slip back, place or insert a tourniquet cord and leave the hands bound, and have it removed when the child desires to go into chambers.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme;	And here comes the treatment for those sudden injuries to wounds or abscesses;
si covient coper celui soudement:	if it is necessary to cover that hot application:
si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	either treat with an ointment, as we have mentioned for the snail's slime.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula from the foundation
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors;	Fistulas that come from the foundation are concretion, and grow larger than those that come from below, or in the space between two parts, if it's one fistula or more;
et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans;	and when that concretion is old, if it moves, and accumulates moisture causing white or fine yellow fluid, and always these fistulas are external;
et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	And they are known by those who experience loss or windiness when a person is expelling waste, and sometimes jumping from one to another.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge;	And for those that reach up to the bladder, and even halfway down the penis;
et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	They also extend up to the knee joint, and even to the kneecap.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	And thus one can identify a fistula that occurs at the base, and not occurring there:
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And if you pierce your index finger or the base, and insert a fine needle like that of an arachnid or iron into the fistula when there is no twisting.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	And if there is twisting, if you insert a thin thread like that of a spider, or the hair of a horse, as long as you feel the thread or the hair on your index finger;
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	And if you do not feel it, and there is no sign of decay or wind or disease anywhere nearby, as we have said:
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie;	know that it does not pierce through;
si te haste dou curer.	if you hasten to cure it.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula is passing up to the bladder or up to where urine leads, if it jumps with urine, and cannot be soldered by medicines.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	If it has pierced up to the knuckle, then there is a test coming up to the elbow;
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	if there is no twisting and the pain is not internal, then it means that it is embedded deeply, and it does not warrant medicine or immediate ointment treatment;
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	and for these Persian abscesses there is no effective remedy other than effort and the vanity of those who intervene.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos;	In those that are neither Persian nor ancient, there is hope for healing through iron treatment, as I have experienced, and it is that the patient lies on their back with the disease in your hands;
et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	And he raises the legs up to his thighs, and has his thighs inclined towards his belly;
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	Then tie up an arachnid bag, or a snail if there's complexity, as long as you know where the bag comes from.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet;	If the patient feels pain in the foundation, then you should push your index finger, and if it is so that the bag has pierced.
et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	And when you can feel between your index finger and the heart or flesh, then know that it is deep.
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If there's no movement, one cannot judge properly.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	We can still say that quite often we can judge well to heal some, but this happens rarely.
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	And when we assist like this, one heats up the fine cautery according to the width of the fistula, as was previously mentioned.
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement;	And it boils all the way inside the fistula until it escapes from under the foundation;
et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	And do this two times or three, until you know that these burned-out parts are done, which resemble a bird's feather;
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	Then use the moist wadding in ointment until that burned part comes out, then apply the ointment to seal and mend it.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If it's like this, then it's well.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	If this is done, no other means can make it well;
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	And if you push it through and does not pierce to the root which is the foundation, and between your thumb and the tent you place a thick layer of tissue or flesh, and you see the opening of the fistula under that layer until it comes into contact with the healthy tissue;
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	If it's applied at the start of the fistula formation, and is held in place until the tent starts to come out, then apply the cautery afterwards, until it reaches the head of the tent.
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra;	And the tent will be released, and the condition will improve;
puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	Then remove those hollow hairs that resemble a bird's feather, ensuring none remain.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the wound does not heal, cut between you and the wound, then apply either fire or medicinal treatment.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses:	For the fire cauteries gather two good things:
c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	This means, the scorching of these treated hairs, and the bleeding of blood and drying out of moisture;
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	Then treat wet tents with butter or ground things, until the pus flows out, and out comes the burnt hair in the flow.
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	Then treat the wound with binding remedies consisting of hard matter, and apply them as dry medicines.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is healed, if it has truly healed and does not recur.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if the fistula comes just past halfway through the base, and is distant from the body, you should press on or inquire about its foundation.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres:	If you feel the tent [a term possibly related to a medical technique or condition], and there is II something akin to webbing, silk, or rope inside, or it's about to pierce, assuming only paths of love and hope exist, through administering one of the three ways:
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	or you cauterize it as we have said, or you remove it up to the bottom, or if you can identify the tent [a term possibly related to a medical technique or condition], treat accordingly and then apply first aid;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	and do not overheat it, so you don't cut into the structure that holds the foundation, allowing for the eliminations to pass by its own will;
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	then treat it as we have said;
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	By chance if it is healed, or you remove that covering and clean it since it has been cut from the bottom, either by try or with another tool pointed.
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	Then cleanse that area which is in the wound as much as you can;
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement:	Then study to heal the wound, and allow the fistula to remain in the part below the foundation:
si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	if it is easier for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere:	And always follow this manner for the fistulas:
et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And when you bend the needle in the fistula, and it is located under the foundation close to the skin above, if you take a needle that pierces the head according to this shape:
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And tie two twisted threads together, and blow the tent into the fistula until it reaches to the head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	If it is deep within the margin beneath the foundation, then remove the thread of that torn one, just like you bend your thumb or foundation.
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II;	and pull the head of the thread, and join both ends together, and hold one to the other, and leave it for one or two days.
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	and hold it each time until the threads join these bars that are between the two, and bind them together.
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	then treat the wound until it has healed and is cured.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not puncture, make an incision in all possible ways that you can, as long as it is not too deep.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not proper to perform such placement directly and then proceed with treatment as we have said, until the wound heals.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	The shape of the thornlike pustule from which one makes a fistula is quite thick and comes in parts, it slices;
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	And on the other hand no, because one doesn't join what one shouldn't join, as you see here:
des emorroydes	of lacerations
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres:	Illnesses occur in two ways:
ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement;	They can occur internally, like in the resin's core, whether small or large grains are present. They may accumulate with blood and if one or more exist, they penetrate deep into the structure and reach up to the boundary of that structure;
mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	However, those that remain outside can have little moisture, and even a bit of yellow water or a bit of blood, and they have the color of flesh;
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	And the treatment for those that are inside the core, you instruct the patient to excrete them through their openings until the core discharges and they become visible as fibers;
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	If you are in a hurry, and use tweezers, or hold it with your nail, then pull at its roots;
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	And if they cannot hold them due to their moisture, then take them by the claw, or with cotton, or from a piece of leather;
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	And remove them with your fingers, then cover them, and apply some hot powders that are used in the place of a cautery;
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	otherwise you apply cautery as it is said or in the chapter of cautery, and treat with other remedies until they are healed;
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	and if the foundations cannot come out, then treat the patient with astringent and harsh remedies for bowel issues to help what is inside or the foundation pass smoothly;
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	if the intestines cannot mix, and if the thread is hard at the foundation, then it should be treated gently;
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	And indeed you should grasp them with your finger or forceps, and pull them, then cut if necessary in the way that we have said, as long as there is blood, and fear of the metal cut does not exist.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere:	It is necessary for you to sew it up in this manner:
pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large;	Take a twisted thread, and make it into a needle, then pass the thread above and pierce the needle from the other side, and loop the two ends of the thread around the needle, and if they are wide;
et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	and hold the thread in place, then tie the thread, and remove the needle, and do this with all others, leaving some for the excess of blood;
puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	then place on the wound one moist bandage in oil or a poultice, and then place it directly over the wound, and instruct the patient to rest;
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let it grow until it becomes greasy, and when they fall off, then apply ointment treatment and other remedies, until the wounds are healed.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	so that drying occurs due to fire or foundation
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times there is the drying effect of dung in the intestines, and due to the nature's constraint, and when the disease is old and medicine no longer works.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	It is necessary that you place the tip of a thorn or on your nail the skin above, which does not allow it to become moist.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	Then treat it until it becomes firm as is proper;
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	And if it does not become firm, restart the shaving with more strength than before, until a little heals and is scraped.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat it until it is healed.
dou fremit	When the tremor
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	A worm is a small external appearance before the body, and goes all around;
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	And always feel the truth in it when it's cold, and you can also sense its death throes like a shiver, and it spreads throughout the body, and more so in the hands than elsewhere.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	And the treatment is that you take a stick from a goose feather or a strong vulture feather and place this stick over the quivering area, until the purplish circle completely surrounds the quivering.
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	Then turn your hand over the entire stick until you cover all of the quivering area, and hold it firmly, and pull out the quivering from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see something like a spider's cane or iron in this shape, make it thin all around and smooth above:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser.	Don't pierce too deeply, for you must hold with both hands, and firmly press.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	And if you see it, cauterize the quivering area, just as is described in the section on fire cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	in the shape of a bladder
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet;	Never make a silver or lead paste, or melted spider;
et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	And never use these small and large instruments according to their intended purpose.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Therefore, when one applies them in the treatment of infants and those who are weak and painful, they are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The shape of the small and large blister is as follows, or how the belly is bound according to this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez;	And there is often distress where the belly is bound, as you see, and the bowels are pierced within.
et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I;	And on one side there's a loss of two parts, and on the other one part;
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	And in the belly or where one puts medicine from a beast's bladder or parchment, it is pierced through completely with many small parts. There should be one inch of space between each part, then stitch into these parts a strong thread made from woven wool, and join the belly as if it were a goat.
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize;	And when the medicine is inside, bind it with a strong thread using the instrument before, then proceed to cauterize;
et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and that is in the form of a circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	And may the medicine not be too hot nor too cold, and smear the head with oil or yolk of egg ointment, or something similar, then gently rub it.
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet;	Then guide the ministers with both of your hands until it's fully visible. Then remove the swelling, and lift the patient's legs to their side, and if you see that the medicine is about to exit, extract as much as possible;
et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And if they sleep for an entire night, this provides greater help.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you perform a colonic irrigation in cases of stomach upset disease, and the medicine quickly emerges, then repeat until it's well.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant;	And if there is bleeding from the wound or abscess, then treat the swelling as finely as for an infant.
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	and it's the shape of the fine lump under whose skin is constrained:
des plaies	of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies;	We have spoken about the treatment of wounds in the section on wound care;
or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	Or we will tell you about hand treatments and medical practices, according to their completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse depending on how they are made, and depending on where the wounds are located, and for what reason they were caused.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	The causes of wounds are from the splintering of stones, and the cutting of swords and knives, or spears or bows or arrows, or similar things;
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	or those that are made according to the parts of the body, such as a wound in the neck, or on the head, or the back, or the belly, or the liver, and similar members;
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	And I will tell you the treatment of each wound, and start with simple head wounds, for that memory will come in its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut:	I say that if a simple wound comes or to the head, and no bone is broken, be careful if it's from stone or similar things, and the skin has been entirely torn and the wound is large, and you doubt about an abscess heat:
si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	If you make it a speedy healing of the forehead in particular, and if there is little blood from the wound, then heal it against the excised part.
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	And let the patients be filled with wine and large meats.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	And if they do not wish to heal quickly, then reduce their meat intake, and do not drink wine nor eat large meats;
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	And place an ointment on the wound if abscesses form, use moistened cotton in oil rose or solely in rosmary oil, or in fortified wine;
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	And if there are no abscesses at all, place something on the wound if it is fresh and bloody throughout, and not disturbed by air; I will mention a powder later on this.
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the body has moved it, set some ointments on it until it is healed.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large, like from a sword cut or similar injuries, and the lips cannot be sewn together with sutures, then they are sewn together, like I will explain in injuries to the abdomen, by sewing.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope;	If the wound exposes the bone, there's pain and it can only bear so much pressure, if the patient allows;
puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	Then treat the wound with medicine, and replace hard tissue for skin in its place, instructing the patient to consume hearty meats such as cooked tests and wheat, along with other similar items.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	And if you find or discover rotten skin, and it doesn't reach the bone, then remove the rot completely, and let out pus, then treat.
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	And if there's an artery in the wound or vein, then without hesitation, and it cannot be stemmed by medicine, so you should clip the artery, and if you find it protruding, tie it with a thread.
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if this does not benefit you, then apply cautery to it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere:	And if the wounds are small and simple, they receive a light treatment:
et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	and take this powder that binds in such a way when the heat has worked it in.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est:	And the manner of the powder is:
pren encens une partie;	take one part of incense;
sanc de dragon II parties;	take two parts of dragon's blood;
chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	take three parts of fresh calx, grind it finely and apply the powder to the wound, compressing it until the air can properly circulate and it joins with all its blood;
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle;	then mix well, leave it without disturbing it, if it does not swell;
car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	For one does not remove the medicine until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And you should not do this with charcoal alone, when you don't have the incense or the dragon's blood, but only that the doctor has cleansed the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	And if the artery has caused the wound to heal, just as it is healing, so immediately, do not apply this powder in any case.
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	but apply some digested ointments, or made from oat flour mixed with water and honey, until it begins to bleed;
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then continue other treatments until it is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	And if the bone fracture comes with the wound and it's small, then treat it with fine forceps;
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	and I will tell you about fractures of the head later.
de la plaie dou col	from the wound in the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	This wound comes from the neck and if it is simple, there should be no difference between it and those in the head, but if a vein or an artery is cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	If it's the neck, leave the treatment and don't put anything restricting, because it harms the neck and causes them to retreat;
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	And do not put anything cold on the wound, for the substance of nerves is cold, and the continuity of such things is connected with the brain, which is the highest member.
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	But let the medicine be cool, like as almonds are washed in mild water and mixed with rose oil, and also washed lemons similarly in mild water, and other earthy substances following this manner, and wet ointments.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, so it binds in layers, then treat until it heals properly.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	And if the wounds are deep and there is hair and filled with blood, if you puncture or even deeper.
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	And if the artery is cut, and blood rushes out, if you uncover it, and repair it, and cauterize; this requires skill.
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	And if the spine of the throat is cut or the windpipe, and the passage must be kept open, by which meat goes; so when you place the windpipe on the reed of the throat, do not touch the throat but keep it according to its natural shape.
et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	And then it tightens the addition, leaving him for some days, then treats with desiccating ointments until it is dry;
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	And if the wound shows on the bone, then one must seek treatment;
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	And if there are pieces of bone, if you can remove them all, and those you cannot obtain, leave them until the wound rots away and is healed by nature, allowing its natural process to finish.
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wound is fresh, apply the powder I have mentioned on it.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there are bones in the wound and it has an ulcer, treat it as I have described in this chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	From the wound of a spear or a knife
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne:	If it's from a spear or a knife and the wound goes deep, observe whether there is any wind coming out of the wound; if the patient can't breathe properly:
saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	Then you know that the wound is fatal;
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	And if it isn't deep, and the whole of its blood is fresh, if you don't put any powder there in the first hour or bind it without a clot for fear that the blood won't settle fully, will escape from the end and return to the heart, and let the patient rest;
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor;	but apply an attractive ointment, and bind it twice a day;
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors;	and if you don't have an ointment, put in the wound old cotton to absorb moisture, and make the patient rest on the wound for three days, or four, or more;
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne;	if there is no convulsion, nor harmful trembling of the heart, nor constriction due to pain alone;
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	and when you see good conditions, know that the wound is saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then treat with various remedies until there is no blood;
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule;	and if it cannot heal and work, know that there will be a fistula;
si la cure si com on doit.	if the treatment is as we should do it.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	And if the wound is from a single sword or knife cut, or worse, on the back, take the treatment of whoever is in front;
s’elle est grans, de cousture;	if it is large, with stitches;
et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	and if it is small, with powder, and if there are fragments in the bone or have been removed from it, if you cleanse the wound, and if any external treatments were performed;
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	and if they have not been removed, let the wound fester, and facilitate the extractions;
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And for other wounds on other limbs is the judgment made, just as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	regarding the protrusion of the abdomen
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	The swellings of the belly are large and medium-sized and small;
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	From a major wound, sometimes the intestines rupture, or the nerves of the intestines, through which foreign substances can enter;
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	And the stitches are more troublesome; and it is not worse to have a small wound than a large one, because in the case of major injuries we do not reattach the intestines as closely, unless they are done stitch by stitch;
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II.	Because the intestines swell whenever they feel cold; if we do not reattach them more closely, and for that reason it's better to have smaller wounds; because we must sew the intestines back in their place with care, just like with others II.
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres:	And know that rupture of the belly occurs in four ways:
les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	The two common sutures occur in the belly wound, and the suture for other chest wounds is shared with other injuries;
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	Yet they are more specific to the belly suture, and I will mention each one individually and explain them.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres:	I say that when the wound is small and there's nothing of the intestine exposed, and when a matter is to be placed back, this can be done through one of the two ways:
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	or due to the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because of the swelling of the intestines from cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	And when it's cold, heat him up in this manner:
moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	Moisten an sponge or add salt to water solely, or cook in boiling water with vinegar and lime and needles, and release the intestine until the internal wound is healed;
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And once this wine has been strained and made muddy to relieve swelling.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	And when you see the swelling leave, moisten the intestine with water or broth that has been cooked in salt, because through this, only little things pass through the entry.
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	And if it cannot enter, make a little incision with the tool used for extracting worms;
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	And the first treatment is made muddy that the cut, which we do not have to make without great necessity or purpose;
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	And these are the instruments to split them:
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	if you cut from within at the curve and not outward, and see this shape:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound has been enlarged, and the intestines have escaped, if you can place them again according to their natural form in their proper location, then do so because this is beneficial.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	When the wound is broad, and it's in the lower belly area, you should have the patient lie on their back, and place their legs higher than their head;
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	And if it's in the lower belly region, place their head and buttocks higher than the other parts, and similarly, if the abdominal rupture is in one of the two areas, position yourself so that the affected part is higher than the other;
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	And thus, you should administer what I say in large and medium wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres;	For small wounds, use what you have at hand, then take the priest's oil in your hands and smear it over the entire rupture with one hand, then bring together the lips;
et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort;	And this is the common method of suturing, and you take one or more needles according to the size of the wound's width, then leave at the edge of the wound an allowance of space, and place a needle where there will be enough strong thread.
et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble;	and pierce the two ends of the skin with the two ends of the thorn, which is inside the skin, as long as you make it pierce that part, and join the two ends of the thorn in four bundles;
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	then insert two strands of thread through the needle from both sides, then join the two ends of the wound together properly, and then leave an allowance of space, and place another needle;
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	then tie the thread like you did with the first needle, and continue doing this according to how many needles you need to use until all the wound is restrained;
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	And use needles of medium size, between subtle and large ones, for subtle needles cut all the flesh, and overly large ones do not fit well at all.
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	because it is necessary that they be medium;
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	and it is not good to have needles sticking too far out of the flesh and skin, as they cut and open the wound before suturing;
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	and then remove the needles when they are no longer needed, to prevent bruising for the patient during sleep, and cover the needle holes with bandages or cloths to keep them clean until the wound is healed;
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II.	and this method of stitching needles works better for small wounds, because you can use only one needle or two.
Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien;	The second stitch is common, and it consists of joining the two ends of skin and the two ends of muscle together on one needle with a strong thread in the middle;
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	And when you have pierced all four ends together, you should then reset the needle at the part where you started, in the manner one sews linen;
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	and place an interval between each stitch equal to that of a small thumb;
ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	These stitches close the wound; I sewed a belly incision that a man had or had lost his intestines to due to a knife cut, and the wound was over a palm's length, with well two palms of intestines inside it, within the belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I brought back the intestines until it had been 24 hours since he had them, and the wound was sewn up until 15 days, and I treated him, and he recovered.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	And the doctor had judged that he would die, and it was a wonder;
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	And I would not treat it with ointment, for I was in a place where none could be found, nor any medicine;
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And I would change the old cotton twice daily over the wound, and wash it with honey water until it healed.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture:	I will tell you two proper methods for stitching:
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	Take the needle and thread it through from the outer part up to the inner side;
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	When it has pierced the right in a straight line, if it passes through the sinew or sticks or where you have threaded the needle, and you make it pierce from the inner side to the outer part again.
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	And the understanding of this stitch is that you sew it as the pelt maker does with the skin, and you leave one side of the sinew on one side, and take it from the other, until the entire seam is completed.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	The second method of sewing, as Galen properly states, is such that no one does, who unite the two parts naturally together, and apply one edge to the other edge, in this manner:
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac;	Nail an awl or edge at the joint of the mirror near, and pierce only that area, and leave the two edges of the fabric;
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac;	Then turn the needle, and make it pierce from the outer part all the way inwards, at both edges of the fabric;
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	Then pierce both at the outer part all the way inwards up to where it's inside, with two other awls at each side of the fabric that are opposite to each other;
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	And this is the method they stitch and it is the most common one.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	Galen stated this phrase, and no one attests to it, so one must suture the belly with two needles, or where there is thread in each.
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	and must one stitch with one needle from one side and the other from the opposite, like those who sew bullets;
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	and know that when the rupture is in the middle of the belly, the suture is more painful than others' bellies.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	The judgment of the wound is like the judgments of other wounds:
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout;	and it is that when you find the fresh wound completely filled with blood, as the art has made it flow, then restore to its normal state, and the intestines, and the cut;
puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	then place on the healing powder for charcoal, and if the art has made it flow, then apply no cream that might be available until the wound heals;
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	And twist the thread, and may they缝the needle, and let them sew the skin.
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then treat the wound as usual, until it heals;
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	And if you don't have medicine, place it there, intermittently until the pus begins to drain. Use old cotton, and shake it twice a day until it heals.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	For you don't need any other medicines when dealing with simple wounds;
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	And if you suspect that the wound might affect major body parts, it's necessary to immerse the affected area in a light oil heated with heat or rose oil, and place it between the joints, covering them completely;
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	And if you feel pain or gangrene in the bowels, and this happens repeatedly, it's advisable to use black wine as an enema, and similarly, if gangrene spreads up to the intestines;
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	And pierce within it, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small ones.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestine which is called 'youth' cannot heal when it is injured, and this is due to the obstruction of blood vessels that are present there, and because of the subtlety of his entire body, and the approach of its nature towards nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	And if the pus jumps out of the wound, set it back in the same way as an intestine, while it is still fresh;
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres;	And if it is old and turned red or black, you should tie the black area, so that no blood flows out, because there are veins and arteries;
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	Then cut out what's between the tie and put the two pieces hanging down from the part under the wound up until beyond it to ease extraction when the pus discharges, and the wound will heal.
de la routure dou boueil	from the rupture of the boil
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	When the intestine is intact and the wound is small, one can attempt to restore it in some animals, for I have seen that a man was wounded or had his stomach pierced by a spear;
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	And there was a wound on the right side of the stomach, it became inflamed and formed into a fistula, causing malabsorption and flatulence;
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	I applied the cure according to what I knew, and didn't stop refining until it was effective, and bound up his wounds.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	And when I saw them healing, I worried that the patient might be suffering in their stomach;
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	But there was no harm, only improved condition, and eating and drinking took place.
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	And they told no experimenter that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it should be treated in this manner:
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	Take large intestines, then join the edges of the wound. And when the intestines have opened their mouths, place them against the two edges if they push their mouth upwards;
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	And then lift his head, and this is held so that it cannot be released, then another tremor follows in the same way as before, until the wound is entirely healed.
et cout la plaie.	and there is no wound left over.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere:	That is the main thing that gets into the intestine, and it causes no harm to the patient, and one can tie the intestine with a fine thread that has been cut from an animal's intestine in this manner:
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	Take the tip of this intestine thread that has been thoroughly rubbed, and then tie it to the tip of the thread made from fine linen, twist the linen thread around the intestines, sew through the needle, stitch the intestines, and reset them in the wound;
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	And this way of stitching doesn't deviate from following the path of love and hope;
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	And if the wound is large and broad, especially when it's in one of the large intestines, so that there's no embryo or healthiness, due to subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	from a fistula, or wherever it may be.
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Know that any wound or abscess, when it matures, is universally called "fistula", and even when it is hair-covered and drains slowly.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	And the fistula is along with a hard and whitish lump-like formation, where one does not feel pain, and it's also feathered like the feathers of a bird;
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	And sometimes in a clear jump, and at other times thick;
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	Sometimes small, and at other times large enough;
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes:	And I have spoken about it in the section on wounds, that every wound that is not healed and has no pus exits through one of the nine causes:
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	That is to say, by the weakness of blood or bruises;
ou por sa malice;	for its wickedness;
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	because of the hardness within it, and above the lips, that does not allow hair to grow;
ou il i a trop de bowe;	because there is too much blood;
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	or the lungs are putrid, and the matter has bad quality;
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	or the medicine is not good in the treatment;
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	or because the corruption happens like a plague;
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	or due to the property in the area being late for digestion, and delayed healing, and escaping naturally;
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	or there are veins or bones;
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the remedies using medicine in this section.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	So it is necessary for me to tell you about the treatment of a fistula which is done through manual work.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	Know that fistulas occur in all limbs of the body;
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	for there are fistulas that come from the large veins, and arteries, and nerves, or at the heart, or in the intestines, or in the bladder, or on any of the ribs, or in the spinal column, or on any joint of the hands or feet;
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	and if it affects the principal property of the limb, and manifests itself accordingly.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	And all fistulas that occur in this manner cause difficulty with healing and there is nothing else except for dirt and lack of knowledge;
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	And if there is no fistula that does not reach what I have said, and you are familiar with the cure, then find out about it. If the fistula is straight, take an araneous or iron tent, place it where the fistula is, and perform the procedure.
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	And if the fistula is twisted, seek with a delicate attempt to pierce, for the needles bend and move within the twist.
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	And if the fistula has twisted sides and you cannot properly search for it with attempts, insert a catheter through one of the twists, because moisture will flow from one twist to another, and clean;
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	Then guide your hand carefully as you can, to determine if there is bone or nerve and how it feels beneath the skin. Ask the patient precisely where they feel pain when pressed by your hand, and determine the location.
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	And when you truly know its location and if it is far from a joint, or nerve, or artery or vein, or any of the locations I mentioned, follow as I instructed, remove the bone and eliminate the putrefying substances that are inside.
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	And then the treatment until it is healed, and if a fistula exists, it must be well cut in the proper location, so you should press hard with your fingers, as much as possible, then I place moistened cloths in an ointment, and apply them up to the tip of the fistula, while the medicine eats away at the excess that has remained at the bottom;
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And then I place salve on healthy tissue until it heals.
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And if it doesn't heal with this method, then apply the cautery as we have described, and if the bone is rotted by the fistula, then press on it.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	If the vein or major limbs are involved, as we have said;
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if the bone is exposed, and there's decay and blackness, then you should scrape it until all decay has been removed, then treat with salve on healthy tissue until it heals.
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	And if it is not healed, and you return it as before, know that you are not yet finished until the end.
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	If you uncover and seek as far down as possible, and remove all the decay, then properly return it to its place;
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	And if it is so healed, that's well done.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	If not, know that the decay has penetrated too far, and you cannot rectify it;
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	if there is no other way but to leave it to natural processes;
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	And if there is a small decayed bone, and you can pull it out with tongs, if you remove it using an appropriate tool; and if there are many bones, then remove them all, do not leave any;
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	And if moisture causes it against your will, with no mistake or fear, deal with the moisture, muscle and flesh, and free the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	And if you cannot remove them in one hour, put on the wound a substance that promotes gangrene, and let it be until the flesh has rotted inside the bones, then they will have their bones easier.
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie;	And if it is a large bone, such as from the leg or thigh, you only need to let the putrefaction proceed until all of its blackness becomes bone dust, then restore the wound.
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	And if there is a large part due to putrefaction, and it reaches up to bone dust;
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	And if necessary, he should treat all the way until the putrefaction stops, and then treat it as long as it is healing;
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	And I will tell you of a fistula that occurred in his leg, so that you may take an example and aid yourself in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	He was a young man around thirty years old, who had pain in his leg due to something that came from within the body, until the materials reached the leg, and then there appeared a large abscess, and no external reason existed for opening it;
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	but the physician by their foolishness opened so much that in relation to the abscesses opening, they consumed a great amount of material, and it became a fistula, and it caused immense loss that all lamented the wasting and moisture within the body;
et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	And many physicians tried to treat it for two years, and there was no wise man in the art of healing hands until I was called, and I saw his leg and the medicines used to cure him, and what consumed through the losses was with great concern within the body;
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	And became red the bodies of the young, and had a yellowish hue.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I pitched a tent on one of these bumps, and then searched all the bumps, finding that some were coming against each other from every part of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	So I quickly proceeded, and searched in one of the sections until I discovered a part of the bone, and found it corrupted and perforated, and the decay extended up to the inner bone;
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	It was clear to me what appeared from the corrupted bone, and I thought there wasn't any other decay, just that which I had uncovered;
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	And I began to heal the wound with medicine for a long time, and was unable to stitch it;
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	And then I restarted, and discovered the bone as before, and found the decay continuing within the bone, and I removed it, and I was concerned to stitch the wound;
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines;	But I can't do much until I've measured inside a palm of bone, and treat it thoroughly throughout, then return it with medicine;
et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	And it was quickly cured and strengthened, and there was no need to restart the work except due to the weakness caused by illness, which could not endure, and because of my fear of death that I had for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For in the draining of blood there is often much, but it was entirely clean, and from the place where the bone used to be emerged a hard flesh, and it had good properties and did not cause any harm or opposition at all everywhere, neither inward nor outward.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, it should be treated in this manner:
pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	Take hold of it, and stretch to the tip of the bone that is exposed, and command that he extend it upwards;
et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	and make another rope of thicker wool than the first one, and bind it above the flesh that is inside the bone, and pull the tip upwards, so that you draw the rotten flesh outwards, and reveal the flesh on the part where you need to see, ensuring the bone doesn't hurt the flesh;
et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	And insert a charcoal or a board under the bone to cleanse the putrid flesh;
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And one must be as thorough as possible when observing and feeling the corruption, and do it again if necessary.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute;	And if the bone is putrid and does not open, or corruption is within or in a part of it, then remove all the flesh;
puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit;	Then place charcoal there, and then cover the corruption from one part to another, and let the covering be long enough over any point of corruption, as we have said;
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	And if the corruption is in the joint, then cut out the putrid joint and cover the bone from the other side;
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then there's no other way but to cut it out;
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	And if the corruption is in or on the hand, or close to the foot, it is very strong but you must inquire about this corrosion, how it has appeared;
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	and cleanse in all ways that you can, but make sure that the vein or nerve does not hinder you;
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	know that the incisors and the grooves for cutting bones are numerous, depending on the arrangement of the bones and their appearance, as well as their size and fineness, their strength and their smallness.
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	and for each form of work, it is necessary to have the appropriate tool.
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	and know that the work will show you the tool you need for your task, according to knowledge of this art, and the testimony of how diseases are, in terms of their presentation and symptoms.
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	If you intend to use the tool required according to what is necessary.
dou feu	with fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	The shoulder joints may be dislocated due to internal causes, or due to external ones;
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	And when you have treated that corrosion by using medicines and if it doesn't benefit, if it should cut off that member until the point where the corrosion comes from, so that the sick might escape through this cause of death or because of malice, which is greater than the fault in the member;
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors;	And the signs are that the member becomes black, as if it were burned by fire, and after the blackness comes this corrosion from limb to limb, and takes over all the body;
si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	If you need to cut it off, and if it's due to the impact of some venomous beasts, such as sea scorpions and snakes, etc., when the corrosion is on the head of two, if you cut it and don't give it any space until the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	And if it reaches up to the wrist, if you pinch at the joint, so that the poison does not spread up to the elbow;
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute;	And if it comes to the arm, if you grip the sword;
et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	And when it passes the sword, that is death, and only its potency can be excused that it could not have been avoided;
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet:	and do exactly this when the poison comes or touches anything:
s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	And if it comes in the first joint, if you pinch after another joint;
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	And when it comes or touches anything, if you grip all of it;
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	And when it ascends to the leg, if you pinch at the knee joint;
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	And if it comes above the knee, there is no other way than to let the patient die;
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	And the way to cover or sew the limb is as follows: you tie it up both above and below, and stretch one surgeon's hand on the lower side of the two threads, and another surgeon on the other thread uphill. You cut the flesh between the two threads with a wide scalpel until the bone is exposed;
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	Then sew or cover it, and place one piece of linen from each side, so that the sewing does not touch the healthy tissue, but moves away from other injury and abscess on the patient.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans;	And when blood drainage occurs while you're working, quickly apply a cautery to the wound or place some constraining powders;
puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then return to your medicine until it is completed, then bind the sore limb with an acceptable bandage, and treat it as long as it remains healthy.
et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet:	and I will tell you what happened at my house in the garden:
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	He was struck by a darkness that seemed like the flame's corruption, and this devastation first attacked his garden in the south, spreading until it consumed all of it;
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	And when the owner saw the corruption, he rushed to cover his garden, and was saved;
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	And later on, the corruption came back to his right hand side, and it reached me, and I treated him with counteractions after cleansing the body, yet could not stop the corrosion;
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	And he insisted that I touch his hand, but I refused, hoping to counteract the substance;
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible;	And I also doubted that if I were to amputate her hand, she would not die, for the power of the medicine was weak;
et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	And he became desperate completely, and returned to his land, and covered his hand with bandages, and he recovered health;
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	And I have told you this only for those who might need to do something else, if necessary.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	No pus comes out in the inner flesh, and stays so long that it causes a large collection of worms;
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	And then burrows and pierces, and the worms jump into it, and the pus remains in the patient's veins, as if they were vessels;
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	And the skin above is as fine as the fabric of a sieve, and does not go all the way to the bone or nerve, and such disease is also called "empty" and is not called "fistula";
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	But if it is so long that it extends almost to the bone from end to end, then it is called a 'fistula';
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	And in cooking, if you sear the skin all over evenly, and likewise when it is thin, like a piece of fabric;
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	and does not swell from its decay.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	And if you find that the skin is reddening and decay is not fully present, and the skin is full of flesh, then you should treat it with castor oil in this way:
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	Examine if the testicles are large, and the scrotum is filled with a foul smell, then you should use castor oil made in this way:
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	Take alisil, oil, and lard, equally, and cook them in a vessel on the fire until the medicine turns red, and becomes as thick as honey;
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	And then use it according to your need, and apply it with water and honey, and with chloride of lime in the womb, and restrain the contraction;
et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	And leave the medicine on for two hours, then remove it by pinching;
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	Perform this action as many times as the breasts are full and drained, and when the milk is expelled;
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	And do this without the medicine present, once every time you use ashes of wood from a vine, and pour water over them. Then let it drip and use it as an enema, until you know that the breasts are well drained;
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	And if the patient cannot bear the Egyptian medicine or water from ashes, or an enema of water and honey, with a little boric acid;
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	For you mix with honey and wine which the honey has the property of purifying and washing, and the wine makes warmth for the healthy;
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	And once you have done this, and you have ensured that the intestines are well purified, when you insert into it what causes meat to be born in them, and then you take to cover the membrane with a fine cloth, and do this with rose oil and in wine;
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	Or you will insert it with some medicines and applications, of which I have spoken about their properties or treated the applications;
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	And if the opening of the intestine is small and the stick of the catheter cannot enter it, then widen it with a small iron rod, and insert a tent covered with an Egyptian ointment or basilicon balm until it is widened.
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if the wound is too wide, so that the stitches only barely allow it to be closed up until the tendon or muscle can fit inside, and if the torn tendons are located above the wound, so that they are stitched higher than where I am.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	For when the arrow is fully removed, one must not leave any wound in the flesh;
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere:	And if you cannot cover the wound from below as you see fit, equip yourself in such a way that the arrow goes to the deepest point it can reach within your body. For when the arrow is removed completely, one must not leave any flesh exposed, and if you cannot cover the wound from its location as seen, then arrange your equipment accordingly:
que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	So that the arrow slides smoothly downwards, and leave nothing of the arrow behind;
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain;	And take in medicine to consolidate, putting it over the healthy area, and they are on a linen cloth that covers all the healthy part;
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	Then cut the edges of the scar on the breast as wide as possible from the first one, then apply ointment on the other cloth according to the width of the scar, and place it over the healthy area to ease the bowing, but remove only a large cloth for once after many days;
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	And that which is on the scar of the breast often needs to remove the bowing, and know what comes from the bowing, whether it's poison or less, or enough, or digested, or undigested;
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	And take care if the patient feels pain or not, and whether there is pus or not, and when your medicine has spread in this manner across you see the nature that jumps on the scar of healthy tissue, then know that the breast is healing already, and brings health near;
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	And then free it in the morning, or on the third day, and when you release the wound, change to another dressing, and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if after many days, the breasts release an undigested liquid, know that the breasts are not well.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if venomous snakes bite after a long delay, do not lose hope for recovery, because health is approaching.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	For there are men who delay in cleansing their wounds with honey, and among those who do the opposite;
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	and if there is undigested matter that remains in the chest for several days, know that the lungs are not functioning properly;
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	and if the lungs are slow to breathe and are distant, then adjust your remedies with both wet and dry substances, such as an oil that evaporates, because there is a large portion of vitriol, and this is the last remedy;
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	take oil that evaporates, and apply it with rose oil, and soak it in old wine of similar strength;
puis le confit et en use;	then the surgeon applies and uses it;
et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	and similarly creates a thicker version of cooked honey, when no remedies are present or when you take myrrh and aloes and incense, and grind them, and add the powder to honey once it is heated;
et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	and then apply it in a paste, and leave it on the skin, and each time administer a physician's long measure, and the roots of the celestial lily which is also like powdered sesame and cinnamon;
et en use de simples ou de compostes:	and uses simple remedies or compounded ones:
broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	grind them, make it into powder, and put it on the honey that I mentioned, and use it;
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	and if the treatment takes a long time and doesn't improve with this treatment, then know that corruption has spread throughout, it makes an impression in the bone, or affects hard parts of the body, or causes impairments;
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	if the treatment of pus removal, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	from the abscess under the nail
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	Panarice is an abscess that arises under the nail of the hand's palm, or under the foot, or accidentally forms in other toes;
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	And when it grows old, and if no care is taken, then the abscess bursts outwards, and runs and spreads across as long as its roots are under the nail, and by chance it might spread all of it;
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	And the corrosion reaches up to the bone, as long as it brings stinking pain, and the shoulder joints become broad, and is the color turns pale.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have instructed in the section on treatment, and if the treatment does not help, then it is necessary that you remove all the excess from under the nail. Then, cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	The cautery is greatly helpful if the bone is sound, and the nail is healthy;
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	And if the bone compresses the flesh at its tip, and it begins to point, and irritates it, then you should place the needle under the bone where the flesh tips, and keep it in a high position, and cut that flesh delicately and gently. Then put on top of the wound medicines hot and corrosive to remove all;
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then proceed with surgery as long as it is sterile.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	And if the corrosion has reached the bone, cut it through forcefully, because the more corroded the bone is, the less it can heal;
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if you see that the bone is corrupted, cut it out as soon as possible in a way similar to what has been explained earlier, then proceed with surgery as long as it remains sterile.
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	And if the bone is hardened and you can't cut through it easily, insert forceps, and since it causes great pain, it's best to first cure that area.
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	Then cut the nail of the thorn by making a crosscut above it, and be careful that the cut does not go too deep to the flesh beneath the nail, because the patient would feel too much pain.
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	And if it happens, place something above that soothes it.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	The pain was originating from the hand.
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	I must adjust those who are born with unusually thick limbs in some men, and sometimes they have part or they have bones, and at no time do they have nails, and none of them are born at the root of the joint where the birth is in neither of our thumbs.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	That which is born on any node of the knee does not move, and that which is born at the junction of the knee, by chance, moves;
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	The cut for one who has thick flesh is so light, in such a way:
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	Cut it at its root with a wide thorn.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer:	That which is born in the root of the joint is trouble to cure:
si te tien dou coper.	so hold it with copper.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In the one born or destined in the buttocks corner, it is necessary that you first remove the fat roundness up to the bone, then cut the bone with a suitable tool, and only then treat until it's clean.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The fuses that come together at the joints originate through birth, or through the healing of wounds, or through heat application, or through similar circumstances.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	If it is necessary that you repair this scarring, so that it must be restored according to their natural forms;
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	Then place between two wet tents or sheets in oil, so that they do not fuse;
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	or you place between two pieces of fine lead, until the limbs are fused, as it should be.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	Sewing should be done with both hands facing down, if you make that seam as it should be.
des vils	Infernal creatures
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	Their veins are large and filled with excessive melancholic fluids that come from several members of the body;
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	And more happens in legs of those who walk and work and carry than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	So you should then administer a single purge to him, and then heal him with basilica treatment.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres:	The treatment with iron is done in two ways:
l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	One way is to apply it and draw out the black blood;
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	And another way is to open the vein, and guide it with all strength.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere:	The size is according to this method:
arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	Firstly, immerse the leg in hot water for a strong soaking, until the large veins become fine. Then gently squeeze the leg from the knee upwards until it reaches the ankle region;
puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	Then cut the vein either in position I, II or III, using a large incision. Proceed to liberate and push forcefully the black blood towards your hand from one end until the other, as long as as much of the veins can withstand the effects of the herbs;
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	Next, apply it and instruct that it be rubbed with blackened meat to darken it;
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	And restart evacuation and cleaning when the veins are full, and harm the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere:	The operations for this are as follows:
reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	Lift the leg from the patient; if there is hair, then immerse it in water; and have the leg lifted by the patient until it turns red, and swell the veins;
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	And if you don't have water to bathe with, heat it over fire and then apply it along the vein from its long part up to the knee or at the ankle in the foot part;
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	Then scrape the skin with an onion, and strip each vein from both sides until you see it when you touch it;
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	And it appears red and black, and when it enters the skin as if it were a white string;
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois;	Start by heating the metal rod, until it is raised above the skin, then place it on the wrist lightly, then guide it in an 'I' shape for another three inches;
puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	Then scrape the skin over the vein until you can see it, then lift it with your fingers just like you did before, and press on another inch, in the same manner as you did initially;
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille;	Then use another size or several if needed, lift it, and press on the second finger knuckle, then guide and lift until you reach the second size;
puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	Then stretch it size by size, until all strength has been squeezed out, then press on;
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	And if you can't pull and lift it, then insert a needle at the end of a single thick thread, tie it and guide it, then heat a metal rod, and turn your hand from side to side until it comes out;
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	And make sure it doesn't stick, because if it sticks, one can neither milk nor lift her, causing harm to the patient;
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset;	And when you have treated her completely, place moist wool in the wound with wine and oil rose.
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Continue to clean until it is purified.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie;	And if the body is twisted and curled together into one bundle, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must cut it in a twisting manner, but do not make it stick.
et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And milk her just as we have previously described.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	The shape of the iron that one uses to twist the body is curved, and do not cut, so as not to pierce the vein;
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	And it has a large curve because if it was subtle, it would impede the vein, but being large as we have said, and this is its form:
de la voinne civile	of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	This vein is found in the legs, in warm areas where no herbs or trees grow, and on dry land where there is no moisture.
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	And sometimes it appears in other places than the legs, and this happens due to corruption that arises under the skin, if it comes from within the body like snakes and worms, being trapped between the skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the symptoms of this vein's beginning show that there is a very large inflammation in the leg, then the veins change, and the vein starts to exit outwards, like the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	When the shoulder is opened, it must be covered internally with a piece of plaster about 1/3 and up to 2/3, you tie it, and leave the plaster hanging down the leg, and every time there's need for more outside, you cover inside the plaster and tie it again.
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	And if it's too long, if you remove a part, envelop the rest and reattach it, making sure not to cut at its root until it is fully exposed.
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	for if you remove it, should it enter the flesh, and cause pus or decay or injury to the body, leading to a bad illness;
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	for that reason, it is necessary for her treatment to be gradual and step by step until completion, leaving nothing or any remnants behind;
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse;	and when this vein has been treated for the length of one or several hands, and a person comes to me with it protruding from X palms in length, where its origin was determined at X palms long; if you remove it, should there be one or more raisings or abscesses, and it is punctured until the bottom, so that everything can come out;
et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	And let the matter inside be emptied out, and apply remedies to the wound for any pus every day, then treat it as with abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains;	And the veins in this place must be handled carefully, and likewise when it opens at the foot or ankle, or where the foot or ankle is, where there is much pus, and where you must avoid injury;
cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	Treat accordingly as we have explained before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	worms that come forth between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	This disease is called in our land "Calf Disease", because it often affects cattle, and it's a small worm that emerges between the skin and muscle, traveling throughout the body upwards and downwards, and is felt at the onset by each part of the body, until it reaches the skin where it was going, then escapes;
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	And it is infected with pus from various fluids, if snakes, worms, roundworms or parasites come near and enter the belly;
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil;	And there is confusion about its nature, for when it travels through the body, and ascends to the head, and reaches the eye, by chance it returns, destroys the eye;
et ceu avient maintes fois.	And this happens many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	When you see it being treated and drained, one cannot but notice that when it goes:
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	Therefore, it is necessary that you bind above and below the wound with a strong tight ligature, then cut upwards and drain it, and if the exit is within the flesh, and you don't find it, then apply fire to sear it from above until it heals;
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	And the greatest harm he causes, if they run the eye, as we have said;
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	And if you see him coming or his head near the eye, then bind over him with your hands, then lift up, and pull powerfully;
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	And it is necessary to use the medicinal agent for purging of the body's humors with dissolving medicines, and be wary of meat that causes putrefaction.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	The pain coming from windiness
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre;	This disease is called in our land "vakirir", and it is a pain that comes to any limbs, and then moves from limb to limb;
et je vis ceu que je vos di.	And I have seen what I told you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	I was summoned to help a sick woman, and she showed me her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein under the arm;
et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	And after this, my face rises as if a worm in the shoulder, more quickly than anything else, as hot silver when it is cut from one place to another.
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	The pain leaves that place and penetrates the shoulder, then a little later spreads throughout the body, until it reaches the other arm;
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	It was conveying to me that she was twisting inside the body, just as I saw.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I was marveling much how she moved thus from limb to limb, for I had never seen this disease in such a manner.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	Nevertheless, I wanted many times to move the pain from one place to another, but I did not want it like I saw in the woman;
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	And I thought it was because the woman had a wet body and her veins exposed, and that is where the constriction of wind appears;
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	And cannot be seen according to this reason among those who are delicate, and have moist bodies and veins that respond.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	And when you see to treat this illness, and the patient feels that pain, if it opens like we said, open it from above and below quickly, then start sewing as long as that constraining wind force comes out of the place.
et cauterize le leu;	And apply the cautery to the area;
et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	And if you do not see it at your eyes, treat the one who expels the winds, like stinking pills, and snake pills, and similar others.
des saiettes	Des saiettes" in this context likely refers to "extracting arrows". In medieval medical practices, physicians would often deal with wounds caused by arrows or projectiles, requiring them to be removed from the body.
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows are diverse, depending on their appearance and according to the location of their impact on the body.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	The variety is such that there are those with large points, and small ones, and hairy, and fused;
et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	And of those with two angles, and of those with tongues, and of those where there are fragments;
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres:	And the one who urinates in no member but does so according to two ways:
ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	or in the primary organs if it urinates, as with the brain, heart, liver, spleen, lungs, intestines, bladder, and other similar organs.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	And when it urinates then not in any part of these organs, and the sign of death that I will tell you later, becomes apparent:
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	So it is necessary for you to be prepared for the extraction of this arrow, because death comes after in various circumstances;
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	And when that bad sign does not become apparent and the arrow is not fully extracted, you should retrieve it, and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	And the sign of brain injury when an arrow has pierced and gone through bone, causing a blow to the head is where blindness, stiffness, vertigo, heat in the eyes, inflammation and reddening of the tongue occur, along with spasms and confusion of mind, and vomiting of bile;
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles;	And perhaps there is weakness in the strength of the nostrils, or the ears;
et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	And sometimes affects speech and voice;
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	And the wound shows white moisture like pus, and also burns like a charred flesh in its movement;
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	And if you notice this sign, take care of the treatment, and pull out the arrow if it is still there.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	The sign of the arrow when it hits or pierces near the left nipple is that it's close to the breastbone. It also feels like if it was stuck in something hard, not empty;
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	And perhaps the seat also moves as with the hair, and in black blood, and comes coldness and cold sweat, and fainting:
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	Therefore, you can understand that many die from doubt and fear.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of an arrow that never leaves its path is when blood spurts from the wound without foam, and the throat swells up, and the patient's face changes color, and they sigh loudly while their body grows cold.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes;	And if the arrow passes through the undercoat of the buttock, it goes out beyond the small ribs;
et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire;	And causes great pain and agony, along with sighing;
et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And it moves the entire limb from the shoulders.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if an arrow or stomach penetrates it, perchance something of the undigested meat comes from the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if an arrow or stomach pierces it, and if there is no meat in the intestines after jumping from the wound, then there's no hope for treatment, nor extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor:	And if the arrow passes through the bladder, and the urine springs out and goes in all directions, and the patient feels intense pain:
saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	You will know that the wound is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other body parts, such as the limbs (including arms and legs), neck, throat, shoulder, elbow, back, spine, knees, and feet, as well as any similar parts, are safe according to various positions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When an arrow is in the nerve or artery and it isn't venomous, as I will tell you that this happened to me, because what you did was different.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	It happened to a house where an arrow hit or pierced near the nose:
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	I tried it and from the other side removed it across the ear wax, and was able to remove it without any difficulty.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles;	And tried an arrow that had hit in the wax near the eye under the paper wax, and the arrow was stuck, and could not reach even its tip towards the shaft, and the arrow was as large as a Turkish bow, all through without piercing any ear.
li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	The attempt was successful, and no unfortunate incidents occurred.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	And tried an arrow from the throat to a Christian, and it was the Arab arrow with ears:
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	I shaved them, and trimmed them as I carried them, and they were healthy for the Christians.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	And pulled an arrow at his home, where it was stuck in his back or belly, and thought he would die;
et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	and then after thirty days, if its condition did not change;
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	I cut the arrow shaft, set it, and carried it forcefully, and there was no bad accident.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	And if someone at home has an arrow fall or hit their back, and the wound heals internally;
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	And the arrow stays inside, and does not alter its natural disposition, nor finds any harm in any of its natural works.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	And see another man, who was struck by an arrow in his face, and was stitched up the wound;
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor;	and then endured without suffering great pain;
et mout d’autres semblans.	And many other similar things.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie;	And there was an arrow for the king in the middle of his chest, it had penetrated him up to the heart, and was slightly tilted towards the right side.
et estoit li saiette toute reponue.	And the arrow was fully inserted.
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	I was called for treatment after it had been three days since it was penetrated.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I found the wound very tight.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	I examined her with all subtlety and did not feel anything;
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	And there was a wound and pain spreading across his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	I thought it was due to the tip of the arrow. I placed a therapeutic plaster on his chest because his lungs were not inflamed;
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	And I saw the head of the arrow.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis;	I applied the poultice to his hands for several days, and healed the wound quickly. The patient then remained in this state for a long time until he felt the arrow inside his nose;
et il le me dist.	And he told me.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	I applied corrosive medication to the wound with my hands until it opened. I tried and felt the tip of the arrow which was moving towards his shoulder;
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	Then I adjusted the wound opening with that corrosive medicine, until the head of the arrow became visibly apparent;
et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	And it passed through the inner parts for about four months, and then opened so that I could use my pliers, on both sides, and it did not come out;
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	Therefore do not stop refining and engineering ways for instrument tools, until I take just one day using well-made tongs. According to how its form emerges at the end of this chapter, whether I am grasping or moving it around, and then I return to the wound site.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	And those who specialize judge that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored:
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	So I would return to this situation, and healed the wound, and fully restored the patient's health.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	And now I'll tell you about the quality of extracting certain arrows, so that when you apply my advice, remember what I don't explicitly say; for books can never encompass everything.
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	However, even wise masters may not have much information about minor things; they'll find nine new works and six instruments for removing foreign bodies that occur in this craft.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres:	I state that arrows do not penetrate limbs except according to two manners:
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	either by their head or they enter, or from another side;
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	And the one that pierces through its head or enters, it is an arrow entering into their flesh, and never does this happen again.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	And if it doesn't pierce now, leave it until the flesh is cooked inside and becomes tender, and wait for the outcome;
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	And likewise if it is stuck in the bone and cannot come out, leave it like that for a few days, and remove it every day;
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And then it pierces through, and if it doesn't, it penetrates inside until all the delicate parts are touched, as long as the bones are broad inside, and then remove it.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide:	And if the arrow is stuck in the bone at the shoulder, and extends up to one of the lungs within the head, and all the incidents that I have described become clear to the patient:
si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	If you do not treat it but let it grow until after a few days its growth is equal, because if the arrow reaches that furrow, it's death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is only stuck in the bone and does not reach so far, yet remains within the patient for several days without any bad incident, then use the device to remove it.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit;	And if it is stuck in such a way and cannot come out force, if I administer leeches internally, as I have told you;
puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the wound until it heals properly.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	And if the arrow is returned to the body's wound so that it cannot be seen, one should seek it with all their effort.
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	And if you sense it, lead it to any suitable tool;
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	And if you cannot do it by the tightening of the wound, and by the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone, nerve or vein, cut as long as the wound becomes large;
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	And pull the arrow if you can, and if there are holes in the arrow that hold it, remove the flesh which is stuck from two sides as much as you can, and then break or bend the ears of the arrow, as long as you can pull it.
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And do it carefully so that you don't break the arrow, making its removal more painful.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you can't do it in one go, leave it until its entire length is rotted away by maggots, then try to pull it out, as extraction requires effort.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	And if the bleeding causes you to be against it, then apply what we have said about treatment in our chapter about the cure;
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement;	And you must know about the incision near the nerve and vein, and use means so that you may draw out the arrow without risk, quickly or cautiously, firmly or gently;
et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	And guide the patient according to the shape they were in when the arrow fell inside, because this is the greatest help that it be as such; and if you cannot do so, follow what the sign tells you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	The arrow that comes from the other side, or where it opens something in him, or if the skin is swollen at such a place as we can see or feel differently:
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai:	So grasp it up high, while you can take the pliers there, and then pull:
si saut fuer maintenant.	If it jumps now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if she is held in the bone, twist your hand round as long as she enters the bone and widens the bone, then pull her out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	And if it cannot come out, leave it still, and then continue the extraction until it comes out fully;
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	and if the arrow is inside him, push the whole shaft of it through;
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument;	and if the shaft is cut, and you see it administered with force, if you use a proper tool, so that the arrowhead enters through the end of the tool;
et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	and then push forcefully, and if the arrow is pierced, use the tool with a pointed end entering first to facilitate extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrow is encased, it must be that you remove all the flesh around or where I am entering, if possible, then treat the wound as appropriate.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	And if the arrow is inside or close to the lungs or bladder or ribcage, and it's nearly within you, if you can cover it up, then do so.
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	And protect against covering the vein and the nerve, and then extract it, and then suture the wound, for this is a skilled trade.
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And the treatment until it has healed.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the pincers used for arrows is similar to the tip of a bird's beak, and here is the form:
Et en sont mout de manieres:	And in those many ways:
grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	Great, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the arrowhead resembles the feathers of a bird, because it tapers to the tip of the arrow, as this is its form:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The shape of the pliers for pushing and pulling as such is like this:
des voinnes dou cors communes	from the horns of common veins
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir:	Of the veins from which we bleed, there are thirty-one, of which twelve are at the head, namely:
II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	Two smaller ones located behind the ears, which are called "the two herbs";
et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans;	and the two arteries in the two visible temples;
et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	and two veins that are in the two corners of the two eyes, which are called "sponges";
et li voine que est emmi le front;	And the vein that is within the forehead;
et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	and the vein that is in the head near the nose;
et les II guindeges qui sont ou col;	and the two jugulars which are at the neck;
et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	and the two veins that are in the cheeks above the mouth, and these are the veins that are called "aughers";
et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	and two veins that are beneath the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras:	The veins we usually treat are five in each arm:
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	one is the cephalic vein, and it's at the left rib, and they call this 'the head vein';
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»;	and the median is called 'the fast' and is made up of the cephalic and basilica veins, and they call this 'the heart vein';
et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	And the diaphragm is either on the right side or inside the chest, and they call this area "the windpipe", and it is on the ribcage, and this is what we heal, which clearly opens up on the belly.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains;	And the artery is the vein that's located between the index and ring fingers, and if you measure it twice;
et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes:	and in the leg and at the ankle there are three veins:
l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit;	one is below the bend of the belly on the left side of the rib cage, and the second is superficial which is at the ankle on the right side;
et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	and the vein that's called "the nesse", which is at the ankle on the other side;
et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	and in the other leg there are three veins below those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	The cleansing of veins located behind the ears aids with the surgeons of old, and for migraines;
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre;	And the qualities of a surgeon, such as I tell you, and it is that you rub the head of the malady, and scrape or rub the area where the veins are with a hard cloth;
puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief:	Then sharpen the neck of the malady like a screw, until the two veins appear behind the ears in two places depending on the head:
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	Kneel down there, and where you feel the pulse under your hand, mark it with a sign;
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	Then take the scalpel and cut through the vein just to the bone, then lift your hand all along the vein upwards, and open up the skin and the vein properly two inches deep, and let out the blood until you see it;
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	Then strain and bind until it's healed;
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	And I have already spoken about the incisions and cauterizations in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	The health of the two arteries that are in the two temples, if it involves ancient gout, and sodine, and ophthalmic usage, and within the body of feverous tears.
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	And the quality of the surgeon is as I describe:
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement;	And let the patient strain their throat until both veins appear clearly;
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	Feel the pulse on both sides, and then proceed to examine;
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	Then gently press on the vein above your thumb at the base of your neck, and hold the scalpel against it. Lift the vein upwards and then cut it, just as you would with other veins, making sure to follow the flow of blood according to your need;
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	Then release the patient, place your finger on the vein for an hour, then place it on cotton;
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee;	and then form the pus, and leave it until it has healed;
et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	and we have discussed this and their management as well as their extraction, or the beginning of the book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	The venous swelling of the forehead is as valuable in diagnosing conditions like the ancient diseases of the face, and migraines, and hives;
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	and its quality is that the patients twist their necks in discomfort until the vein appears;
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	then take the tool called 'spreader', as depicted here:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	And place the tip on the vein, and press with your hand or another object, and let the blood flow according to the amount you see;
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	Then release the patient's neck, and bind the artery until it is sound and when operation has made a broad flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus;	Otherwise, it is not good that the flames be too large;
et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	And let the flame burn across them, for the bone is close by, and if it happens that the flame burns through when they are fine.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	The healing of the two veins that are in the two sinuses helps with the eyes, and at the elbow, and at the knee, and around the ear in the ear, and for diseases of the face;
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	And the quality of their healing is such that the patient tightens their neck by twisting with some ligament, as before.
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	Then heal it, and let the healing pass through, somewhat along the length of the flame, somewhat wide, for there is no flesh.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise;	And if the flames are fine, by chance they might break;
puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	then drain the blood as much as you need to, and then bind it with cotton, and bind it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	Surgery for the nose near the eyes is worth for water (discharge), and for sudden coldness, and diseases of the face, such as migraine and inflammation that comes in the face, and also when it's old;
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	The quality of the surgery is that the patient's throat is narrowed first, then their nose is stretched to your left hand. Take a fine flame long and stick it in between the two nostrils, as the vein doesn't open properly there, and the process will start now to drain;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	And do not go too fast, and make the cure according to your need, then let it rest for a night, for she is very quickly restored;
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	and it's the form of fire:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	The treatment of the two intestines helps with narrowing of the arteries and the onset of melena, and many diseases, and in empyema, and corrosion, and herpes, and indigestion;
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	and the quality of this treatment is that the patient's throat narrows from one side to the other, as we have said;
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	and let the master be above the patient's throat, and the patient bends over the edge, then cure the artery length-wise for a bit wider, then drain the blood moderately, or as much is necessary;
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle;	Then reopen another vein, then undo the ligature, and gently hold the veins in place, so that the patient doesn't choke.
et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	And let it be until morning, so that the wound heals.
de la sainie des leivres	Of surgical treatment of wounds
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The care of veins in the mouth aids in collection within the mouth, and contributes to gum decay, and splits in lips, and nosebleeds and internal bleeding.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	And to ensure quality of healing, have the patient sit in front of you, and hold their neck as I've described;
puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	Then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one is in the right lip and the other in the left, and you know them by the fact that they are black, and because there are small black veins around them:
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	Treat both then, and if you do not recognize them, and are in doubt, treat the larger one of each side. And do it similarly for both veins above and below, because it is the same method.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	Of surgical treatment of the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	The health of the veins that are under the tongue requires aid after the treatment of the head vein, and this is focused on the constriction of the throat, and diseases of the iris, and diseases of the mouth;
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	And the quality of a surgeon is such that the patient's blood should flow between your hands in front of the sun, and you lift their tongue, looking under each side revealing a black vein:
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	So treat both veins then, but do not overly exaggerate, for under them are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres:	The veins of the arm that are commonly treated are treated according to two methods:
ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	either by applying to every flame the large mirthin tool, or the subtle olive tool if it's for arm incisions, and they are called "aneil";
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	And they are wide and fine according to the size and tightness of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The shape of the mirtin flame is very well known, and it's quite wide as you see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	And it requires to open veiny channels full of obvious large blood, and which contain large blood and disturbance;
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	and this is like the form of olive oil:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	And it's more refined and pointed, used to heal fine veins, or one with fine yellow blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	The health of the basilica, which is one of these veins, aids in diseases that are localized around the throat, and in the neck, and in the stomach, and in the abdomen;
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	And it is necessary for the surgeon to heal properly, and he must be aware of the artery which is around.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	And if he cuts into the artery and blood escapes, it is necessary to stop the bleeding, as I have explained;
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And it must never have its flames held, but cut as one would with scissors.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	And if the basilica does not open clearly, it is necessary to remove it, and change another one;
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras:	either you want no pain from it, or you heal through the opening in its place with your arm:
elle apert manifestement;	it opens clearly;
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	and the opening is by the flame as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	And if you know where the healing is, it is necessary that you pull your arm in this way, touching the area as long as you feel the pulse;
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	then mark where the wound is, and then tie your arm, and open the vein through the flame as we have said;
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere:	And remember not to pierce through an artery when you see the limb inflating, because that is from the artery:
eschui la donques.	Therefore, this is it.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	And if you see it protruding up as much as urine from a child, and the veins are red and subtle, know that these are veins of an artery:
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	So hurry up, and place your finger for a while, then hold your finger in place until the vein stops bleeding, as this has happened many times;
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides;	tie down the arm, and leave it like that, and do not move the patient's limbs;
et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	and place them in fear, and do not move them until they become well.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient;	And if the veins do not stop bleeding, and you are forced to act, and the medicine is not at your disposal, if you detect an artery if it opens, because the head of the retreat;
et estainche li sans.	And stop the bleeding.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	Take an almond shell and cut it, then take one half and bind it tightly until the other side.
se li sans estainche, c’est bien;	If the bleeding stops, that's good;
se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	If it doesn't, then apply the powders we mentioned which stop bleeding.
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	And the bandages should not be too tight for the small size of the wound and the strength of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	The treatment of the vein in the middle helps with bleeding from above and below, because it consists of basilic and cephalic veins, as we have said.
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	And it's important for the surgeon to be aware of the nerve that is nearby; if they don't go too far down and instead find the nerve, and then it inflates causing discomfort or pain, and in such an event they cannot heal.
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil;	And this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in any individual due to its subtlety, then you must sever the healthy part of the instrument beforehand;
et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	And listen to the nerve with your power.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is a vein between the two nerves, make the incision long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	The treatment of the occipital region helps, as it deals with blood in the head, and aids with eye issues;
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	And it is necessary to treat the ears in olive oil or in garlic oil, for this is the safest of all veins, because there is neither nerve nor artery nearby.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	Still, it is necessary to seek the most agile person, and do not discourage anything if one fails at first, and you restart;
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	And by chance swell the limbs in some individuals, but if one fails at first, it does not discourage anything.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of health depends on your thought.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	The first thing you must know about healthcare is that it's only provided to keep health intact, and to avoid future diseases;
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute:	and let the treatment be done in one of the three veins that are or cut:
c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	which means, frontal, temporal, and jugular;
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	and one should treat in the beginning of prayers on knees, and in autumn and after winter after eating, when signs of fullness are seen;
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	and one should treat on the first or third day, after two or three days.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	The treatment for diseases doesn't have a fixed time, but when need is of day or nutrition, at all times and in any situation;
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	And it is not advisable for a doctor to treat children up until twelve years old, nor pregnant women past the fourth quarter of their pregnancy up until seven months.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	And it is not suitable for surgeons to heal the elderly who have surpassed sixty years.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	And when anyone wishes to be treated, in any way whatsoever, if it is necessary for them to cleanse their intestines with a gentle cathartic, if they have food retained, if the veins drain the excesses that cause harm to the main parts;
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	Nor can one recover from those who are too intoxicated by meats, nor those who are drunk, whether they be strong or have alcohol-induced issues.
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	And if illness is treated after colic passion, vomiting, abdominal distension, frequent urination in women, and hard labor, of staying awake and engaging in work, due to the loss of virtue or from things related to weapon use or injuries.
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	Then balance the body fluids, if it is overabundant through foods and drinks and by means of medicines; if you have the means.
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	Then through bathing or a wash, if nothing goes wrong, to balance the blood, and to cleanse from the body's disease towards the lower part of the back by the third part, as we have said.
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	and guard that day from work, pain, and excess, and similar things;
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	and be tied and joined, and let the herbs be higher than that which you are treating, and rub both arms twice or three times, then slightly loosen the tie. For if it is too tight or not tight enough, it will not balance the blood;
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	and then rub the body with your hands until the veins swell and you can feel them;
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	Then moisten the tip of a small piece of cotton with some old oil, then place her right hand's index on that vein close to his shoulder a little bit where she plans to lance, so the vein doesn't rupture and escape under the cut.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	For there are veins that escape like strings when lanced, and some have windiness within them, so that when you place the tip of the lancet over them, if you remove it quickly from the flame, it cannot open the vein, and thus they belong to this category;
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	And if the vein ruptures, the wound is too narrow for this; therefore, it is necessary that the one who lances be skilled in these matters.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin;	And if the vein ruptures on the first attempt, that's good;
se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	If not, then try once more close to this place or until quickly, if his head is not swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras:	And if his head is swollen, and the flesh is puffed up, let him rest for one or two days, do not bind his arm:
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus;	By chance, it may come to abscesses in the armpit;
ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	Do not bathe him, then try again with the cleansing if it pleases her;
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	And if his ear-pit is small, or the hole in the chest is too subtle and you doubt that there isn't as much blood flowing as you see, then pierce it right at that hole all the way through.
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez;	And make the incision quickly until his head swells;
car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	For this happens many times, when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	If you see the limb is swelling, do not stop applying the poultice and place a bit of oil thereon, for it relieves the body from blood's burden, and when the oil is applied in this manner to the limb, it aids in healing.
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	And apply the oil poultice to every bandage when treating veins, in order to stop the flow of blood.
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu;	And this is also effective for thyme and wormwood when they are placed on the limb;
si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	So refine the herbs until they are finely ground, and if too large, it is too coarse.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	And if it happens that there is a large abscess, which occurs many times, even when not bandaged because in some cases the opening of the vein is small, you should act quickly and place a damp sponge on the limb in a mixture of water and wine, heating it slightly, and hold it for an hour.
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	And it is necessary that you do this after the flow of blood from the wound, and if it remains in place for several days without any blackness or greenishness, then it does not harm it.
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if you see that, place some thing of myrrh or沥青 mixed with the juice of catmint, basil, or similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique:	And often abscesses and appearance occurred in the healing of the basilica:
met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	So place your hand there, and if you find that the area is soft upon pressing with your hand, then this is an indication of the bad appearance.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere;	Hear then that you should not apply any of what we have said, for by chance it could affect the artery;
mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	But have them make it dry to harden the place, then give further treatment afterwards, until they are healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And for each one give blood according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges;	For if there's no blood and it remains black, let it bleed until it turns red;
et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez;	And if you see it large, leave it to shrink until it becomes fine.
et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	And if it's too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	And it's necessary for the one who is full and well-fed, needing blood extraction, that they make a larger incision, and let the flames be wide;
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	And for the one who is weak, do the opposite, and suitably care for them frequently, and you should care for them by cutting across rather than straight.
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And this method of healthcare prevents bleeding and compression of nerves, and it's preferable that the healing goes long rather than wide.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates;	And for the one whose body needs healing, it's necessary to give them moist bread in the juice of quince apples;
s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	If they are flushed, let them bleed three or four times. And if they have a cold complexion, drink moist bread in a quince juice syrup before the healing process, or in an aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, ensuring the syrup has a strong fragrance.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if they bleed after surgery, once the flow of blood has subsided, it is fitting for them to inhale a broth of lamb, and a fragrant subtle syrup, and use other things that we have mentioned in the division or chapter on syncope, for the evacuation of veins.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if they wish to exercise their arm and strengthen it again, whenever applicable, when they are weakened by great bleeding, they should recover gradually, according to the amount of its strength continuously.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And if one wishes to exercise their arm after the first recovery, and they are in good health, they should recover for 7 hours after the first recovery, or after the new hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And for those who wish to heal elsewhere, if they must heal on the second day or the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre;	For there is much blood inside the body that is already flushed, causing fever;
si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	If one needs to bleed significantly, and widen the puncture until it's full of blood;
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	Since you fulfill all the conditions for health, and place your hand on his hairs when he is well, so that the bite does not occur where it is not supposed to (pameson), and this happens many times when the healers are negligent.
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	And it is not right when you see the arm being freed and blood coming out a second time, and that the limb has been lost, then you should press firmly.
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	If it is bent, he should extend his arm quickly, for this would be badly done;
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois;	but let him do so until the second time when it heals.
ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	Or you should hold the tip of the flame to it until the blood that has frozen at the end comes out, and place it over a damp cloth in water, pressing gently.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is swollen, let it alone and do not squeeze it, until the abscess subsides.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if you need to bleed again from the first place of bleeding, direct it onto the same spot or into another vein, or on the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein in the arm is clean at its point of connection with the main vein because it is separate from the neck vein due to its composition.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	And the way of treatment is such that the patient keeps their hand in hot water until the veins turn red;
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	Then bind it moderately, so that the vein appears well, then now treat it through, not too wide nor too long;
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	and make the cuts short and wide, and treat well near the wrist joint, and if unable to pass, then place your hand in hot water, and let the blood flow in the water, for as long as you need;
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	and if it's still that way, don't place the hand in hot water again either, because we are more prone to it in winter than summer;
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And this treatment of veins is safer than for all other veins, as it has neither artery nor nerve.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	The healing of saving the right hand against all diseases of the liver, and this is how it goes:
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	Stretch the hand, and dip it in hot water, as long as the vein is not collapsed, if you can see it;
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	and if it heals diagonally, and if you hold it fully from start to finish, without hurting anything;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	and don't overheat it too much either, because the nerves are completely naked of flesh, and then put the hand in hot water, if it's frozen in the wound, and can't come out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated the blood as much as necessary, place a cauterizing agent or a seal on it to quickly solder until it stops bleeding, and thus do this for each case.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The treatment of the right hand is equivalent to the disease of the mouse, and do everything as I have told you for the left.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The healing of the stomach is effective for all diseases present in the body, such as disorders of the heart, retention of flowers, and illnesses of the lungs, kidneys, elbows and old legs, and similar ailments.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet;	And the quality of its healing is such that the patient dips their finger in hot water and rubs it over the vein until it warms up, and then applies it to the joint of the toe;
et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	And if the vein is at the ankle, and above it runs much blood;
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	Then heal it or make it wider where necessary, or at the ankle, for that is beneficial.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant;	And if you heal it above the heart, be cautious of the nerves that are nearby, and also heal across in the same manner as when sewing.
et soit li flaimes anesil.	and let the flames be inside-out.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if it cannot pass without difficulty, then place the foot in water, and allow for thorough bleeding of the vein.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	And if it needs healing for the first time, then try again with the second dose above a bit more, because the lungs are salty;
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	Nor should you doubt of nerves, as we have said, and do the same on the other side equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The veins of the sciatic region are at the ankle bone, and their health corresponds to the pain in the hip; when it is due to blood congestion.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne;	And the quality of its healing is such that the patient feels better or bathes, and twists above the ankle four times, because otherwise the vein does not open;
et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	And if it opens, heal it in all the ways you can, and across;
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And treat as you grasp it, for the hands lack force, and she is very responsive to human hands.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	And if you do not find it, heal no bone that opens or under the heel, and towards the little toe, and beware of the nerves;
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint;	And make such a flow of blood that you see it, and then release the knot, and place cotton and tighten it;
ele est maintenant sanee.	It is now healed.
des sainies de ventouse	of suction healings
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre;	Vacuum cups are made from horns, or spiders, or toads;
et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres:	And suction is performed in two ways:
ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	By causing and attracting blood, or means of causing blood to come out.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres:	And this suction, which is meant to cause injury, can be done in two ways:
ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	either it's with instantaneous fire, or by means of fire;
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief;	and suction which is performed by causing injury and extraction of blood is done in fourteen places on the body, from one of which all is solid above;
et li autres est emmi le col;	and the others are around the neck;
et II autres en II costeis dou col;	and two more on the two sides of the neck.
et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	and the suction cup under the chin;
et li ventouse des II espaules;	and the suction cup on the two shoulders;
et li ventouse sus les crupies;	and the suction cup on the elbows;
et les ventouses emmi les II bras;	And suction cups on both arms;
et les ventouses des II jambes;	And suction cups on the two legs;
et les ventouses des II chevilles;	And suction cups on the ankles of both legs;
et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	And suction does not treat blood, for there are small veins scattered throughout the body, and because of this it does not weaken us at all, just as we do with bloodletting;
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And it should not be administered, neither with hot nor cold applications, in any disease that comes from congestion, until all the organs are emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	And if suction is necessary due to diseases, or as a routine practice, we should administer it each hour at the beginning of her period, or at the end, and continuously throughout.
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	For there are some who, when they must sputum, if they weigh their head;
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	and for those who discover congestion and warmth in their face, and on their head, and at the neck, and dimness in their eyes;
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	and those who notice a drop of blood in their mouth, and have swollen tongues, and cough up blood;
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	and for those who think, see through their nose blood and dirt and various things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and especially at the beginning of each month, we command to drink after three hours during the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	The surgery of the nose helps with the cold in the head ... leading to eye problems, and it should not happen after the removal of everything from the body;
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	And this suction is part of the surgery for the head, and it should not be used by those with cold constitution or who have catarrh, as it causes much harm to them;
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	And because of this it is not proper for them to use it when they have cold diseases or if their head has ill conditions.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And whoever uses it often becomes forgetful, and due to this, it's necessary to place the suction cup slightly further down by the suspicion of forgetfulness.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	The ventilation in the throat is located beneath the head and near the basilica. Because of this, it is beneficial for it to be narrow at the bottom, and to have an incision along the channel of the heart, and everywhere else, and for repletion;
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	And it should allow some pressure, because if it holds too tightly, it can cause constriction or obstruction in the stomach and heart.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique;	Ventilation in the second costal area of the neck relieves head pains, eye troubles, toothaches, and constriction, and is situated near the heart's health zone.
et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	And it's important that you instruct the surgeon to express their hand before operating, not to cut the artery, and not to let blood flow.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche;	The ventilation around one's chin is associated with illness of the mouth, and decay of gums, and similar illnesses that occur in the mouth;
et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	and is found in the region of the healthy inner lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	Ventilation under the shoulders corresponds to disease brought about by heat and congestion.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	The ventilation around the elbows is equivalent to three veins of the arms, for it carries blood from those large veins;
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	Instruct the warrior not to overexert himself, for the lungs are exposed to air and lie near nerves and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire;	The suction on the back is associated with bloody affections at the base, and diseases near it; it should be that the suction is large and made of skin, requiring good treatment;
et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit;	And by chance, if it were too thin, it would break;
et i fai grans plaies.	And I make great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors;	The leg vacuums are treated properly because they draw blood from the whole body, and are beneficial for old pains in the kidneys, and the bladder, and relieve the flowers;
et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	And they are located on the two shins and the two ankles, and still they weaken the body after long use, and lead to swelling in many dispositions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc;	The method of applying the suction cup is as follows: you first place it empty and suck steadily, then quickly put it on and move it evenly without stopping until you see the area turn red and swell up, and notice the color change due to blood.
puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez:	Then remove it, and reapply the suction cups, taking care with body positioning as some have tough flesh and clear pores:
si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes;	It is necessary to strike once merely, it is necessary to make wide wounds, and a little deep.
et suce legierement.	and gently suck.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois:	And if it lacks strength, it is necessary to strike twice:
la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	The first time to subtletly open the path of large blood flow.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois;	And if it lacks strength, it is necessary to strike the third time;
et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And when we wish to drain little by little from the blood, it suffices to strike only once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent;	And if we wish for little of blood, then we proceed often;
et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	And if it lacks strength, then pierce deeply and at the ends so that the hair is pierced suddenly; this is suitable for those with thick skin and tough flesh who have hardened tissues. You should grease their ears with suction cups from which an opening appears and one that dissolves:
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	If it's in this state, from where it appears, or from the oil of sweet almonds, or from the oil of cucumber seeds;
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if it's in a vein, from the oil of cress, or of lilies, or of chamomile, or other similar substances.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the pus is large and cold, take oil of myrrh, or balsam, or anise oil, and similar things.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if for the sake of thickening flesh and large pores, there is no need to apply oil but it should be washed after the suction with rose water or cold water or water from a mulberry tree or cucumber water or porcelain water, or any similar substance.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And for those who have some moisture, if they rise with it, or from wormwood water, and sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	And those with large excesses rise from old wine, or from water of sulfur, or from decoctions of nettle or chamomile, or other similar remedies;
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II;	And it's not advisable to use suction cups before or during the bath, but rather after the bath for one hour or two.
et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And don't sleep after suction, it's necessary for them to bathe when they need to be sucked and when they have been sucked.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	And watch over him who is being healed and is hot-tempered, and let his body not become too heated and inflamed;
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	It is necessary for him to consume cold things, such as pomegranate fruits and endive and lettuce in water, and similar items;
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And eat eel, and pork meat, and damp meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	And for those with cold constitutions, they should consume honey syrup, and fragrant half-aged wine, which is between old and new, and eat small portions, and eat eel, and eat small birds and baby pigeons.
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	And on the day he feels dizzy from lack of wind, he should drink more than he eats;
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	And it is necessary to not give any men any parsley or mint before dizziness occurs due to lack of wind, or afterwards, to strengthen the main limbs;
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And sharpen the knives but it is not fitting for those who are faint-hearted to drink.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne;	The suction cups that are used to pierce are those placed on the liver and kidney, and in gout, and on the abdomen and stomach and lungs and hips. For this body part cannot bear piercing by needles, and one does not use force only to draw blood from limb to limb, as we place them on nipples when a baby is unable to feed.
por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	to thicken the blood flow in the limb, as we place suction cups on the abdomen and stomach to reduce inflammation;
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	and relieves pain when there is an obstruction or stone, and by its attractive power, it may relieve the obstruction, or remove the stone from its place;
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement;	And thus she does it when one puts her above the liver and under the mouse when there is retained wind, and these suction cups are administered empty for suction only.
et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	And they are administered together with fire, and sometimes filled with cold water, as in diseases of pleurisy, and in such manner that we fill the suction cup with hot water or with water that has boiled herbs suitable for this.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The shape of the suction cup used heated like this is:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	And it has two doves half a palm wide and at the side is located in the middle one small nodule, as to place an awl, like that of an arrow, so that it does not wound the patient when placing it on the limb;
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	And in the middle is a rod of an arrow or iron to place a candlestick, and they are available in large and small sizes according to diseases and the season for those who take them;
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	For the suction cups of children are different from those of adults, and those of skinny people are different from those of fat ones.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	And should we place this suction cup on the limb:
empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	Take the wax wick or linen thread, and insert it through the member that is in the suction cup, so that the lightness is at the bottom of the suction cup to not burn the skin;
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	and then place it on the limb, and do so either at the location we have mentioned, so that when desired, if the steam goes up, remove the suction cup;
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	and apply the liniment as before, and repeat it often, if you need to.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	In the suction cup that is administered in the illness of pleursin, at all aches, there is no member or location, and it is only administered fully when it is filled with water, and then placed solely on the limb;
et c’est li forme:	And here is its form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	Without surgery, we treat them only in limbs where suction cups cannot be placed due to their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar areas;
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	and on the skin of livestock, such as cows or pigs, and other similar areas;
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	and the quality of surgery is that when you find mussels in clean fresh water without contamination, then take them;
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	and place them in fresh water until they become familiarized and have nothing inside their stomachs;
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	and then cleanse with blood and suction cups, then rub the limb until it turns red, and place them on the mussels;
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	and when they are full and they cry out, if it is somewhere you can place suction cups, then do so, because it's not much after that.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	If not, raise the aid of humans, and then water, quite well, and then perform incision;
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	And if the limb heals too quickly after the course of the surgical cuts, moisten it with linen in cold water, and place it there until the wound is cooled.
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	And if there are multiple wounds, place powdered vitriol or garlic and similar substances on them until they cool.
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	Or you put half of peeled beans on the limb, and leave them until they heat up in the limb, thus it will stop bleeding now.
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	And if you need more, take other wounds.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	And if the wounds do not heal properly, rub with fresh blood or stick a needle in them until blood comes out, then place them there, and soon when they sense the blood, they will heat up.
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And when you see that they are bleeding, apply a powder of some aloes and flour ground, or ashes, let them do this now.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	This begins the book of fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is many times necessary in the art of medicine, and restoring and resetting of fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	Know this, you young man, that the people of my generation throw away knowledge from this chapter, which they have never seen in any old books, nor did they ever read a letter about it;
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	And because of this reason, the knowledge has been lost in our land, for I have never found anyone good;
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	And I know nothing of it, for by the knowledge of ancient books, where I have studied so much that I dealt with this knowledge through experiments and my life's routine;
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	And in this chapter I have described what is contained here and summarized it at the end, clearly showing the shapes of the instruments that are used, as I did in those two previous chapters.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	Therefore, it is necessary that we outline or provide an introduction to this book containing the essence of knowledge and the chapters where the wise person applies their understanding, staying true to reality. So that those who have experienced it may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	I say that when any fracture or dislocation or twisting or sprain occurs to anything, it is necessary for you to quickly heal the patient on one side and the other, without letting anything stop you, such as weakness of body, or infants, or elderly people;
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois;	If it is too tight, or too cold;
et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre;	And chew cold things, which means cold meats, and liver and asparagus, do not drink wine, nor chew any fatty meats, and do not fill up too much with meat that fills the blood vessels, until you doubt about pus formation in an abscess, or spreading of material to the limb;
si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	If the patient recovers according to their usual regimen as they used it.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary that you feed the patient with meats that cause significant nourishment, or have viscosity, such as cooked wheat in water, and onions, and chestnuts, and pies, and veal spleen, and eggs, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For such nourishment leads to movement and more quickly heals the breakage.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	Know that broken bones in the elderly and those who are weak cannot be properly set or joined according to their nature due to the dryness of the limbs, nor those that are also too tender, such as children's bones.
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant;	but if there's no remedy, reset the broken bone by pushing on the protruding large ends that have been pulled apart and join the limb together, as long as it feels like it did before.
et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	and don't finish his work entirely, and for this it's necessary to nourish him with large meats, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that breaks come in various ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For a break at the neck is different from a break at the knee or leg, and in this chapter I will tell you all ways of breaking.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there are breaks leading to war, and others through preparation, as with the size of a feather for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And in cases of injury along with breaks, and breaks resulting from a small crack.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	And for each manner it has its own tool, and its proper instrument in restoration, according to what memory brings to its place;
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	and it is known that the breaking of the bone occurs when the leg is twisted, and opens well from below, and can be felt under hand pressure;
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	And when there is no twist or dislocation at the joint, and the patient does not feel much pain in their body, if there's no break;
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	But it can still have twists or cracks, or small breaks.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	If it is not suitable for you to move it by hand, but apply the remedies that come next, and then gently constrain it now.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	Know that the break that occurs in the joint and divides it into two parts, now they should be placed on an equal footing, so as to treat abscesses effectively.
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	And if pus accumulates and comes out, until the pus is relieved, let no day pass as long as the abscesses are still present;
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces;	Then equal it to the extent that you can do so gently and wisely. Know that its restoration is easier than restoring those with pieces;
puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	Then he restrains, as will be fitting after this.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	And if in the bones there are pieces broken, and it is divided into two parts, whether by hand or foot, or to your hand if it's one small limb, or by two strings, or by one string and to your hand;
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	and place the limb according to its natural shape, so that when the parts of the broken member have healed, if you reset it by all means, return any protruding parts into their original positions as far as possible, and be careful not to cause injury or pain with your actions to the patient.
et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	and adjust both ends of the bones well according to the best shapes.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien:	And feel it well in your hand if you think it is not quite right:
si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	If you raise it beautifully, and do not squeeze too much, not pressing as those who remove it by their work of abscess expulsion and muscle contractions do to the limb, as we have desired many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	And when the limbs are at the right position, if you restrain well the patient so that they do not move, whether awake or asleep, when turning or in any other manner;
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	Make sure the limbs are securely placed so that the patient does not feel any pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	But when they do not feel any pain, if it is not properly adjusted, you should put them in such a position that they do not feel any pain;
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	And see to it that he is placed straightly, so that no twisting occurs when restored;
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	And the quality of the broken limb is according to what I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	You know that limbs broken are diverse in smallness and largeness, and in shape.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans:	For there are small limbs, like arms and legs and similar:
si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	So it is necessary to wrap them with soft and fine linen;
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe:	and those that are large, like the thighs and legs:
si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	So it is necessary to wrap them with a broad and firm bandage, because wide bands embrace the entire large limb and restrict it equally from all sides, so there is no difference;
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	Then bind with light bandages for the torso, three or four turns according to the limb, and hold your hand firmly on the entire bandage, then go above the break and restrict it less, so that the break can move a little away from the break;
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	And gradually soften this ligament a little by little, until you grasp a large part of the healthy limb, then take up another ligament, and return in an overlapping manner around the broken limb.
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	Then return to the broken part and slightly tighten it, not too hard nor too soft, just as we said in the first instance above;
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	Then place the linen or cloth bindings between the twisted ligaments until they are all equal. Then tie everything over the bend, and then place your well-made stars above, if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	And if there is swelling or an abscess, place something soothing for abscesses above it, and which relieves the swelling, leaving that way for a few days;
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	Then hold onto your arrows, and they should be half the width of a slender cane cut straight or uniformly, or from a staff from which arrows are made, or from palm leaves, and follow this figure:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	But it is necessary that the arrows placed at the break be slightly larger and wider than the others;
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	and should also be as long as is necessary for the size of the limb, whether small or large.
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	Then hold onto the arrows in the same way you did with the first trial, then tie an additional thread on top, just like you did on the first trial at the break;
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins;	Make it tighter more so, and less afterwards;
et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	And it is necessary that the thread be of medium size, neither too thick nor too thin, and made from soft linen;
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	For if the threads are thick, as in my works where they twist the linen cords for their loops, and that is great mistake, because the loop cannot be equal if it is too fine, and it does not suit to have less than two millimeters between each row.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the muscles are stretched by the bones after constriction in their joints, put over them bandages of linen or coarse wool, so they do not blister.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When a wound is bleeding and the joints are broken, I will provide the treatment below.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it is not proper to strictly bind all broken limbs on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	For when the limbs are large, it is not suitable to place these rows until after five days or seven, or more depending on your experience with abscesses that occur.
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion:	and here is the method of the old plastering to restore fractures, dislocations, and twists:
et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	And you take some flour that settles on the walls of the mill, mix it with plenty of egg, and prepare this concoction neither too thin nor too thick. Use this mixture, and this is the common way of plastering to restore fractures in various conditions, as well for women and children. There should be no concern about being too expensive or too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion:	Another method of plastering restores fractures, dislocations, and twists:
pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.;	Take saffron, garlic, nutmeg, asafetida, and Arabic gum, and add water to make it equal to X parts.
mirre et aloes, ana V З.;	Mastic and aloes, and make up to V parts.
alechil VIIII З.;	Add vinegar to the mixture up to IX parts.
et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef;	And make it into powder, and mix it with yolk of egg juice;
se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	If the body's condition is hot, then use this plaster as it has a good composition and restores broken bones quickly. It is beneficial to many people.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion:	Another method of plastering that is useful for twists:
pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.;	Take a good portion of this medicine, let it work well, let it be effective;
mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.;	Mix with myrrh and aloes, let it amount to nine parts.
acaice VI З.;	Let it amount to six parts of caraway.
bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Grind well the Armenian balm and mix it thoroughly with vinegar or enough egg white, then administer.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure:	Another way to plaster for joints and fractures of bones, it relieves pain that comes on, and the cutting is done with bone, and the bruising:
pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Take new wool, mix its grease in oil and water-cooked fat, and place it on the affected area.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	Wound plastering does not heal completely but it is better for soothing abscesses and properly mending bone pains.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez:	Another way to plaster that restores broken bones:
pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Take dried fig leaves, and leaves of terrestrial poplar, grind them together, and make a paste.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another method of plastering for the repair of bone fractures and to alleviate the pain caused by the wound.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie;	Take root of balm, chamomile, flowers of violets, flour of cloves, from each take one part;
et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	And grind it together with wine, and when the limbs are heated apply it mixed with wet coriander water, or just water, and use it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another method of plastering more forcibly than the first, when hard pus comes to the healing of the limb.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie;	Take roots of balm, and sesame seeds, balsam, melilot, pennyroyal, and violet flowers and chamomile blossoms, from all take one part;
et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	And grind it together with salt water, or sweet water, or wine, according to the heat of the limb and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Ypocras in his book states that only balm made of beeswax and oil should be applied to the broken limb for restoration purposes, and nothing else. He also indicates it should be between two substances that are neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems like Galen suggests we should apply something to the broken limb for restoration; some things that are dry but a bit warm, such as mirr (myrrh), aloes, and incense, and similar substances, just as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor:	Another method of plastering that is useful for injuries and pain:
pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Take powdered bone of roasted animals, or feathers from birds, and crushed coriander seeds, and equal parts, grind them together, and make a plaster with it, and use it.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu;	And then apply some of this plaster, and be sure that the patient does not feel any pain or the bone is not moving in its place;
si ne lou deslie par mains jors.	nor by manual adjustment later.
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant;	And if pain comes to the bone, or itching, feeling of restlessness or swelling, if this occurs, then you should adjust it, and apply the plaster now;
et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	and take a light cloth and a moist sea sponge, and dip it in water, then lift the bone until the itching stops and pain is relieved;
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	Then let the limb rest for an hour, then place it on dry lanolin, moistened in water or rose oil, and secure it with a bandage until you are sure of removing any pus.
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant;	And let the inflammation and pain in the limb settle, and relieve the discomfort, then continue with gentle manipulation, and a bit of plaster, but do not apply pressure as strongly as before;
et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And gently until it feels relieved.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you notice that pus and redness, pain, swelling are still present everywhere in the area, indicating inflammation, then you need to apply plaster and bandage again, so start doing this as you did before, equally.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII;	And if nothing of what we have said affects the limb, or if it needs to be released only after three, four, or five days;
et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	And never leave it for more than twenty days, according to what we observe, until the healing process begins and brings the alignment back;
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant;	Therefore hold more tightly than initially, and increase its flesh, as I have explained before.
et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	and if you notice that the skin is drying more than it should, know that no healing can come;
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	Take the person then with hot water, every time you release them, and do this each third day, and cleanse a bit of the wound;
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement:	Through this work therefore cut the swellings from the limb, and heal it quickly as the foolish would do, that keep the member twisted:
c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	This is wrong, and there's no sense in this work, and I only see it as a way to rest the limb and open it properly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	Through various methods of breaking up
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	Many ways of fractures exist, and various shapes, and their causes are specific;
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust;	For there are fractures caused by the impact of a sword, and the collarbone is all bone up to the symphysis which is on the surface of the bone, as it might be done in hunting or with a spear.
et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	And this type of fracture is called this way because it's named "haichure".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»;	Or the sword hits the bone from above without piercing it, and this type of fracture is called "absolute".
et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	And these two types of fractures result in large or small wounds.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is sequential impact, or a crack or neck of stone, or through stone, or other similar occurrences.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a break at the bone, which comes up to the membrane beneath the bone, or above it, and this wound is either large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	And if there's a wound that penetrates as finely as a hair into the bone, and it's a small crack, for this reason it is called "hairline fracture".
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres;	And if the wound is made by striking a rock or falling or through some other cause, causing a piece of bone to enter from below, it's like when a candlemaker works on candles, with the heat coming from below.
si entre li piere dedens.	If between the stone internally.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	And this happens more in those who have wet bones, such as bones of an infant;
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles;	It occurs in all these ways of breaking, where small fragments cause damage like thistles would;
et je em parlerai en son leu.	And I will speak about it in its proper place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And know all ways of breaking through extraction from them, and investigation with attempts, and through the corrupted matter which is upon them.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The appearance of hair is known by this: when one has exposed the bone and rubs it together, then the dark fracture opens.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of fractures, be vigilant about maladies and if you see no adverse event such as vomiting bile, loss of consciousness, stretching, swelling, fever ague, and if the eyes emit and turn red or other similar symptoms in various conditions, it cannot be healed without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see an alarming occurrence, yet still hope for recovery, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the nose comes to you first, and it's in winter, it is fitting to remove the bone before the fourteenth day after the month you could.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it's in summer, hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the pus under the bone becomes infected, and the accidents we have said occur.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi:	And if the break in the bone reaches the tissue that covers the brain, it is necessary that you cut through the fractured part like this:
et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	And if you take hold of the bone that is not attached and uncover it on the bone in all the ways you can, and with the appearance of the wound as much as you can, and if blood discharge comes to uncover the bone or an abscess, assist according to what is necessary, and then you should fill the gap with wet cloths in olive oil;
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc;	And let the wound rest until the pus lesion is calmed down, and ensure there is proper drainage of blood;
puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige:	then begin to work towards the bone, and this is done according to two ways of working:
l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	one method is that you prepare for a narrow cut in front, and this is the form:
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then make another cut of about double the size of the first one.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde;	And the second method is that you have several different sizes of cuts, some narrow and others wide, and they should be pointed, and made of iron;
et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	and work gently, so as not to hurt the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os;	And if the bone is hard and solid, it is necessary to pierce through it, in such a way that you perform cuts with prongs, not all the way through so as not to penetrate beyond the bone beneath the testicle, and there should be above the point a margin or a circle, which prevents the point from passing beyond the bone;
et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test;	And you must have several of them, so that each comes into its place in the middle of the length of the bone, so that you may have holes for all your tests;
et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	And this is the form of three kinds of holes:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez;	The quality for piercing through the broken bone is that you place one hole on the bone, and turn with your hands until you know that the bone is pierced;
puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures;	Then put the hole elsewhere a little later, and do this all around. Then cut through the space of the bone that is between the teeth, and do it more finely than you can, gently, just like we said, until you bring the bone to your hand, or with none of the tools you have such as forceps;
et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	And beware not to touch the brain or the spinal cord.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	And when you have pierced and treated the bone, if it is fitting that you prepare what has remained from the bone to all other instruments resembling an incisor, but it should be more robust and finer than the other incisors;
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens;	and if there remains nothing of the small bones, or no scales, you should gently scrape with the instruments;
puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	then treat the wound from the sides and dressings that we have mentioned.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus;	And another method of treatment is as Galen said, which is more harmless;
et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	and the heat must be very strong, and this is his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first to uncover part of the bone, where the break opens and moves, so that once you have uncovered that part, you will place under the tip of this oblong incision, which has this form:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os;	And do not cut from one side alone, and let the part be divided into two sides, so that the cutting is towards the bone;
puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	then strike on with a small hammer, so that you gently press the entire bone, and be well aware of the cloth which is nearby;
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	If it's close to the bone, gently press the bone, because bones are very sensitive and can cause pain.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the bone break doesn't go through the membrane, and only part of the bone is cut above, with small pieces remaining, after smoothing that area it is necessary to remove the scales using a fine shaver you must have in various quantities. To apply the most suitable for each place according to the work and the shape of the break.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	When facing large shavers, then proceed to finer ones, and never cease this practice until it's done well.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement;	In each of the other hair-cutting tasks and delicate breaking operations, it is necessary that you handle according to its orientation;
et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	and this matter cannot be handled by someone who has not devoted their study to this craft.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	And if the soft spot is discovered, it is necessary that you use linen strips according to the size of the wound, and apply the oil generously, then place it on the wound;
puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil;	Then take another cloth doubled up as one likes, and mix the grease with wine and oil rose, and put it on the first cloth;
et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	And do this more lightly than you can, so as not to weigh down the scab, then administer it over another bandage, and do not pull it with too much force until it only touches the wound.
et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses;	And leave it like this for one or two days, until the abscess becomes calm, then remove it, and administer medications such as lily roots, bran of thyme, incense powder, and garlic, among similar things;
et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	And make a powder from these things, put it on the wound, and administer medications that do not cause irritation.
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice;	And ensure that the wound is completely clean, do not leave any pus, nor let it assemble in the socket, because when the ball assembles on the brain's mesh, it will run and resist, causing great mischief to the patient;
car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	for when one places something sharp above oil, it sears from above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Therefore, take heed, if no accidents befall the patient as we have said, if it is doubtful, then there should be no fear.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	And if it only comes out as part of the medicine we've applied, assuming that such virtue has been exerted, then you should take a portion of honey and three parts of rose oil and one spoonful of glue, and apply this mixture to the ointment.
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then continue with the appropriate treatment until it is healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os;	Know that neither of the two parts above the nose are broken, or just one of them alone, for these are two bones;
et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	And this one is cartilaginous tissue, it does not break, nor does it allow for twisting or bending, and then heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	And if one of the two parts is broken, it is necessary for you to pinch your little finger or the tip under the nose, and place the break equal within your index finger, and at the bottom towards outside, until the nose regains its natural shape.
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	Do this gently, and make sure that the patient does not feel pain through your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is in the part above the nose, and cannot come to his nose, then it's necessary that you place him level with the head of a rod a bit thick.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	And if the break is in two parts, redo this procedure, and try to restore the first day's work, if you can;
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	But if not, after the seventh or eighth day, when the abscess is calm, then pinch near the nose to where the linen fabric begins, if the break is in one part.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est;	If you pull on one part of something from another side, then it breaks there;
et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	And let the tents be so large that they fill out the hollows in the nose.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And they say that when restoring one must smear the stumps with butter, and change each day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin;	I don't think it's quite right, but they should be moistened in the preparation of a mixture from an egg and powdered pepper;
puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	Then leave the tent until the bone is hard and the cartilage toughened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi;	And once bound, or goose feathers instead of tents should be used in the place of them, and if it's done upside down, and holds up well, and withstands the wind, and blows the patient inward;
or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	Or do as you see fit or as you have observed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if pus comes out through the nose as you are working, then put moistened lint or cotton in oil mixed with rose water, or a spoonful of almond oil.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	And if abscesses do not come out, then apply a plaster to the surface, made of sifted flour, and incense powder, mixed with yolk oil. Then place it on light bandages, but do not tie them too tightly.
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	And if the nose break is small, and it has broken into small pieces, then use tools suitable for this task when extracting. Then cut along the wound, and clean out the damaged material, and suture, using plasters and remedies suitable for this situation;
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there is no injury within the nose, then treat it with the usual methods, and apply snail shells until they heal.
de la routure de la mandibule	On the rupture of the jawbone
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jawbone is broken outwards, and there is no wound outwardly visible, only the break is outwardly present, not being split into two parts externally but cracked internally. If one knows this lightly.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide;	It is necessary, if the break is in the right part, that you bend your ring finger into the mouth of the patient;
et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	And if the break is in the left jawbone, hold your right hand's index finger and gently force the break inside, and execute it with the other hand from outside, apply evenly.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the breakage of the jawbone is split into two parts, it should be treated with an extension of both hands until they are even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double;	And if the teeth are moving or a fracture occurs, then use a thread of gold, silver, or silk to hold them in place. Then place a paste on the broken jaw, and put a double layer of cloth over it;
et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And place on the cloth a large, well-made plaster, or an equal piece of leather, long and wide according to the jawbone. Fix it at the parts you can attach it to, and instruct the patient to rest, and eat light meats.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet;	And if you notice that the shape changes, if it dislocates on the third day, and then correct whatever has changed;
et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote;	And apply plaster upon it, mix with powder from the mill along with abundant egg or meal of ground almonds, after you have removed the wax;
et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez;	And place a thin layer of plaster, and if the plaster cracks, and the position of the wound does not change, let it stay until it heals;
maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	Many times it is healed within three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if it comes to incision at the foot, then apply what we have instructed many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee;	And if there is a fracture and wound together, remove no part of the bone when it is broken;
si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	Such subtlety in the extraction requires instruments suitable for this task.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, enlarge it with fire according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all these pieces and there remains none, if the wound is wide, place one poultice suitable for this over it to encourage flesh growth until healing occurs.
de la forcele	by the strength
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres:	The broken force breaks many times forward towards the shoulder, and the break follows three ways:
ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer;	When it is broken and dried out in two parts, and there are fragments, it's more easily restored;
ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	There is breakage with injury.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie;	And the operations in such cases are when there is breakage without injury, that you have two assistants, so that one marks the shoulder where the strength is broken;
et li autres estende lou col vers la partie;	and the other extends the neck towards the affected part;
puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	Then place the breakage evenly on your hands, so that the shape is as it should be, and there should be no appearance or movement.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit;	And if you need to extend more, then place a round sponge of cloth or wool under the shoulder for the patient, and it should be as large as your necessity requires;
et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And apply gentle force, hold the pole by your hand, so that you make an equal breakage, as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot draw the head of the force to the outside due to it coming forwards, then the patient should lie with their head on their shoulder blade, and place a pillow under one shoulder. The attendant should hold the shoulder down as long as the bone of the force is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus;	And align the break with your fingers, and if you find that it's splitting, then it should be to split from above;
et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as;	And pull the pieces gently, and if the bone doesn't join for any pushing, then you should correct it towards one of the incisions you have made;
mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	but place the full force of that instrument, to avoid this slip:
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre;	and make it seem like a spoon, not too thick, and be as wide as it should, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the operation;
et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	and have two heads, as you see, and let one be wide, and the other narrow, as is the wound you made when treating the bones;
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	And when you are assured of the removal of pus, if you clean the wound, and if the rupture is small, or if you doubt about removing pus, then dress the wound with cloths and tents, according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if there are incisions from them that come out, if moisture one, apply oil and rose water and wine, and place it on top.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	The grinding of the bone, when it involves injuries and surgery, is that you place on the bone a plaster made from the powder of the mill and some yolk of egg, and lay lightweight bandages over it, and put a sponge under the wound if needed;
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre;	Then take a very large bandage, about the size of your palm in width, then place the cloth over the bandages, and plaster it;
puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	Then take a narrow strip about three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around the bandage, so that the ends of the bandage hang down.
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide;	And place the candle near the wound, and turn the stick upwards to the neck, and over the healthy ear, and over the diseased ear;
et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	And reset each part; and when you see that the heat touches the wound's opening, and you clearly see that the candle does not move over the broken bone, then reward yourself every day, and once you remove the bandage, then keep it restrained.
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut;	And let the disease flow out on his back, and place him when he sleeps with a small pillow under the ear, to lift the shoulder up;
si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors;	And relieves the pressure of the muscles by aligning the shoulder, or you tie his arm to the neck, and do not untie it for fear of bad accidents until 20 days;
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez;	Then renew the plastering, if you see it needs it, then hold and keep it like that until it is restored.
et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	and it is restored by the utmost within 28 days, and in no cases beyond that time limit.
de la brisure de l’espaule	From the breaking of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement;	Sometimes the shoulder breaks or is damaged at its ends or in the middle, and if only one part seems to have been affected by a touch;
si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	if you adjust it according to the shape of the break, and reset it according to its natural form, in all ways that you can;
puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double;	then apply on the shoulder powdered flour from the mill with plenty of eggs, and make gentle compresses, and place a doubled bandage on top;
puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment;	then place a broad and fine straw, slightly wider than the shoulder, such that within the straw there are no movements in any part of the shoulder; if the straw is wet with linseed oil, so that the straw conforms evenly.
et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor;	And then holds it firmly into a large bend, so that the limb does not move from its place, and checks each connection daily;
et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit;	And each time it is realigned, if it is held firmly in place, and makes the limb equal if it is not displaced from its position, and has the patient lie on their side;
et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en XXV.	And the shoulder is restored in 20 days or in 25.
Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	And when this number is completed, if it is released and you are sure, because it's not an easy task of bone to be placed lightly.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of the bone is exposed and not covered with skin, then it should be handled like an abscess from a broken wrist, and you do what we have said about treating a wound in the first chapter.
de la brisure dou pis	From the break of the foot
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc;	The arm is broken only once in the middle, but this happens rarely;
mais il brise sovent au defuer.	but it often breaks at the elbow.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken within, if it descends towards the knee, causing great pain to the patient, lack of strength in the legs, and dizziness, and occasionally vomiting blood, and reveals the opening inside the broken bone, and you will well understand.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient;	And in the restoration if allowed, when the patient is lying on their back with their arms at their sides, and I place my thumbs between the shoulders, then press the shoulders together, and align the ribs of the second ribcage with your hands, delicately adjusting them to match all possible ways that you can adjust them, until the shape of the bone is as it should be;
puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve;	Then place them on the plaster and cover the delicate salt bed, or another light wood, and wrap it in a piece of cloth, then bind it to the broken bone, so that it does not move;
et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint;	And twist the bandage around the back, and tighten it diagonally, and reward each hour with the string, and if it relaxes, then tighten it;
et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures;	And if it is necessary to move it due to corrosion or itchiness that comes to the body, or pain or abscess, if you must hurry, and remove this, and smear with ointment, and treat as usual for those who have come in need of cure methods.
puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then remove the plaster, and keep it steady until it has healed.
de la brisure des costes	Of the breaking of the ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses;	Know that the breaking of ribs only comes about in their large parts behind the back, and within, and they bend because they are soft;
et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	and feel it well during examination as is due.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	The repair process involves making the break equal, just as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	Then apply plaster, and bind it with one bandage, if you need to do so.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile;	And if the break of the ribs is occurring internally, the patient feels intense pain and sharp pain, like tears, as in childbirth, because the bone presses the tissue.
et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And to points, all at once and instantly produces large amounts of blood, and this is harmful for health, and the old ones have used extensive means.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if someone says it is necessary to give foods that fatten the stomach, in order to expel the gas outward.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not do this; if no abscess was there, then no chaulze (a type of cauterizing agent) should be used.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it did come about, then heal it.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison;	And it is said that when one uses suction cups on the body, for bodily fluids, and this seems reasonable;
toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	However, there is doubt that the suction cup draws away excesses towards the body due to its weakness.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they say that for the body of any one who must have a wet wool cloth with hot oil over it, and place cloths between the ribs to make the wound evenly hot inside, then apply the treatment for bleeding wounds, meat, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac;	And if the patient feels intense pain that they cannot bear through the bone piercing the skin, there is doubt in the patient, whether it is necessary to cut on the body of the cracked rib, and one should place an instrument over the area to hold the ribs together;
et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then one must cut into the bone, and drain lightly, and then sew the two edges of the wound if it is large, and dress with plasters until they heal.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu;	And if abscesses occur, place them on wet cloths soaked in rose oil, and place it under the wound;
et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat while the wound is suitable for an abscess, and be vigilant where it should be on the back or side of the body, until it becomes healed.
de la brisure dou col	Of the breaking of the neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie;	Never break bones in the neck region, and nothing should cause them to bend;
et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	And likewise along the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to none of them, and you wish to know if they will heal or not, take heed: if you see her hands softened, swollen, and dead, and cannot move or extend them; and when you prick them with a needle, if she does not feel.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Know that it is mortal in various conditions; if they remain silent and feel well when held steady and not moved, know that the bone's joint is saved, and that the disease has been cured, if care was applied.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit;	And if something similar happens along the spine of the back, and you see that it is not healed or understand its condition, then take care to see if his joints are softened, and if his accidents are those that occur in the limbs, and on the back there is a loss of wind and loss of power against will.
et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And when one has laid it upon its belly, there is an eruption against its will.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when it is sewn on his back and he wants to sit up, he cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz:	Know that it is mortal:
si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	if it doesn't work in its treatment.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if such an event does not happen to him, then it is a simpler matter.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez;	And the treatment is that you should apply it if there's pus present, if you place on the spine where rose oil or egg yolk oil is, until it calms down;
puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer;	then apply one of the soothing and drying plasters, and bind it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest;
et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	and don't let them sleep on that part where they feel pain, until it heals.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur;	And if any bone is broken, you must cover the wound;
et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And heat the bone, then join the two edges of the wound if it's large with a stitch, then treat with ointment until it heals;
et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier;	And if the bone of the head is broken, which they call "the skull fracture", you should hold your left hand's bag in your left hand and place it evenly with the other hand at your power, then apply the plaster and the bandage above, if you need them;
puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Then apply pressure, and if there's exposed bone, do it upwards, and set the bone, then treat the wound until it heals.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	From the breaking of the bone in the hip
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief;	It sometimes happens that the hip bone is broken, and if it occurs, there might be a little swelling in the head;
et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	And it grows long, and descends to the kidneys, and comes to the patient's pain in the back, and bruising, and inflames what breaks.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure;	And for the correction, you extend your hand upwards as long as you are above the irritation;
et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li;	And know which is the break and the shape of it;
et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And if the break is only at the head, make the break equal, as long as it's in its natural shape.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the breakage is along the length or it declines towards the inner side, guide the patient so that their abdomen supports it, until you achieve the restoration of this breakage.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve;	And once you have made it equal, place it on the plaster, then put a stick or reed onto it, and hold the irritation so that it doesn't move;
et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And use your back under the ribs, as long as the spine is equal.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	Instruct the patient to sleep on his side or on his back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit;	And if abscesses have come about, if there's no need to cut them, until the pain in the abscess subsides, and place on it what we've said before.
et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident;	and then return to the restoration process, and apply it as necessary, if there's no adverse incident;
et c’est li maniere.	and this is how it is done.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the breaking of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres:	The assistants are those that lie between the knife and the head of the shoulder, and if they are broken, should one restore it according to one of the two methods:
dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	One method is that you take one thickened stick, according to this shape:
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege;	And fasten the two heads with two strings, and place them up high, and have the patient sit upright;
puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval;	Then place his broken arm on the staff, until it reaches the elbow, and have half of a staff's length in your hand, then can ascend onto any heavy thing or let the attendants extend him downwards;
puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	Then set the injury equal to both his hands together, until the break returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other method is that one arranges the wound on their buttocks, and ties their hand to their neck, then instruct two attendants that one shaves where there's a breakage at their hands, and the other removes from each side up to half an inch, and extend each person to their respective sides.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is more forceful, hold to the bandage across the wound, and above the wound, and extend each of the ministers to their share.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure;	And if the break is near the top of the shoulder, it must be that you place one half of the splint at the elbow and the other towards the knife, over the break;
et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute;	And similarly if the break is towards the knife, it must be to place one half lightly, without effort, until the break is equal on the side and on the knife;
puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	Then make the break equal, as it should be, and restrain it, if abscesses do not come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez;	And if abscesses open, do not hold them back for up to seven days, and apply wet wool and oil in a bandage until the abscesses subside;
puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein;	Then hold them back, and the method of holding them back involves placing the plaster over the soreness, then placing the arm against the shoulder, and putting your hand on the shoulder or over the breast;
et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And put the bandage, hold it against the shoulder and over the arm, so that the arm is in its natural position, without anything preventing it or if the bone isn't bent.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part;	And if you doubt that the bone isn't moving, use braces, and place a larger and stronger brace over the injury compared to the others, with one inch of space between each brace. And make sure each brace is as large as it can be while still allowing passage for three inches on both sides of the injury;
puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	Then hold onto the stumps firmly, as I said at the beginning of this chapter on bruising, more forcefully and less by pulling away.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit;	And if you see the stump of the stumps and the tension, as we have said, during the time you are restoring the broken limb, and if there is doubt about the abscess swelling, leave it bound until seven days, as we have said;
puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	Then look each three days at the bandage, that itching does not cause swelling around it or that the ulcers do not come to the limb because it is too constricted.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If there is an address, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac;	And if no such incidents occur, or if it is not released until three days or more later, and let the patient lie on his back, and have his hands on his stomach;
et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens;	And place the shoulder with a soft cloth evenly filled, and watch every hour of the day or night, that the shape of the broken limb does not move, or that the joints do not soften;
si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz;	if it is addressed by the virtue of medicine, and he gives us the meat that we have placed in front, in such a manner that the meat reaches the first subtle substances;
et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And when it begins to take effect, if it becomes robust.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout;	And it is customary that the shoulder and the leg should be taken in forty days from all ends;
et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	And then one must untie and administer baths and remedies by ointment for the injured limb to recover.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the dislocation is ugly or tangled, it should be relieved for one day or two months.
de la brisure du bras	"Of the breaking of the arm"
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet;	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the 'fossicle', from one of which the lesser bone is smaller, and it is this that supports the elbow;
et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi;	And those are large, and this one is on the ground, towards the little knee;
par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	By chance it may only break the large bones, or the small ones, and by chance they may come together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations;	When the small bones are broken, the recovery is light, and the healing;
et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	And when the large bones are broken, the healing is bad, and more painful than when they break together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If only the small fracture is broken, it's advisable to gently stretch and make it even.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort;	And if it's a large bone, you should strain it harder;
et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor;	And extend it upwards towards the thigh, and pinch the hand pouch higher than the others, and the smaller bones lower than the others' bones. And have the patient cross his limbs over themselves, and the thigh in front of him be higher, so that the limbs don't suffer any strain;
puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	Then extend the ministers' arms to the relevant part above their hand or wrist, and other ministers upwards at the other one.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then place the eyes evenly, according to their best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if in the breaking into pieces, you place each piece in its own place, and if there is none of them that holds onto his sense, and you cannot restore it to its place, then cut on top of and through the bone, as we said previously.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler;	And concerning the stinging of wounds, I have spoken about it in the singular chapter;
si pren la cure.	so take the cure.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz;	And if during the beginning of the healing process there are clotted abscesses, apply a dressing made from rose oil and white beeswax, so that it is neither too hard nor too soft;
et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	and fix the dressing slightly upwards, until the clotted abscesses are relieved.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres;	And then place the wax, and apply the plaster made from powder of the mill with enough egg, then insert the sticks; ensure that the stick for stinging pain is somewhat more pronounced, and slightly wider than the others.
et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions:	And know that he must have six arms or more in various positions:
soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II;	let it be within one of the bones, or perhaps in two;
et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre;	and keep it above the fracture rather than anywhere else, and always slightly apart from it, as I explained at the beginning of this chapter;
et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres;	and let the cloths placed over the fracture be soft and damp, not hard or rough;
et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	and let the threads that are being tied be made of linen, not too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And restore the member and the ligament after a few days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez;	And if any bad occurrences come to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, it is necessary that you wash the limb with hot water until that itch is soothed;
et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And let the limb not move at all during rest.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then continue the constriction, and if the ligaments have been torn and the bone has been exposed, as well as similar matters, address them.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if precautions are taken so that no injuries can come to the limb because it is too constricted, it is necessary to soften it with heat for a short time and leave it like this for several days until the pains disappear, and then you restrain.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things that we have said happen to the patient, or up to 20 days after the release.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos;	Or perhaps in such cases, then one might place their hands on the person's neck, and ensure that both sides of the neck are equal, and guard against any movements or jolts, and sleep while lying on their back;
et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	Know that this healing is restored within XXX days or XXXV, and by chance in XX days, depending on the nature of the remedies and the character of their qualities.
de la brisure de la main	Of the breaking of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	You know that on the back of the hand and with us the bones suffer little breaks, and no more than bend many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement;	And when the hand is broken or bent, it is necessary that the patient keep their arm straightened and aligned directly in front of them;
puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint;	Then place their hand on the extended table and extend the fingers of the broken bones, placing them in line, until they are well joined;
et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu;	And apply the plaster and the swabs, if no pus comes out, then place a poultice according to the size of your wound.
et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	and be wrapped in an I cloth of linen.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie;	And if the splinter is at the heel between the front of the foot and the belly, make a poultice from linen, and instruct the patient to press it onto their broken heel;
et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	and then press with a long linen cloth, and make the poultice as thick as the heel of the hand, and press it, as it should be done.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the break is at the front, it should be that you place a splint above and another underneath in the foot part, so that your hand is opened and straight, then bind them entirely around the hand, and seal off the connection between the fingers.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient;	And if the splinter comes to neither of your toes, it's embedded, so place it evenly, as it should be done;
et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve;	And he holds it with his foot, and if you see that placing a small stick straight upward eases the pain, and doesn't move;
et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés;	And if the pain is felt on other fingers, such as in the index or any of the others, place it evenly, and secure it with a healthy finger that comes next;
ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet;	or tie them all together in an "I" shape, that one is enough, or place them on a stick, like when you have a walking stick;
et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	and always take care in the restoration and positioning of each incision, and support those that come next, as I have explained.
de la cuixe brisie	Of the broken thigh
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier;	The bone of the shin is often broken; and one sees it well when it turns in front and behind;
et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	And for its restoration involves securing it above the fracture, and the other below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment;	And the sick lie on their face, then extend each minister's connection to its equal part;
et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And this is when the fracture is within the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the splint is close to breaking at the base of the foot, then one should direct some of the straps towards the knife and the other straps beneath the splint.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval;	And similarly if it's close to the knee joint, then place its connections above the knee joint, and allow its extension downwards;
puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	Then place the sights of the bone equally with his two hands, as long as it follows its natural shape, and then apply the plaster, and the bandage, if abscesses do not come about.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure;	And if an abscess appears then let it heal and return to your work and treatment;
li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	The birth is performed in this manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus;	It is necessary that you wrap around the wound with strips of leather doubled in two or three layers, and retain the excess. Then bend the leg until the heels reach the base of the shin, and place one thread longitudinally between the knee and the leg, beneath the knee, and guide the end of the thread over the top of the head.
puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe;	Then bend the bandage upwards on the leg and on the knee. Place pins on the wound, and place a pin on the bone of the leg;
puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure;	Then use five threads between the leg and the knee of the same material to ensure equal tension. Then start binding in a form of three or four turns around the wound;
et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint;	And when you go further than the incision, and do not restrict it less.
puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet;	Then take two threads from the bundle that you have held between the leg and thigh, and secure three pins above them. Then return under the thread at the tip of the thread, as long as you see beyond the foot;
et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	And hold it so that it does not move from its place, then leave it like this. Then if there is no pus or swelling or any other indication, it should be left as such.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois;	And if there does occur something, loosen the thread and address whatever comes about, as we have said many times;
et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet;	And if there are pieces of bone that are caught, then it is as one should do, if one can;
et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer;	And if one cannot, then it is necessary to cut the limb, and drain the blood;
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And treat it as we have said, until it becomes clean.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras;	Every once in a while, the cook should add garlic inside the cut if one puts them during the process, as in the shoulder and arm;
toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	Nonetheless, after such preparation, there is no complaint from the patients.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	Know that the egg is restored in one day, or somewhat less, or somewhat more, depending on the diversity of body types.
de la ruelle dou genoil	from the garden alley
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	Know that in the knee joint there is some cracking noise, but it bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, except for just a crack, or if it wears out, and affects all injuries, and feels like an injury, and this is felt very well.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet;	And in this preparation, one should put what burns well on its parts until all can move as they should.
puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant;	Then apply the plaster, and if necessary, put a round bandage, and tighten it as needed. Then reposition all other preparations we have mentioned for other injuries, such as pus-filled abscesses and similar things.
si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If you meet with each incident as it suits him, while he remains sound.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the breaking of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»;	Know that in the leg there are two bones, from which one is called straight by right "tibia", and the other is called "fibula".
et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	And any damage or injury that occurs in the arm happens here too, and because of this, the restoration process is similar to that of the arm, uniformly applied, and it involves all aspects. If both bones are broken together, then the leg turns in every direction.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the delicate bones are broken, then turn in front.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien;	And if the large bone is broken, one feels great pain and can see it clearly;
et torne desoz.	And it turns inward.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement;	Therefore, apply the extension and make it uniform, and secure the pins uniformly;
mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere;	However, nevertheless, if the fracture is ugly, and there are more than a few parts, then the extension should be gentler and of less force;
et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	and align it according to its virtue.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz;	And when you have completed all your work, take wooden splints that can be rubbed onto the leg on both sides, and let them be as long as from the leg to the knee down.
puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien;	Then wrap two bandages around the ends of each splint, both above and below them, and tie them in the middle as well. Also during this time, make sure the leg does not bend to the right or left, and thus it will be done properly.
et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie;	And no one administers anything from the length of the leg, and it is made of wood, and you put the leg to rest in order to avoid any movement, and this is properly done where there is a wound during the fracture.
et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident;	And move each leg every day to see if there is pus or any other incident;
si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	if the treatment continues until it becomes clear.
de la brisure des os dou piet	From the breaking of bones due to injury
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	Ankle injuries do not come from breaking bones, but rather due to certain positions that the feet can be in, and there is only strength when in multiple dispositions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus;	And if it happens to the bone with a fracture, and you see these bones rising upon each other, place your hand on the earth like the bone would want to go, and then put your foot on his foot, where the bones are raised, press it so much that they regain sensation in their limbs;
puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	Then apply the plaster and wrap it up, place a small table of two full shoulder boards under his foot, then squeeze him onto the board in the appropriate position, then when you have covered him with blankets and other things you need.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days have passed, if you release the bandage, because you will find that the bones are even, whether broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main;	And if any of the two bones are broken, repair them, just like we have said about the bones of the hand;
puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment;	Then place the bone fragment with an angle according to the length of the bones, and make it slightly wider; then put under it the plate that I said, and tighten it diagonally.
et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet;	And if there are two or three or more, and they are broken, place on each one a fragment according to its quantity, wrapped in one layer of linen, then tighten the table under it.
et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And stay on top of the table above the stomach of the plate, so that it presses well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit;	And you must not forget the other things I've said about other breaks, once we have discussed them;
et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And assist every incident as it should.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	regarding the breaking of the bone in the hand
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier;	When the bone of nature in a woman is broken, if she is made to stay enlarged, then she is inclined towards the lower back area, and held from behind;
puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto;	Then fill the void of nature with cotton, and also place it as large as necessary;
puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto;	Then stand the woman up, and gently lift her back little by little, and then jump the cotton until it reaches the entrance of nature, and return the bone with this action;
et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor:	And when she wants to urinate, if you remove the cotton, and when she has done so, have her rest again, and do this for seven days or about that time.
si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature;	If the break is healed, and if you see fit, take a goat bladder, tie it at its opening with a rope, and fill the whole bladder inside nature;
puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens:	Then blow on the fire rod until the bladder is inflated inside:
la nature si revenra li brisure;	The nature will return the break;
puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then fill it with cotton and leave it like that for some days until it heals.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche;	And when the bone of the elbow or knee of a man is broken, or in a woman if it's left like we have said about the hip bone;
et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	And these nearby fractures should not be overlooked by someone who devotes their study and use to it, and listen to my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration:	For the break means in many positions the right way of restoration:
enten le donques.	Understand it then.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge;	In the case of a broken penis, take an ointment from a goose and apply it to the affected area;
puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	Then wrap it with bandages around, and leave it for three days or until the wound has healed, and it will heal quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	Of breaking with injury
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for the one who has a break with an injury, even if it's large, as with bones of the wrist or shoulder blade or similar, that they be now treated, so that the treatments we have mentioned testify to.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound has healed, you should reapply vinegar, and if there's no other remedy, then start restoring the break in the same hour or day. If abscesses occur, apply them immediately.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if abscesses occur, allow the restoration up to a new day, until the abscesses are pacified. Don't touch them on the third or fourth day, for you would bring about bad accidents.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the bone is broken and visible through the uncovered thigh, it must be gently placed with your hands, in a small extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie;	And if the extension does not allow you to make it equal with your hands, then use this iron tool if you have it, which should be seven or eight inches long, and its width should match the size of the wound;
et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure;	And for that, the surgeon must insert it three or four times, depending on how many times he needs to do so in each fracture treatment;
et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And make it round and a little thick, so that under the pressure on your limb when you are opening it up, it does not bend at all, and have roughness at the front, and be thick in the middle ahead.
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent;	And it is called "palainche", because it must have the crooked head placed on the top of the visible bone;
et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	and beat it once, until it regains consciousness, and ensure that each side is equal against the other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the break is subtle and the instruments cannot properly take hold of the bone, it is necessary that you grip the top of the bone as long as the instruments have control.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir;	And if you cannot bring the bone back, as we have said, using a suitable tool for this purpose, such as an incision blade or awl, with your strength;
puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	then rub the one that is stuck in the hard bone and small scabs.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is returned, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it has not been placed in its natural position.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit;	Do it until it is in its place, then moisten the wound with black vinegar and properly if it is in health;
et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption;	and do not put wax or any other thing over the wound that could cause gangrene and decay;
puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure;	After administering these treatments when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound open, and cover it completely according to the size of the wound, and make sure to protect that the wound is not strained with breaking.
et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois;	And many times this has happened to the foolish patient, and there is no occasion where they have caused death or corrosion on the body.
et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	And may the crushing be softer and more effective than other breakages.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles;	And if the wound is deep or large, and you doubt that past accidents have caused it, as we said, and you find pain in the limb, then it would not be appropriate to apply these treatments;
mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	But instead of applying these treatments, wrap the area tightly, and secure it with hard bandages.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one or two days that the wound has begun to heal, remove what you had placed with all the wine, and apply a healing ointment for wounds, such as the four-formula ointment and similar.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And you must dislocate the limb twice a day, in the morning and at vespers, until it is united and sound.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it should be that the limbs are placed so that the wound heals in such a way that the bone comes together lightly.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if the days pass and it cannot heal otherwise than at once with the bone, know that there are small fragments of bone, which is why you should work on the wound with traction, and remove all these unnecessary pieces that cause pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a sinus appears in the head or any other form of infection, it is necessary to treat it according to what he instructs in the chapter mentioned earlier.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse;	And when the bone is broken, and opened on the body part, like the bones of the elbow or shoulder, or other similar large body parts, if you do not treat it immediately, for many times death results from this, but let it until it heals.
par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues;	By chance, it may heal on its own after 20 days or 30 days, then treat the wound, if you can;
et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And if you cannot do so, leave it as it is.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	The blows that come from sweat
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre;	Many times after the healing of the bruising, especially when it is near the joint, comes a difficult thing to see in the figure of the limb;
et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	And by chance, the limbs may not be able to do their natural tasks.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres:	Therefore, take care when it is fresh:
si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil;	If he administers strong medicines such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, sarsaparilla, carob, or similar others, you should use any of these substances alone, or all together combined, and mix them with a stomatic wine, or an abundance of egg white, or honey.
et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors;	and place them on the wound as poultices, and bind it well, and do not loosen it with your hands during the day;
et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee;	and then reposition it, and start another poultice treatment until all the swellings have subsided;
ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite;	or you bind with a well-made piece of plaster;
car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres;	because the properties of plaster are such that it relieves all swellings on the limbs;
et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent;	And if the dislocation has already become like stone hard as a bone, and it is necessary to extract it, even when cut open, then remove the excess that becomes noticeable.
ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Or you would take it out at no small cost, until it is extracted, and the treatment until it is healed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	The limb that is weak after a siege
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes:	When bone fracture repair is restored and after that the limbs remain weak and subtle, if this happens due to various reasons:
de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit;	Of which one is because it was tied too tightly and not tied as it should have been;
ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre;	Or because there were too many ligatures, and the movements could not come to the limb;
ou por multitude d’arosement;	Or due to an abundance of bleeding;
ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre;	for too great movements, not at their time;
ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	because they have little blood in their body, if they are weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui;	And the treatment is that you feed the sick, and make the body tender, until the pus has multiplied in him;
et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce;	and he administers baths, and gives him joy and delight;
puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre;	then put grease on the limb, so that the grease attracts to the large artery, and frequently washes it with tepid water, until the bleeding corresponds with the limb;
et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	and restores him to his natural appearance.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	If the member is twisted after recovery.
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil:	When the limb is twisted after restoration, and if the bone is broken openly, even though the form of the limb may be ugly, it does not lose its natural substance:
si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre;	If you do not believe those who say one should break the limb entirely anew, and many a person has done this in our land;
et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors;	And these actions are criticized, causing great harms, and indeed death befalls the person.
toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses;	Nonetheless, if the nodations or tortures are fresh, they should be treated with hot water, or by cooking soothing herbs, such as leaves of marjoram, roots, and clover, among other similar things;
et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus;	And make an application of a soothing paste, such as well-prepared duck fat, and take marjoram's extract, mix it with fat from geese grease or saffron oil, and apply this paste.
ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	Or take dried figs, grind them with cow's dung, and similar remedies that alleviate inflammation.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And never let the dislocation occur by rubbing constantly and for long periods with wet hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And allow some movement in the limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement;	And if the hardness and stiffness have developed and become like bone, so it is with stones, and requires removal by the iron tool; thus, if necessary, one must cut up to the bone, carefully and slightly in the delicate incision.
et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	and apply attention and study to the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	This begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, because it cannot move then, and the limb is misaligned, causing great pain and injury to the patient.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation affects none, if it suits now to bring back without hesitation.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu;	For if one delays, they swell the limbs, and by chance they reattach to the bone in their current position;
por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez:	for heaven forbid that one should move it at the time when it is swollen:
maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	often bring about discomfort and other pains;
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez;	however, when this happens, if you make the patient see a surgeon, then let them rest until all the abscesses have subsided;
puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	Then apply the member of hot water and oil, then gently remove it, and treat each limb as if its treatment comes naturally in place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters on shoulder dislocations up to this point.
des mandibules	of the jaw
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres:	It often happens that the jaws are dislocated backwardly, and the dislocations of both occur in two ways:
ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc;	or they have a slight stiffness at their joints, and become slightly softer;
ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	or they are completely dislocated and hang towards the back, causing saliva from the mouth to spill out that they cannot contain it, nor can they close their mouth, and their tongue wraps around with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When a dislocation is small, it can return through various positions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	And if it is complete and accomplished, you should reset it quickly without hesitation;
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars;	and in such a way that the attendants cut the head near the injury, and push the pins of his pocket into the root of the jaw dislocation inside the mouth, if the dislocation is on two sides;
et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal;	And let the other hand's fingers be spread out, for setting things equal;
et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And instruct the patient to soften them, his jawbones, and move them in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And hold the thumbs in place until they settle back into position.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement;	And if it hurts when he returns them, even if they are the two jawbones together, if they are immersed in hot water and oil, as long as you gently reset them;
ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	Do not hesitate to return them, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	And when they are returned equally, and the mouth of the patient closes well with softening, then place it on wet cloths in a poultice made of oil rose and wax, then gently bind it with moist bandages;
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	And let the patient sleep on their back, and keep their head between two cushions, so they do not move left or right, nor strain at all, but only eat light meat, until the pains are relieved, and bind the jawbones;
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And then test it to see if it can be moved lightly, and not allow any opening of the mouth for eating or drinking until the mandible is well healed and healthy.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jaws cannot be placed in their proper position within an hour, and are not returned to them, it leads to fevers that become habitual, and at times abdominal pain, and at times vomiting of clear contents.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions;	And when you see this, then know that it's destruction;
et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	And many times, death has befallen the one to whom it happened, within nine days.
de la forcelle	from the forceful (context unclear without more information)
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The forces cannot relieve the pain from within the body's continuity or from its backside; it can only be relieved once outside, and this is clearly felt.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras;	And the healing is that the patient lies supine on their back, and extends their arms;
et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra;	And then press the body shape to your palm, and it will return;
puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	Then place on the plaster and the bandage, and tighten;
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer;	And the head which is towards the knife cannot be moistened;
se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit;	If it's not dislocated, and if it does dislocate once, then reset it to its place, as we have said.
puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then apply the plaster and bind it tightly, and secure it. Instruct the patient to rest until their wound has healed.
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And similarly, bring back the shoulder blade when it is dislocated from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	Of the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres:	Know that the shoulder is dislocated according to three methods:
de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz;	The first method is when it dislocates at the part of the humerus under the axilla;
et li seconde est a la partie dou pis;	And the second type is when it dislocates near the base;
et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	And sometimes it dislocates above that part, and this happens rarely;
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners;	And does not dislocate behind for the shoulder, nor dislocate within for the nerves;
et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment;	And it repeatedly dislocates from above towards the elbow, even for those with little muscle, because in these cases force acts quickly;
a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	For those with enough muscle, it jumps to the bone and returns to the bone.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And by chance happens to some men through impact or bruising, and swells the shoulder with an abscess, and they think it is dislocated due to this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains;	Therefore, you must experience it, as long as you are certain;
et adonques encomence la cure.	And then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	And when it moves inward towards the elbow, you will recognize the dislocation, and distinguish between the diseased shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find a clear manifestation of their diversity;
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes;	And you will find a hollow at the top of the shoulder, and as it goes from the elbow to the wrist, the top of the shoulder resembles that, just like if it were an eye;
et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	And the patient cannot bring his hand back to his nose, nor move it with any movements;
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	And similarly, if it is dislocated at the top, even if not entirely hidden, because you clearly find it at the nape;
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	This manner of dislocation can only be remedied through realignment when it is new, or when the child has just been born.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu;	And the method is that the ministers lift the hand from the skin at the top, then place their thumbs under the arch, and lift the joint upwards forcefully at its natural position.
et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz;	And the ministers lift the hand and extend it upwards, then place it under;
si venra hastanment.	If it comes quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude;	And if she does not come as we have said after a few days, it is necessary that the patient be bathed in hot water;
et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	and the attendant should gently soothe and alleviate it, as in decoctions of rue, fenugreek, and melilot in water, and be administered;
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	then sew the patient on their back, and place a cushion of equal wool under them, neither too soft nor too hard, then place the heel on the cushion, and lift the head off the shoulder, and lift the arm away from the side.
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval;	and have another attendant hold the back of the patient's head so that it does not move downward;
celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	this shoulder is now coming back, and if you see whether lifting it follows this manner:
et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides;	And make it so that you ensure the presence at home, which is larger than the patient;
et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	And have them face towards the costeit, support their shoulder above the patient's side by the bone beneath the skin, and lift the bone upwards so that the patient hangs down.
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	And have another person guide their hand from below towards the belly underneath the patient.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too weak, so he cannot bear any weight with it, and the dislocation returns immediately.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere:	And it can also be reset in another way:
et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	And consider putting the long stick in the ground, so that the shoulder is also bent like a bow, and neither too large nor too slippery;
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust;	Then place it under the patient, but so that there is dirt underneath, and have the patient lying on their back.
puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	Then extend his hand up to the other side, form it into a position, and the joint will return to its place quickly.
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure:	And if she does not want to return through all these things that we have said, then perform this treatment:
pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	Take two large thorns from the second branch and four broad sticks, which have their tips rounded to easily enter over the armpit, according to this shape:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide;	Then bind the tip of the shaft under a cloth so it does not burn the skin of the patient, then place the shaft over the armpit near the sore.
et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part:	And extend your arm above the shaft for its entire length, and attach the shoulder to the shaft, and place the arm at the tip of the hand's wrist, then place your arm on one side of a large board, and keep the hand extended downwards, leaving the body hanging from the other side:
li jointure reva ens maintenant.	The joint moves now.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is done, no matter how it was done, if it should be that you place upon the joint a rod of hair equal, then apply an adhesive plaster with ground powder from the mill, along with incense and egg yolk, over all the shoulder and around, then remove from the joint addition, and rebind over the plaster, and hold your hands in this way. And let your hands remain like this.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost;	And it must be eaten little at first, until the limb is strengthened, because it will heal faster;
et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve;	and then eat more after five or seven days, and move it;
et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	and if it is firm and not made soft, it will be healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint has moved out of its place because of moisture or for another reason, it is necessary that you apply three burnings to it, as was explained in our previous chapter about burnings.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis;	And if you do all this, and it dislocates after seven days, and the joint does not hold, and cannot lift your arm upwards, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder are torn or stretched or softened;
et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	and know that the joint will never be firmly placed in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure;	The dislocation that is towards the buttocks and breasts, or behind, if it's caused by pushing and stretching of the hands, and is administered elsewhere;
et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And treat until it has healed.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after the healing comes redness to the limb, and delayed movements, then immerse the patient in hot baths many times, until that redness is alleviated, and returns to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the shoulder joint issue
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient;	The joint of the shoulder is dislocated by pricks, and by pricks it returns;
et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien;	And it is dislocated from all sides, both in front and behind, and the dislocation does not respond, for you can see it clearly and feel it well;
et desalue selonc chescune figure.	And dislocates according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you connect the cut wound with healthy tissue, if you can see it clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is broken, and cannot bend the arm or reach his shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener;	And it is necessary that you reset it in this way when the pus bursts and spreads, for if it bursted and spreaded, it would be a complaint to bring back;
et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier;	And by chance cannot be brought back entirely, even when it is at the back;
si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	It is worse than other dislocations, and causes more pain, and by chance it leads to death.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains;	And this restoration occurs, when it's such that we can bring it back, you extend his hand to your two hands;
et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And his arms be spread outwards and inwards towards the elbow joint from both sides, forwards and backwards, then set the joint to its place or at the base of his palm, until it returns to its normal position.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And when it comes to dislocation in front of the body, it returns as soon as he doubles his hand on his own and holds the joint at the base of the palm with a tool that is set back.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension;	And if it does not return to its original position, administer strong extension;
et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension;	And if two people assist in extending the arm and support it together, so that it does not move during extension;
puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	Then turn the arm in each direction, then when you have enveloped it with a long and wide double band;
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	And when you place the joints at their joint with your hand, if you smear them with some oil to soften the joint, then bend the joint properly, until it heals;
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And when it's in place, put it on dry plaster with an egg yolk, hold it steady, bend the arm at the neck to the side, and leave it for a few days, then release it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse;	And if the joint is firm in its place, release the tie, and leave it;
et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis;	And if you see that the joint is not fitting well, redo the plaster and the tie, and leave it like this for a few days, until it is firmly set.
puis le deslie.	Then release it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez;	And if it feels sore after the return of the joint, and it moves, should it be bathed and well rubbed, and squeezed until it is soothed.
ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	Or you place a fat sheep's fat on the joint, then leaves it for a day and a night, then apply the plaster, and let him bathe in or enter the bath;
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain;	And when it sweats, rub the joint gently, then put back the fat, and then let him bathe in or enter the bath;
et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And do this two times or three, until it heals.
et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus;	And if you see that, put wet cow manure heated with butter on it, and apply it;
si revenra a sa disposition.	If it returns to its place.
li dislocation de la main	the dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures.	The joint of the hand dislocates easily, more so than other joints.
Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	Otherwise, it is necessary to return it to its place immediately while it is dislocated, as soon as it becomes dislocated. It should be noted that the limbs swell or an abscess forms.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	And the repositioning is done by placing the painful hand on a board, stretching out the assistant's hand, and guiding them to make it equal. You should have your palm facing towards the appearance of the joint, and hold it until it becomes normal again.
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu;	Otherwise, you must check if it is properly in place;
adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	Therefore, have the patient lay down their palm of their hand on a board during stretching and repositioning.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, then have the patient place the back of his hand on the table, and you look to place his hand at the appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	If it returns now, it's simply so.
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If not, if the removal of plaster dressings that calm abscesses is done, and he leaves like this without needing to start again.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	And if he cannot bear it, and you do not put him in the right place after a few days, if the joint remains bent;
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout:	And it does no harm to the patient as long as his arms are immobilized, and he cannot strain anything at all:
adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere;	So know that the nerve is cut, or the artery;
si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	If there is no other way than to apply the cautery for removal, and by chance there is no other remedy.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hands are in plaster, apply what we have said on plaster, then apply it and leave them for five days, then remove it and leave them as is.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he cannot move it well, and there is no pain, if the water is warm, and rub it until it becomes clean.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	Regarding the dislocation of the fingers of the hand.
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	No dislocations are ever done to either hand, each part alone, or on the back of the palm or belly.
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	Therefore treat the shoulder, and maintain the dislocation in your hands until it heals. Then support the head of the shoulder, and guide it towards the side where it was dislocated;
et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor;	and leave it for two days, then set it evenly on that day;
et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut;	and fasten it as we have said, and loosen it each day, let it move, and fasten it again the next;
et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and repeat this often until it is tightened, and do the same if dislocated in the hand's belly, perform as shown here until it heals;
et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	And do exactly the same thing when it has dislocated on another side.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	Dislocation of the ankle, dislocation of the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When it is dislocated in the back or neck, or when there are multiple dislocations, if no cure is applied, because time rushes the patient into harm.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I.	And the signs are that the discharges go against one's will, cannot be held back, and many times they soften some limbs, or both legs, or both arms, or the neck.
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars;	And many times the buttocks move to four sides;
celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	That which moves at the backside is called "gibbosity":
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance:	The treatment consists in returning the gibbosity, which has come from childhood:
si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	If there is no cure or healing throughout.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	And that which comes from childbirth or impacts or similar things, according to the old methods of treatment using big words, is not benefited in all great ways;
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	But I have summarized it according to my intention, and formed instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	I say that when in pregnancy there is a disturbance before the anus, no one remains healthy;
et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	And similarly that which comes directly to the two sides, and one can only cure inside what comes to the back, as I say;
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	And it is that the patient stretches on his back evenly to the first part, and there is no strain on him, so he does not blister;
puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	Then place the first stick in the ground and form it, and the other at the ankles, and tie a string under all the knees of the patient, and the other at the hips, and at the knees, and at the ankles;
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons;	And two helpers know how to bind them, one at the head and others at the joints, among the two pokers;
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	And be well closed, the poker as we have said, and the mirror place her palms on the spine form, until she recovers.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	And if she does not recover from this treatment, take a plank of three spans long and set it over her back, and if the patient is on their side, place one end of the table under the spine. Then lay the middle part of the table on the spine;
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu;	And have the mirror place her feet at the other end of the table, and press well until she recovers to her usual state;
et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And if you notice that it twists at the elbow which turns towards the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	And you should place two sticks at the head of the sufferer's arm from half a span long, and in between each stick, there is an area of about one palm's width.
et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent;	And place a notch in each stick, or where the elbow corresponds, and have the sticks firmly set into the ground, so they do not move.
et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	And between each pair of sticks place another stick turned, at the point where they would normally turn, and have two small turning sticks, about one palm's length, to help turn the elbow.
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And tie the junction point between elbows at the elbow towards the head and the other joint towards the feet on the other elbow. Each servant turns their elbow to all the joints equally, as we have said, and the master applies the spine evenly in this manner.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when they are even, place on it a desiccating plaster with plenty of egg whites, then coat it, and then apply turpentine, and then rub it with a tablet of three inches long, which penetrates the fatty part and the healthy portion of the spine, then bind it with a bandage, as we have said, and use the patient to endure slight blisters until they are healed;
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant;	And if nothing comes at the end of healing, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines, with the turpentine that we have mentioned before;
et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations;	And each time one administers a piece of cork, and every time there appears the appearance behind the spinal bone in the back, and be careful that it is dislocation;
et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption:	And it is the bone that opens, for which one must not have presumption:
par aventure feroit venir la mort.	By chance death might come about.
des dislocations de la hainche	dislocations of the hip
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures;	Know that the joints of the hips and the joints of the shoulder come only from dislocations alone, not like other joints.
et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties:	And the hip joint is dislocated according to four parts:
dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier;	Inside and outside, in front and behind;
et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	And even more inside there, and only partially dislocated forward and backward.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	And the knowledge of such a dislocation inside is that when you join the diseased leg with the healthy one, it becomes longer, and the diseased knee opens further than the healthy one, and the diseased knee cannot bend over the fire;
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And it is where the limb is swollen due to an abscess, because the joints of the shoulder come there.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of him who approaches death, so it is that this event is contrary to what was before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement;	And for those who have it in front, if their leg is well according to completion;
toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	Otherwise, don't double the calf without pain, and if you want to make it stand up, it can't before and holds its urine, and swells the leg, and when it walks, it passes over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of him who is behind are such that he cannot spread his knee or double it, and that leg is more curved than the other, and his ankle is flattened, and that shoulder comes up under his back.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure;	The process for this simile of dislocation is that you reward it when the dislocation is old, and it stays according to its position, if there is no treatment;
et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	And it should not have any assumption.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre;	And in those whose dislocation is fresh, and there are four ways of dislocation, if you rush to correct the joint, stretch it inside and outside, and move it right and left;
par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	If by chance it returns, and there is no need for another treatment.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	And if it does not return in this way, then you must apply great force, and hold the leg strongly with both hands, or with one tie under the knee.
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe;	And stretch out another's hand over it in such a way that they push their hands under their armpits, then pull it with one strong tie up to the thigh.
et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	And hold the head with the other hand of the rope;
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	Stretch both upwards and downwards at once, until the patient stands off the ground at once, and remains hanging.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of extension is typical for four similar situations, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it's correct.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance.	If not, then you should treat it according to its appearance.
Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	When a dislocation is in the pardedens area, it is necessary for you to recall the condition on their healthy side, then put the tie on the root of the leg, and the part which is around the artery. Then adjust the tie above the artery, and against the force.
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment:	Then take hold of another attendant's arms, and hug the thick part of the leg on the diseased side, and extend it to the rear in formation:
si revenra a son leu maintenant;	if it returns to its place now;
et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	and this way of dislocation is easier than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres;	And if you cannot compress it in this way as we have said, then it is necessary that you tie both feet of the diseased side together with a strong ligature around the two ankles and the two knees, and let the diseased leg extend two hands more than the others;
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc;	Then have them hung by their head on a pole, and above the ground two feet long;
puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	Then command the minister to embrace the head of the goose, and have other ministers hanging with the patient, who embraces firmly the goose, because the joint is now returning quickly.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	And when the dislocation is behind, if the patient lies, as we have said in those with elasticity, and stretches the ligament properly on the affected leg, and also on the waist;
puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	Then place two prongs, one on the head and the other at the waist, then insert the prong between the goose's legs in the shape of a dislocation;
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And plant wet cloths inside to prevent the patient from blistering, then extend each minister towards him, and place them evenly on their hand for the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, that's good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If it doesn't, place on .ie., the table, and press on it like we said in glibosity, and let the patient lie on the healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit;	And when there is a dislocation present, it is necessary to extend the diseased leg quickly, and according to what I have said;
et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	and place the patient's limb so that it is over the diseased ankle, then press with one hand, and extend it backwards towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches;	And if the dislocation is at the back, it does not need to extend the limb downwards or lift off the ground, but rather should be placed as if the hip was dislocated backwards as we have described about lying on both hips;
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	and under its back, and the limb should be extended as we have said previously, and one must press on the joint at the table;
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz;	and it will be correct when the diseased leg extends its legs, and they will be equal;
adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	Therefore adjust the hips, and apply the plaster, and hold it with a bandage, so that the hip does not move;
et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus;	and let it rest for three days or four, then release it, and apply the plaster on top;
et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors;	and if you see that they are even, hold them in place as before, and let it rest for three days;
puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	then release it, and allow him to move gently, until the limb is strengthened.
de la dislocation dou genoil	Of the dislocation of the shoulder
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres:	The knees are dislocated according to three ways:
c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier;	that is to say, inside and outside, and behind;
et ne desalue point devant.	and do not dislocate in front.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	And the signs for this are that you instruct the patient to bend their leg at their hip. If they cannot bend it towards their hip, know that they are dislocated;
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	And for the restoration of all this, you should make the patient lie straight, and extend their leg if they can, and place your back against their buttocks, and set their foot on your feet;
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment;	Then take their knee with your hands, and pull it between your fingers, then bend the two sides of the knee to form.
et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	And another helper extends their foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the signs are that they bend their leg lightly towards their thigh.
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie;	And place the plaster, and allow the leg to rest against its thigh, and keep them together tightly for three or four days, then release.
et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And do not move the injured limbs until the members are reinforced.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limb is not in place, apply strong extension, as we have said about treating the hip, until it becomes stable.
de la dislocation dou talon	On the dislocation of the heel
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heels are never perfectly reduced or completely dislocated, both inside and outside.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	And the signs so are that the ankle is swollen, and moves forward to the part where it has been dislocated.
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	The readjustment must be quick, and when it's only slightly out of place, we should gently stretch his hands towards it.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	And when it's dislocated almost completely, you should have the patient sit straight, and guide his left hand down by the leg, above the ankle;
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	Then pull his foot towards you with your right hand, and then twice with your left hand, then extend it upwards, and firmly keep the foot up.
et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet;	Do this twice as we have said, by squeezing and pulling on the foot;
s’elle revient, c’est bien;	If it returns, that's good;
se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	If this does not work, then restart the operation, for it is remediable.
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	And if it cannot return this way, then have the patient sit up on their bed with their back touching the ground, and bury his penis between his thighs in the earth, and firmly plant it into the soil between his legs, and tie cloths around him, so as not to bruise the penis;
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	Then scrape the soles of his feet with ministers (which likely means tools or instruments), and others spread his legs out to his hands or knees, so he ties them around his neck on his chest;
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	Then spread each minister (presumably meaning instruments) equally, and place the penis between his thighs to hold it when one extends.
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	Then place the mirrors equally to reset the dislocated shoulder at his hands, and others use ministers (tools) to scrape the healthy leg above the wound, and the dislocation will return quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	And when it is at the correct point, then apply the plaster and bind closely above, keep it steady and firm, tie down the foot, and guard the nerves that are located under the ankle from behind, ensuring they are not too tightly bound.
puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain;	Then leave it for two or three days, and if the bandage becomes loose, due to the firmness;
puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors;	Then release it on the third day or fourth, and guide the patient to move for three days;
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And if he goes beyond this period, it's not safe that he will still dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if abscesses are pressing on him and it comes to this, you must soothe him, as we have said elsewhere, until he feels better.
des dois	Of the fire cautery, command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the arms are dislocated, if they need to be properly stretched as part of their work, it is a simple matter.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	And if the dislocation is in neither the neck nor leg bone, it's necessary to have the patient lie completely flat or on a table straight up and down, and place your foot where the joints are open. Then press with your foot firmly until it returns;
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie;	And when they are even, and there is nothing open, you place under the foot of the patient a table with two shoulder rests. Then adjust them firmly, and leave them for three days, then release.
et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And make them rest until they are healed.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	regarding wound care and dislocations together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	When there is a wound with the dislocation and one seeks to restore it, many times it happens that the patient dies:
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	if you are not cautious in the treatment, if you do not know the art and have not practiced it for a long time, or if you are not compassionate and merciful and delaying, then do not be reckless;
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	and start with calming things like abscess removal, and leave the patient in the hands of God, if you do not see hope for their recovery;
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	And when you see hope, immediately reset the limb back to its place, so that pus and wound can heal.
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	And when the limb is back in place, administer treatments that soothe the pus and wound. Care for the wound, as it requires, with dried ointments;
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	And if there is fracture along with the dislocation, and small bone fragments, set them back into place, and do as we have instructed for simple diseases;
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	And guard against entering paths of fear, as I have said, for you must act according to your Creator's will, and by the knowledge with which you arm yourself and protect your body.
