O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	You, dear children, I have completed this book which is the summary of medicine's knowledge at its end, and finished it through its explanations and by its declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And I saw in my vision that I would complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of manual skills, namely "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is practiced in our region and is everywhere unknown, so it has been lost and its knowledge has been taken away, and nothing remains from it beyond the small descriptions in books by the ancients that were handled by the hands.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this has come error and vanity, and closed minds, and science has been moved away.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	It seems I should revitalize this treatise altogether according to the path of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and will follow together the forms of the cautery instruments and other tools for use with their adjustment and preparation, just as it is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because no good masters are found in our time for this reason, the art of medicine has been extended.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary for the one who interferes to master in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, until they know the location of the limbs and their shapes and connections and separations, and have knowledge about bones, nerves and arteries, and the number of bones, and their movement and rest positions, and where their exit lies.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And thus says Hippocrates that rest with rest is much, and work with work is little; and similarly in the art of the hand.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you at the beginning of this book that if someone is not aware of what has been said before, they might commit errors and waste others' time; just as I have seen many times more than once with those who interfere in this science and abandon their knowledge and lack of experimentation.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I saw a foolish surgeon who amputated one of the neck ulcers or a woman's goiter, and cut into her arteries around the neck; because so much blood came out that the woman died in her surgeon's hands.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And I saw another surgeon who treated a stone in an elderly man, and the stone was large; he took with it a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I have already been called to remove it, and saw the position of the wound and the size of the stone, and indeed if they operated on him he died.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I saw one other case which was treated by draining Duke of our land who had his leg broken, and with the breakage there was an injury; and the patients were full of ignorance causing the break to occur in the wound from being treated roughly, and did not allow any healing at all for the injury, and did this until one month; and he was commanded not to move it again; so he stayed like that until his leg was completely swollen and his feet, and resulted in ruin.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to come to him, and I hurried to relieve the leg; and when I heard it being dislocated so smoothly that he did not feel any pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But all the corruption was already established or throughout a member, and could not be cured; and the corruption did not cease to spread within the member until the member was completely lost.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And see a second wound that collapsed an abscess in a crooked way, and then inflamed due to the mischief of its lordship.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For a gangrene, when it is of dark bile humor, one should not touch it with iron if it is in its place so that all the corrupted parts can be removed.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And for this reason, dear children, you need to know that the work of hands is divided into two parts: that is to say, one where there is danger in multiple dispositions; and I will show you in each section of this book where it has power and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	Because it is necessary that you guard yourselves, so that no one can say ill of you. If you take up your weapons in caution and act gently but firmly on your illnesses, use the best method so that through God's grace you come to salvation and be blessed; and leave unending sorrows of sickness behind. And remove from those who cause you doubt, have faith in yourself so that you may go from this world to glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Galen instructs in some of his admonishments: "Do not take any illness as a remedy that you might be called foolish by others.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have composed this treatise according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapters deal with fire cauteries and medicinal cauteries, and the chapters are organized from the head down to stones; and about the shapes of instruments, and the metals for cauterization, and all that is necessary in the operation.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapters concern cutting and piercing, and suction cups and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar matters; and these chapters are organized with descriptions of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapters deal with restoring dislocations and twists, and similar matters; and they are arranged from the head down to stones, and include descriptions of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	As we remember from the work, it is necessary for me to discuss the quality of each remedy and its harm associated with each temperament.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I state that the qualities of assistance, and the harm, are the longest word and subtlest science and the secrets respond. And many wise people spoke about this, agreeing with it; and they satisfy me with their words, for I fear lengthiness.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I state that the cautery helps universally for any complexion where there is matter, because there are two kinds of complexions: this means hot complexion with substance and dry complexion with substance.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In the hot and dry complexion combined with matter, they divided their thoughts and said that the cautery is a great aid. And the other group said the opposite: that the cautery only helps in diseases caused by heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is so hot and should not be treated with hot illnesses by heat or drying. And it contradicts those who say otherwise, that the cautery provides great assistance to hot and dry diseases that come into the bodies of people.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the body of the person and their moisture to the nature of fire, you find that the body is cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this word.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it true on every occasion by experimentation.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And for all procedures, do not interfere except that which has been proven and by long use is known the chapter of cautery, and the variety of human complexion, and the dispositions and causes of their illnesses, and the occurrences and time period; we have no fear from other complexions, especially in cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the parts should assemble and align with the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	Know this, my children, that assembling a fire-based cautery contains secrets of healing and yields even greater goodness than a burning medicine cautery.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and does not come forth from any member that is cooked, and does not harm another member if it's not named.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	Hot medicines move from one part to another and bring about diseases of sickness elimination in the body; and by chance they can cause maladies. The fire, due to its potency and quality, does not do this unless there is excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And this I have found through experimentation and the length of my service and study in the art, it aligns with the truth of things; and because of this, I apologize for the length of speech, as I do not wish to withhold from you the secret of fire and its quality, how it removes diseases from bodies, as the philosopher explains when demonstrating. Receive it into your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, boy, that they decided when the cauterizations should be done, and read prayers.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cauterization is suitable in all times, because the harms arising are most removed by the help of the cautery; and likewise if the cauterizations are for necessary pains that cannot wait until greater evil befalls the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And never think like those foolish people, child; for there is no recurrence to a disease cured by cauterization. They say it this way: but they are mistaken, because cauterizations are only medicine that changes the complexion and dries out the fluids causing pain, which is more effective than medicine for hastening recovery, and due to the power and authority of its work.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And the possibility is that the disease does not return at all according to the complexion of the patient and the location of the illness and its effects; they are gathered together in him through the acquisition of foods and similar things. If no cauterizations are administered or if there's little excess and moisture, as with cauterizations for pain, and similar conditions, then this kind of pain does not return again; but this happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And not many people understand why cauterizations are named the last of medicine, and this can be seen; but they do not believe that cauterization is worth after medicine. But their understanding is false, and they say cauterization is the last of medicine because when our methods for cures in any disease do not work, then we administer our cauterization, and it works.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Thus clearly cauterizations are the last of medicine, not according to the understanding of those who say otherwise.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The old ones said that gold cauterizations are more effective than iron ones and they stated this because of the quality of gold and its high substance. They also mentioned that the skin under iron cauterizations does not rot; however, it's not true as I've proven it myself and found that in some individuals, it can indeed happen. Gold cauterizations are better than iron ones, just as they said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And yet, when you heat the gold tool, you do not realize that it is heated by the color of the gold, and it quickly cools down; and if you heat it too much; then put it in fire; thus, there is enough prevention.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this reason we use our metal cautery which we have prepared for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	So I have organized this chapter about the shoulder joint up to the elbow, so that one may find it more easily.
dou cautere olivaire	oil cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	The fire cautery works with moisture and cold on the brain. There are two ways to do it due to an illness called 'soda', and due to many fluids that descend from the head as sweat, from ears, and because of multiple dreams and toothache, throat pain, and especially for all diseases that come from cold such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is such that the patient is cleansed by a dissolving medicine altering the head. Three or four times, or five times according to how well the powers and the strength and the habit of the patient can bear it; and then wash off the head of the patient.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then place his hands between yours and put your hands under his nose. After that, place the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two nostrils; and let it come where your middle fingers are, if blood is drawn out, then heat up the cautery which is called 'olivare', from which here is its form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place the joint in its natural position with ink, and guide your hand downwards and sideways gradually and steadily while turning it; then lift your hand alone, and check if you see bone. If you don't see any bone, continue with the cautery until you do see bone as I have instructed; after that take one pinch of sand, put a moistened cotton inside and place it in the joint, allowing it to be there for three days; afterwards apply a butter on top of a cloth; leave it on until the scorching disappears; then treat the wound with the ointment known as 'tetrafarmaçon', continuing until it heals.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And if they said that the older ones believed, when a wound stays open longer, more pus discharges out; and because of this advice moves.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And it was said by none of them that we should let the cautery burn for so long that part of the bone becomes ashes, and then one must set back what has been burnt from the bone, and treat it.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And they say the other that we must let the cautery burn there and press so hard that it raises as wide like a small egg that women place in their bellies because fluids can be expelled out of it; and should we leave the wound open for a long time afterwards; after this, we should clean it and dress it.
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two ways of using a cautery do not seem to me to be good in every respect, except when it comes to certain patients with fear; and I believe that I should leave them alone; because the joints become weakened by continuous exposure to nature's fluids, as we demonstrate with other limbs; and even when the joints are weak from nature itself, and my first experience of using a cautery is more healing and soothing for me, and in doing so I gather together salvation.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	from the old head pain
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When throughout the entire head comes chronic pain that lasts for a long time, one should use the patient's fingers and pills which are called "cochies," and also do cleansing of the head and ears with bandages; and if one performs the cautery as we have previously mentioned to them, then it proves effective.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take care that the shoulder of the patient is of strong nature and not too cold; therefore, apply the cautery slightly over the part where we previously mentioned to do so.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After apply the cautery to each horn of the head up to the bone, just as we have said previously, and perform one application of it over where it is called "vessel"; and make one application of it in the place where suction cups are placed; and lighten your hand so that you do not go beyond the bone: patients feel more intense pain with this cautery than others, and I will discuss this further elsewhere; and it should be noted that the applications to the horns should be subtler than that used for the middle part of the head, and it's the form:
dou cautere dou chief	A fire cautery, for the purpose of a patient, instructs them to let their hair grow long and even; and if it starts pricking at its base when they are young, one should hold steady so as not to move until they fully grow.
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When pain suddenly comes to a part of the head and extends till to the eye, and if the shoulder is purged by mild medicines, and other treatments I mentioned about diseases have been done in the division of diseases, but none of them help: then one should do cautery according to two ways, meaning with medicine water and fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The medicine water cauteries involve you taking a spoonful of oil, and then applying the bark and dressing to two pieces each for both shoulders, in such a way that you can place the spoonful of oil on the skin; and when it is placed, ensure it adheres well and leaves it like this for 12 hours. Then remove and treat with garlic butter until pus comes out.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the oil cure until it is healed; and if you see that doing some of those burning medicines that I have written or the first treatment of burning medicines works for you.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The iron cautery should be done like this.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cautery of which I have described:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And call it "closed" because its head is made in the shape of a bell or has .i. inch of curvature, and at the middle there's a small appearance; put it over the painful area, hold your hand and slightly rotate the iron, until half of the thickness of the flesh burns; lift your hand to avoid burning the artery, which will start bleeding abundantly.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After this, place cotton in the form of a bandage and keep it on the affected area for .iij. days; then apply moistened cotton with butter, and continue oil treatment until it heals completely; if you wish to cauterize this migraine using the iron cautery ('cultellare'), do so at its tip but be careful not to cover the artery in this part of the migraine that is not old.
de emigraine	From headache
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you cure headache as we have previously described in divisions of diseases, and it is not effective, and you notice that the cauteries mentioned earlier from medicine do not work on the iron, then it becomes necessary to heat the cautery known as "cultellare" until it turns white; and do this at a length of half a foot along the arm, and take your hand once, and strain until you no longer touch the artery and only reach up to the bone; and guard against the jaw that closes when eating, and let the tongue only care about closing and not allow spasms to affect the patient, and guard against bleeding from the artery when it is cut, or if cutting it causes great fear and similarly for those who are untrained and inexperienced; and leave your work half done; but I will tell you how to stop bleeding when the artery has been cut, and I will show you where it happens in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you notice that these cauteries do not work on the illness, and the patients are suffering, apply them to the middle of the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it heals; and if you see this, use the cautery that we said or from chapter on extraction of the artery, with a two-bladed cautery; and these cauteries are better than that one and more effective.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of the pain of the ears due to cold
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When pain comes from cold in the ear, and we have tried remedies that dissolve and others of the treatments we discussed in this division, and if the pains do not subside, then apply this type of cautery called 'points', which is described thus:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After applying the 'points' all around the sick ear, or all around the two where the pain is located in both ears, and move away slightly from the root of the ear after you have indicated its location. Place ten points around each ear; cure the area until it becomes healthy.
de la torture de la bouche	of mouth agony
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Tortures that should be cured by cautery are only those that move due to the flow of blood, as we have stated in the divisions of diseases; and no cautery is to be done for those that come from scorching and inflammation of nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you treat this kind of torture that moves due to the flow of water and from clearing the head, as well as gargling, if it responds well, then it is necessary for you to apply the cautery with three applications: one in the root of the ear, and another slightly beyond the temple area, and the third at the adjustment between the two lips; and place the cautery on the healthy part that opens up, and apply it right where the head of the ear is just under a bit above the ear wax, and another on the temple as long as about an inch; and leave the cautery there until half the skull is burned; and this is how you should do the application of the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And there is the appearance of the cutler's burn that we have described previously, but it is somewhat more subtle and requires that the knives be a bit thicker; after the treatment of the area as I have said before, until it becomes healthy.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When dealing with an old stroke, you treat it as we have said, and if it does not benefit, and the patients do not have a fever, then let him undergo four cauterizations: two on each of the four head corners, one under the head, and one on the neck in what is called 'watches' as we have mentioned before, and the last one at the mouth of the stomach; and treat it accordingly as we said previously.
de litargie	from Liturgy
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this illness, you should give the patient large pills and brain-purifying pills to cleanse their brain; afterwards, let them rest with their head high. And place the camphor plaster on the back of the head; and here is how you do it like a cautery: do it as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If it remains in this state, well and good; and if not, let him undergo three cauterizations down the neck to just below the collarbone, and leave an interval of one finger's width between each cautery. And treat as with others, and if you see it fitting together, and the patient endures, let him undergo a third cauterization in the middle; and if required, two more on top of the two horns, and treat until it is in this state; and let the cauterizations be called 'olivare', as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	Of the coldness of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary that the head be cleansed of years and what we have said before; after treating the head with the patient, then let him undergo cauterization down the head and on each horn, and one behind and three on the spine below the neck; and if you need more, and if the body is moist and the patient endures, and the disease has spread, then let him receive four cauterizations on the spine of the back; and leave until the most pleasant cure becomes dry, and lift your hand; afterwards treat until it is in this state, and let the cauterizations be called 'olivare' as we have said before.
de l’epilempsie	From epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	The epileptics should only use the cautery for those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary to first modify the brain with years and other remedies that we have discussed in the section when the organs are large and suffer from physical illness.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if this is a child who cannot bear it, make gargling and chewing often with good meats; after that you place the head in the middle, and I perform one cautery according to what we have said before, and another on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the organs are far out and suffer, make cauterizations like I said for those who have paralysis and softening of muscles, on the spine both at the back and neck, and apply olive wood cauterization as I said previously.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	And if the organs are female, make one subtle cautery according to this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When due to the reason of melancholy are excesses or substances corrupted and large bile flows, therefore the part cautery of fire cauteries as we have said to him who has paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if due to the cause of melancholy are the excesses declining into melancholy, and is the body of the malady moistened, then it should drink something so that the brain may be purified, according to what was before in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After removing the head of the malady; afterwards make two pieces of linen well made, as one circle, put them under the head; and if the malady is seated, place it so that it is held in all directions; after that present the liniment, and apply butter from old beeswax; and heat it on a moderate fire, until what you pour can be tolerated; afterwards empty the circle through the center with the head under it, and let it cool; and do this to each part of the malady once per week with another good method, until it is healed.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	Or if you see that it has to be cautery, do points on all the cautery at once.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	This way of cauterizing moistens the brain greatly; and then put on wet cotton in butter and grease.
de l’awe des eulz	of the pain in the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the pain first comes to the eyes through the symptoms I have mentioned in the division, then start and continue to instruct the patient on things that purify the head, and keep him/her away from all moistures, and make him/her sweat or take baths several times fasting.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After having him/her direct his head, and make him/her cauterize in the head area, and make two cauterizations on each temple when the pain subsides from both eyes together, or when the pain is subsiding only from one eye; and apply this cauterization to all veins and arteries that are around the brain, and make sure they are cauterized long according to the width of the temples; and watch for bleeding out, and if you see too much blood coming out, then stop it properly like you did before.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	And I will teach you about the extraction of arteries and incisions in the cautery technique how to perform it; and never should one apply a cautery or heat over both sides of the two bones behind.
dou cors des larmes	of the two paths of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	When the tears of the eyes have been long and accustomed, and are located on the veins, or beneath the arteries that appear from the head outward; and it is seen that they are superfluous cold humoral discharges, then do as I said at the beginning in treating such things: first apply a cautery to the head, and then two more cauterizations on each temple, and two cauterizations or heatings beneath the two bones. And if further treatment is needed, carefully perform one small cautery up to the eyelid for each location.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	of the two paths of tears within the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you apply the medicine as we have instructed in the division, and if it doesn't help, then give the patient three raw onions to drink; after this, you should lift the head, and perform cautery or mid-cauterization with olive oil; and make two cauterizations using the 'claw' type of cautery on the two ears, a little above the hairline; and be careful not to touch the artery as you don't want to cover it.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the shape of the cautery which is called 'claw':
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the paper of the oil has been weakened by illness and moisture, then cauterize it with this cautery which is called "olive".
de coi ci est li forme:	of which I have described:
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see that it's done twice, two cauterizations on the two nipples as long as they are; and don't let go of the hand until a third part of the paper is burned, according to the method I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	of hair that pricks the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	No instance has occurred where the hair of the eyelashes turns into the underlip and pricks the eye; in that case, one performs cauterization according to two methods: namely, with fire or with burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they grow and are even, then put the patient in good health; after that draw a figure on the paper of the eyes such as it is like to the leaf of mirtle, and let its beginning be at the sign of between the hairs; then place wet cotton saturated with egg white and garlic paste on the eye, then heat up the fire cautery which has this form:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After that cauterize on the figure you have drawn bit by bit several times, until the skin is blackened in that spot; and the signs of health are that you see the paper shrink, and the hairs lifted to the eye's point. Then raise your hand and leave thus for three days, then place wet cotton saturated with butter until the scorching disappears; after that apply a balm until it heals properly.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if after this the hairs and paper are softened, then restart with the cautery on that same area as you did before. If the hairs have fallen out, apply heat until the paper rises to its natural position and is even, without touching the eye.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The fire cautery of medicine commands the patient to let their hairs grow long and even; then make a shape from parchment as if it were the leaf of myrtle. Then take French soap and live charcoal, each one ounce, and grind them together thoroughly; mix it quickly so that it doesn't cool down, then spread it over the shape like a myrtle leaf, put it on the paper eyes. If the disease is only in one oil, you must open it with one finger, if in both equally; place cotton moistened with egg white under each eye. The patient's shoulder be in your good health and put your forefinger showing on the medicine; press once every two times when the patient feels the bite of the medicine because they feel a bite also like fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for some time, then apply the medicine to your finger.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And when the excision is past, if you lift up the elbow, and reward it, if you see that the paper has been lifted in the same way as it was lifted by the constraint of fire or by incision; and if it's like this, then it's well.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If this doesn't work, the medicine should be applied to his body where it hasn't worked yet, until your operations are equal and your eyes adjusted; then place moist cotton in butter until the burn is healed, after treating the area with ointment known as "dyafenis" and other remedies, until it heals properly.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if it's necessary for you to take great care of your work so that the medicine doesn't leak into your eyes.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if the paper becomes wet and the hair pricks in the eye, then repeat the medicine on that area of the body which is softened by the clean paper, just as you did before; after that treat until it heals properly; and this is the form of the leaf of mirt.
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the eyes of men are various in size and smallness, and according to this be your constraints; and do not allow the right way to that person who studies this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	on the treatment of fistulas by cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat fistulas as we have instructed in the division of diseases, and your treatments do not benefit, then it is necessary that you apply cautery to them according to this manner.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to place his head in a healthy position; and cut the hair on his head between your hands in such a way that it does not move or shift his head; after this, apply moistened cotton inside an egg or garlic juice to the eye; then heat the cautery which is prepared: and place it close to the head as if it were a feather of a rooster, so that the tip of the cautery rests there; if you see it, let the tip point from one part of the head to another, and if you can see it, let it be like a tent; but in any case, it is better for your work that it not move.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After pressing the fistula if it is open, and treat any pus, then dry it off; and if it is closed, operate on it, remove from the bowe; afterwards place the heated cautery in this manner, hold your hand near the cautery to the part below the eye, so that your hand does not cause trouble; and put the cautery into the oil grease, and let it fume.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the beginning of the cautery up to the bone, it would be well.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If not, then restart the cautery one more time, and if you need it again, let it rest for three days. Afterwards, place wet cotton on butter, and continue with the ointment cure until healed. When forty days have passed without healing, apply corrosive water medicine until the bone is exposed; and follow this regimen according to what your chapter recommends.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a method for cauterizing fistulas that none of the old ones mentioned.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	Understand by "fistula", and make it clean; after that, place the thin camel bone inside the cut:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	And they do it in the size of three parts of a spoon; and hold your hand or camel firmly, making sure not to move the patient's skin so that the melted wax does not drip onto their eye; and one should put moistened cotton on the eye before applying an egg yolk or oil: the wax then removes the pus from the boil, and through marvelous healing, it saves health.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healed through cauterization as we have described, that's good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If not, then it is necessary to administer pertussis to the child, and return the fistula to the body within the child according to what should be done in its own proper place.
des crevaices en levres	of cuts in lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times, cuts appear on the lips that are referred to as 'whiskers', and similarly on the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When treating these cuts using what we've discussed in sections, and if the treatment doesn't help, then use this method: apply a small surgical instrument for cauterization like this:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place him quickly in those openings until they grow; afterwards, clean the wound where it is healthy.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the boil on the neck
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess comes to the root of the throat or on the gland, or at the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, after it turns rotten and swells up and becomes discolored, turning into a fistula; then you treat it as we have said in divisions, but it does not heal: so you need one cautery according to the size of the fistula; after removing the pus from the fistula, keep your hand until the iron tip reaches the bottom and beyond the lesion; do this process once or twice, after treating as we have said in treatments, until it is healthy; if it heals like this, it's good; and if not, you need to uncover the area and remove the rotten bone, according to what you find in your medical text.
dou movement des dens	movement of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened due to moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it through medicines and that doesn't help, then place the head of the patient on your healthy side; afterwards heat up the cautery according to which will come after in this manner: that you put a twig onto the tooth; and place inside the cautery quickly burning hot, hold your hand so that the patient feels the heat reaching to the root of the tooth; afterwards lift your hand and restart the cautery according to your desire; afterwards fill the patient's mouth with salt water, and leave it there for an hour and then remove it.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this way, the moving teeth are stabilized, and the softened gums are restrained, and the moisture is corrupted and dried.
de la dolor des dens	from toothache
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When toothache comes from coldness, or there's coldness or ice present, and medical remedies don't help, then one must use cauterization according to two methods: and the wax cautery and the fire cautery.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Wax cautery if it's like this: you take butter from a cow, and at the tip of a metal or iron spoon; after that take cotton and wrap it on the point of a needle, and moisten the cotton with melted butter, then put it quickly over the painful tooth and hold until it cools down; and do this often until its effectiveness reaches to the root of the tooth. And if you see cold hair and cotton moistened in cooled butter, apply it again onto the painful tooth, and place a hot iron on it until heat from the fire reaches to the nerve of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	Assemble a fire cautery as you desire, using something like a hot iron or needle, and make it large enough so that the heat doesn't enter the mouth of the patient; after heating the cautery, from which the form will come afterwards, place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery cools down; do this often, for the pain will be relieved that day or the following.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it is necessary that the patient fill their mouth with good butter in anticipation of this hot cautery, and then immediately apply it. And this is the form of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And make a cautery to the extent that you wish it, and according to what is within your ability; this is the form of the rod:
des scrophules	regarding the instructions for dealing with scrophula (also known as King's Evil or leprosy).
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the scrophula is due to cold humors and not responsive to treatment with medicines, then heat the cautery as described later in this text, and make two openings for fumes to escape from the other side of the cautery; and place the heated cautery over the abscess once or twice as needed until it reaches the bottom of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, adjust the cautery according to the size of the abscess and leave it in this position for three days; and cover with wet cotton saturated in butter until the pus is drained; afterwards cleanse the area with ointments and swabs until it heals.
Li forme de la cainne:	The shape of sugar:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	When the humors conquer in the channels of the lungs, and especially when it comes from cold constitution, then it is necessary that the body be cleansed first with diuretic medicines; afterwards make a cautery at the root of the throat, and be careful not to come all the way to the throat, but just a little.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	After I make another cautery at the joint of the neck and head of the spinous process, let it be known that this type of cautery is called "clavile," as we have before us its form; and treat the area in such a manner as previously described until it heals properly.
de la toust	To the cautery of fire, command the sick to let their hair grow long and even; and if they stick at their root, hold the eyes firmly so they do not move until they grow.
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	For all and every disease of the lungs are due to cold moisture, and the patients do not have fever nor chills, and they are diseases that come from old age, then you should apply two cauteries on their force (or strength) in their veins; and one other cautery right under the buttocks between the breasts. And let the cautery called 'clavile' be the one according to the form which was mentioned previously.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And if you see it, perform the cautery by applying force to all of the cautery known as "pox," as its form is described above in the illness of the ears; and let there be 30 pox marks, or more, depending.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After curing the area as described previously, and for this type of treatment, let there be three rounds of cautery following this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And for this reason are the cauteries lighter, because you make them three times over.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture and it is set back in place, then it cannot stay put; instead, it immediately dislocates again with small movements as we have experienced. Thus, it befits you to first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	After that, bind the wounds on his back and sides; then remove the kidney inside the scrotum with your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated within, heat the cautery to just two fingers' width as described here for this process:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	And cauterize the palm up to its knuckle, and let the mark of the cauterization come together in one point. Four cauterizations; and for this reason, perform the cauterization using the tool with three prongs, because it is due to the intricacy of a tent that there are four marks resulting from cauterization; and the nerves follow along like threads and the form of the cauterization tool with three prongs:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And each time, fix it on this one nerve because there are seven cauterizations for it.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After placing the fire cauterizer over the nails, grind with a thong; after that, rest the patient, and do not let any of the limbs be in long tension until it is well stabilized.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it was relieved above, resulting in little else, then perform a cautery on the thickness of the clavicle cautery, or use slightly more cautery force.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joint is closed, and the moisture is removed and the injuries to the patient are healed.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When coldness and moisture affect the stomach in proportion to its nature, they multiply the catharsis within it, and follow established treatment methods which do not benefit him. Therefore, it is necessary for the patient's injuries to be bandaged on their back, and stretch out their legs and arms.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	From this onwards, apply three fire cauterizations below the heel on the buttocks for a quantity equivalent to that of two. For every cauterization, target the clavicle, and two cauterizations behind each pair of ribs until the pattern of cauterizations forms at three angles, ensuring space between them so they do not join together when subjected to corruption; ensure that all cauterizations thoroughly burn both sides of the knee, and form this shape without adjustment.
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if you see it cauterized with a large cautery in the stomach like this form; and whoever fears from that cautery, cauterize by pressing and judging on the stomach at one point according to the quantity you see of it; then cauterize completely through the entire cautery which is called 'points'.
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment we have administered, as long as it's clean.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	As for the liver, it causes pain in the chest and due to moisture and excessive wind. It must be treated through its natural complexion by getting rid of excess. The body will not benefit from this treatment if the liver is soothed on top of its bile ducts; and three cauterizations should be performed according to this form and figure and quantity on the liver, beyond the lateral aspects, where bile comes out; leave a space between each cautery about twice the size of a coin; and let the cauterization cover both the long and short sides without pressing your hand down fully over the whole area; only burn half the kidneys and have the body in place under its feet; if it can't do this, let it lie down, stretch its legs, and lift its arms; and this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	And if you wish to do so, cauterize these fire cauteries using a knife, be subtle and skilled in this art, and guard that you do not burn all the flesh, for you would dry out the whole body; and let it only boil up until a point, because the flesh is very delicate at that spot, and know how to see it.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	When it has moved to the liver, and you know whether it is within the liver tissue or on the surface: if it's within the tissue, the patient feels pain but not excessively strong; and if it's on the surface, they feel intense pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	And when this treatment brings the disease to its head, it is necessary for the patient's body to surround its head; and then mark out where the disease has spread on the body, and then heat up the cautery that resembles a needle, as you see here is its shape:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	And apply the cautery until the knees are charred, and continue till the scabs are all gone; after this heal according to wound treatment until it is healed; and one must not use this cautery anywhere else than those who have studied for a long time in the art of medicine, because these hands caused no diseases ever.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Therefore he can safely operate, and every time it seems to me that movement is better than leaving it alone.
dou cautere de pleuresin	of the water cautery
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The old ones said that one should make water cauteries of the roots of aristologe, and do it like this: take a long root of aristologe, the longest you can find, let it be dry, and also as big and as long as your hands; then soak it in oil, heat it up on fire, and apply the cautery between your shoulders and neck for one application, and two small applications lower down where is below the chin; and four applications between the fifth and sixth rib, going slightly behind; and one application near the belly button, and another on the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and four more at the ribs towards the end of the application that's between the two shoulders; don't squeeze your hand, instead do it openly as when you smell.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And it is said by no old man that any person uses a fire cautery like shaving at the neck, and they heat it up and place it between the ribs, until it reaches this abscess; and then the pain leaves, as we have described for the liver abscess.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this chapter is fear or that the patient dies now, or a fistula comes which cannot be cured.
de la mice	of the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the illness of the mice in those ways we have discussed for wound treatments, and it doesn't benefit, then they try three methods of cautery that are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	There is a method such that you make three or four cauterizations, depending on the length of the mice [presumably referring to surgical tools], according to the figure of the liver that we have mentioned before; and do not rush your hand over the entire cautery, and let the patient be aware from behind; and another way of applying a cautery is when you heat the cauterizer with two ends, as we showed it in the dislocation of the shoulder; lift the bone at the site of the mice, or where the pain begins from the left side, and raise the elevations by which you lift the bone according to the bone's width, and the cauterizations should be according to the size of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	After I place the two heated needles on each other until they pierce from the other side, and then remove the cautery, in this way it will remain for four. And if you see, fully cauterize with all three of the cautery at three points.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the cure when it has taken forrot (or decay) over a long period, and this is as effective as all other previously mentioned cures.
de ydropisie	Of dropsy.
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	The cautery isn't suitable for indigo (or certain materials), except when it's done in the way that is called "asclytes".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	When you cure according to the methods we have mentioned in divisions, and your treatment doesn't help, then it is necessary that you make four cauterizations inside the mouth, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the kidneys, and one behind the back on the spine, and one place at the anus; and make sure that the cauterizations are well close to the spine near the kidney.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After leaving the cautery in place for a long time to treat gangrene, do not stop treating the patient after the cautery treatment; and then recovery would speed up, and all four intentions would be fulfilled with God's help.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The shape of the cautery for the belly is like a curved metal piece as we have demonstrated before; and for the back, it should be round like an olive, as it was shown earlier.
de l’enfleure des piez	Of the swelling of joints
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	When the joints of the person are swollen and filled with yellow bile, it is necessary to cauterize on the back of the foot between the index finger and the ring finger; then lift your hand with the cautery without turning.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter too far into the interior, thus would it release the yellow bile and apply the cautery according to this shape:
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After performing two cuts on each of the legs at the tip of the knife; and make the cuts along their length, one in front of the knee and the other behind, halfway down the leg; then leave the cuts open for a long time without curing them, until the bile comes out; afterwards take care of the other treatments that we have mentioned.
de la menoison	Regarding memory loss
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	When the treatment of abdominal pain arises from cold or moisture, as long as the digestive and retentive powers which are in the stomach and intestines are overwhelmed, it cannot be treated with regular treatments; and you see the patient suffering very much and full of strength, so do this. First, apply a large cautery on the stomach according to what he has discussed previously or abdominal cautery, for the circulating cautery; and four more cauteries inside the mouth on subtle places, using one small cauterizing iron in each place, and two more on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see the moister being abundant and the patient suffering, do this: apply a cautery on the thumb, and one cautery on each elbow, and two small cauteries on the stomach below the large one. Because the treatment benefits when there is good assistance.
de la cure des emorroydes	regarding the treatment of hemorrheic disorders
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	When the purulent sores are either at the site or beneath the skin, and they are old with large cold and moist putrid humors, and if they do not respond to the treatments as we have described in divisions, then applying cauterization is necessary: III on the spine of the back, exactly where it protrudes from under the loin muscle little by little in a triangular pattern, and apply I cautery under the liver for II inches; and if you believe that the stomach is cold, and the food does not cook properly, and one observes swelling in the abdomen, then for such cases apply a large cauterization on the stomach, as described earlier, and another on the liver, and yet another on the kidneys with all the cauterizations. Leave the cauterization over long periods.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treatment until it becomes healthy.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	regarding the condition known as 'thelul'
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you handle the metal tip, if it resembles a small rasp, and then heat the rasp completely until it's red hot; leave your hand touching until the cautery touches the place where the metal tip is cut; do this once or twice, and if there are many metal tips, cauterize each one just like we have said; after applying healing herbs wait until they start to heal; and if you heat a large cautery on iron, it will provide greater help.
de plaie mal curee	from poorly treated wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot endure cutting or opening the wound, as we will explain in its proper place, if there arises a disease that can only be cured through the use of a cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When there is no leak and it has become corrupted and rotten due to diseased moisture, if you try the entire delicate test and know exactly how much depth it has reached.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	After heating the cautery until it seems ready, and applying it to the fistula according to how deep the test has entered, then repeat the application of the cautery until the rotten and diseased portion is burnt, once or II or III times depending on your need; and be careful not to burn nerves that are close by, and major veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	If the fistula goes towards the bladder and intestine, be cautious of these cases, and do not perform it outside a normal wound. And remember that this is not for general use; after treating until the wound becomes healthy, if there are pus and oozing matter for long periods, then you know that the condition inside has been completely healed; but if the matter does not solidify, know that there is still infection, and the bone inside is rotten at its core; and proceed like one of these cases we will mention according to its condition.
de la maladie des reins	Of kidney disease
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When abdominal pain originates from the kidneys and is accompanied by excessive wind, it does not affect all women equally. Hence, you should perform a cautery on both sides of the kidneys with the clavile cautery as we have previously mentioned; and if we cauterize in the middle, there will be three lines of cauterization, which will provide more assistance.
de la vessie	From the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is thick and weak from heat and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then you should apply a cautery to the lower part of the bladder, where hair begins on the hand, and one each right side and left side; and let each cautery be as long as our finger. And make an application defuers (backwards) across the back, or two if needed; and let the cauteries form in a clavile shape according to what was said beforehand.
de la marris	From the maris
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the uterus is cold and moist, and fails to allow conception, and its flowers are corrupted and their ends are delayed; and when they come in, there's great pain: thus it should be that you apply three cauterizations inside the womb, as we have said or like the bladder cauterization, and two cauterizations defuers (backwards) across the back; and let the cauterizations form in a clavile shape, as we have said.
de la hainche	From the thigh
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the viscous fluids descend into the thigh socket, and because of this reason it moves out of its place, and the signs are that the leg is longer than the other when measured together; and it's found that the limbs start from their origin view, so you should cauterize the wound on the thigh socket as if with one cautery resembling a circle, and mark in front of the limb within the socket where it turns, so that the socket be inside the circle; and let the cauteries be such as those which have been cauterized on the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the above cauterizations are not available to you, make three olive-sized large cauterizations, and let each of the cauterizations be as perfect as all the knees; and treat until it is sound.
de la dolor de la hainche	Of thigh pain
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes in the buttocks region, and this is due to coldness and moisture, and the patient has been treated as we have described for division and treatment of such cases without success, and the disease is old: therefore, it is necessary that you cleanse the body of thick fluids using stinking pills or other good-looking pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	After you perform the cautery; and regarding the method of the cautery it is according to two methods: that is to say combined hot medicines, and fire cautery.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Fire cautery is according to many ways, among which one is as follows: you should make three triangular cauterizations based on this form, and ensure good depth and largeness for each, leaving space the size of two between each one, and make them olive-shaped; no central cautery is done in the middle of the hip, so there are four according to this form:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see fit, apply the circle cautery that we have described previously in relation to the dislocation of the hip; but do it in such a way that the circles encompass the entire buttocks area and all parts of the flesh are heated.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is the way it's done in sciatica, when pain resides in the hip and doesn't reach up to the thigh or down to the leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if it comes up to the thigh and leg, apply two cauteries there where the patient says the pain keeps them, and a single cautery above the ankle four times, slightly on the left side; use knife-cautery techniques, and burn away the thickening of the blood clot. And if the patient feels that the pain extends up to four feet or close to five inches, cauterize where they feel the pain in three points or four at the 'point' marked cautery.
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if more work is needed, then do it accordingly; and if the pain spreads from the knee towards the thigh, perform a cauterization with the surgical or circular blade. Make sure to take great care in all your cauterizations so that you don't let up on burning until you've destroyed nerves and major arteries, and don't cause the patient any greater harm or constriction.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I have seen several who have done cautery on the ankle bone up to four feet, and they remained until their leg was swollen all over, and even their toes as well, becoming pierced and rotten throughout.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a stomach ailment that led to her death.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pains are in two parts together, make a cautery on each one, following this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And the sage instructed in the saddle cautery, which is as follows: Make it a piece of metal about the size of a small ox horn or slightly smaller, and place it diagonally between the parts, extending from one end to the other with space like that of a small rope's width. Have two diagonal supports spaced evenly apart and shaped somewhat like knots; ensure there's no bend in the iron piece being well-made; this is its shape:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And heat it until it turns completely red and emits steam, then place the heated rod on the afflicted part of the thigh, turning it towards the healthy side; apply one cautery operation at once to each side and leave the area for three days; then cover it with butter and keep the wound open as long as needed; continue treating with ointments until the wound heals.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasim says that we use very little of this type of cautery for the fear of his consideration, and we see few who use it; yet still, this is a good cautery, which one can tolerate, and leaves where it has been applied.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	The burning medical cauteries are such that you create an instrument with diagonal supports in which the edge of the door descends, made of metal or iron with one long side and at its height it has two notches, each having the size of a coin; they should be outwardly and upwardly placed, and join together according to this shape:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After placing on the buttock area of the lying patient towards their healthy side, and quickly place your hand near the buttock; afterwards spread between the two circles of the hot coal heated in a flame for one or ten minutes, then let the patient endure the heat and burn from it.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	For there are indeed the symptoms of burn as from fire; and when the burning subsides, lift your hand with the instrument and raise the buttock gently, and leave it like this for three days. Then put on butter until what remains black from the blistering is cured; and let him stay three more days till pus begins to form; and then that would be the next treatment following the ointment cure as long as he is well.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And if the pain has spread up to the thigh or down to the leg, then apply the tool that burns the body in accordance with what you did on the buttock even more; and this is the way of hot application, and I have written about it or discussed the correction of medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take alum and quicklime, equal amounts of each, grind them together, and mix them in a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	So that it has the size of a small burr such that the tip of a razor can enter; and put out of this pot into another pot well filled with water, and place the alum and lime underneath sweetly until there is enough powder above the powders that you will have held well in your hand; and leave it like this until all the liquid has run off and the dregs or water from the bottomed pot, then take all that mixture, and pour it over lime and on the alum as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	And then it will be liquid and administered in the form of mixtures of medicine and cauteries for other limbs. For it performs the same work as fire, and can also be used with other medicines such as tannisine, honey, anacardium (a type of nut), lime, all mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galen tells us about a treatment of which a horse was treated for the pain in his hip and the sciatic nerve pain, and all his limbs, and he says that no other treatment was done, and it cured him at once after this treatment, and he bathed as instructed below.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And it is said in this manner that you should take fresh and dry litargite (a type of ore), grind it finely together with a little fat, and apply it to the hip, thigh, and leg where the pain resides, and cover it. And leave it for three hours until the patient no longer feels the burning sensation.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then let them enter or bathe until their body is a little revivified, and have them lie down, and the pain will disappear completely and they will be healed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And know that no one must use such cautery with these remedies, if this is after the removal of worms.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And Galen states that when the sciatic vein is treated with donkey's urine, if it helps at all; and the cautery should be applied in this manner.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take sweat and mix it with old oil, then apply it to the hollow that is between the first toe of your foot and the other which is called the instep.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	After taking dried donkey hair, hold it over fire until it turns into charcoal, then apply it to the cloth and leave it until it is blackened; and repeat this process again, and keep doing this in this manner until you think by common sense that it will reach up to the hip, and that pain should subside; and this method of cautery is called "donkey hair cautery".
de la dolor dou dos	of the pain of the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether by fall or from percussion or due to excessive evacuation, or due to any semblance of cold spread material, none of these appearances warrant cauterization, because it's akin to what comes from an infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary to do this after the fact that the body has rid itself of foul pills or other such things, when one performs it on the back, at the spot where the pain persists, three lines marked by a cross, and in each line more than five cauterizations according to the power and quantity that the body can endure; and do the cauterization as per the 'point' cautery; and if you observe, perform three or four cauterizations at the mid-clavicular line following this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	This disease often befalls small children, and the signs of its beginning are that they appear pale when they stand up and faint; and you find in the last spinal segment of the back and also on us the appearance that comes over the other spinal segments.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this [condition] and observe its treatment, if you apply it with a blood cautery in the form that follows.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	If the cautery burns each part of the spine equally.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see this, apply the cautery between two or three lines on the spine with the burning tip of the cautery, making sure the points are close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After the treatment is done as long as it remains clean according to what we have said, and be cautious not to apply the cautery in places of weakness where nerves are located.
de la dolor des jointes	of the pain in joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When joint pain is caused by moisture spreading to every limb, and when the pain comes from the feet, which people call "gout" properly, and when it's due to cold reasons and cannot be cured with medicines, such can be treated with cauterizations in this manner: make the animal of cauterizations near the joint on the foot, and let the cauterizations be olive oil according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if it needs that you apply the heat on the abdomen below the foot, if you cause a burn over the entire area where we claim 'point'.
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if the pains extend to the knees and other joints, and this happens many times, if you have to apply heat on each knee three or four olive oil burns; and if needed more, do so, but don't remove your hand until the wound is thoroughly burned.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend as far as the knees and back, then one should apply the cautery as we have described in our chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	And if the pains are at the hands, make points in the armpit area II lines; and if there remains any pain in the arms, make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come up to the elbows or to the shoulders, cauterize each part, and take good care of the patient and apply remedies.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	And if you give them good care and cleanse phlegm, they will recover with the help of God.
de la routure dou syfac	from the rupture of the uterus
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When rupture occurs in the stomach and the intestines fall into the cervices (birth canal), this is new. It is necessary that when you see it being cured, do not remove it during day; and use things that relieve the belly, so that the insides descend from his belly; after make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to rub his anus until the intestines are repaired, then take them with your fingers, and pinch just under the rupture onto the bone of the knee, and have it look as if there is a sign halfway up the front, like half a circle above the chest; then heat the cautery to its form:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	As long as it is white and emits pus.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Then remove the bowels from their location; and have your attendants scrape his hand so it doesn't turn around; and work well on the thighs for the patient, and place one cloth under him at the knees and another under the buttocks, and another beneath his hands which you clean with them; then apply the cautery to every sign of it in all your hands, and hold them straight until you reach the bone, and if you don't reach the bone on the first try, start again one more time until you reach the bone; and be careful that the pus doesn't escape when you make the cautery; do not burn him; and thus ensure that the patient does not suffer, or any other harms.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And know that when you do not reach to the bone with the cautery, your operations are worth nothing.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And it is necessary that the cauteries for children be subtle according to their size, and likewise large people should have large ones according to their size. After three days, apply a balm with the fire cautery until the scorching is removed; after this, another ointment treatments until they are healed, and let the patient lie forty days on his back until the wound heals well; and it is necessary that these instructions be followed for some time so that the boils do not burst when he wishes to go into chambers.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	And after forty days, when he wants to get up, have him wear a well-made bandage and keep it on for another forty days; and have good rest, so that he doesn't overwork himself and avoids overeating or drinking too much, and avoid too loud shouting; and once he follows this advice, he will be completely healed.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I shall say about after the practice of cutting in his chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	of the rupture of the abdomen
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	When wounds come to other abdomens and are visible, and you notice they no longer grow, then apply the fire cautery according to its quantity, and use one-third of the full measure; after treating them as we have said; and none of the old ones advised that one should cauterize with the cautery at three angles according to this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	But the first sign is to mark where the edge enters and draw a line across the width of the wound, and another below it, and your hand rests with the tip of the cautery along the entire length.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cauterizations are lighter and more moist.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	from old pain in no member
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes to any limb, due to falling or injury, and this pain lasts for a long time, and medicine cure doesn't help, then it is necessary that it be cauterized with the cautery known as "points", and apply the cauterizations according to the length of the limb, its smallness and frailty, its utility, and its location of twists and its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If it is healed after the first cautery, that's good; if this does not work, start another cautery on this one, because such burns should make the member near which they are applied move, so you must perform the cauterizations until the disease is cured.
de meselerie	In amalgamation
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The mire is helped once by each cautery with great assistance, and similarly the disease that comes from the putrefaction of blood and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	Can you see the cautery? Prepare and take care so that the disease is at the beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and does not recur nor linger, and you doubt whether the corruption spreads throughout the diseased area, then do five cauterizations on the head: I apply them on the top from the nose, and the other towards the forehead at the end of the hair; and two on the two horns, and one behind on the cheekbones; and leave your hand so that the cauterizations go up to the bone, and until the scabs come out as much as the vapors of the thick humors can escape; and do it on the rest as before.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	And if the meseil is scattered everywhere; and it clearly manifests itself, so it's necessary that you cauterize using these cauteries that we have mentioned on the head, and one cauterization under each nose, and two cauteries along the spine from the neck, and seven along the spine of the back, and a large one over the kidneys and another in front, and two along the shoulders; and two across the ribs, and two along the tendons of the feet, and one on each joint of hands and feet, and in the cavities of the hands; and be careful not to burn any nerves that are behind the heel bone, so do not scorch them. And never make a cauterization over the bone at the elbow, and another over the bone of the stomach, and one more on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And know that the more I use the fire cautery, the more help I provide, and it benefits him; and know that patients do not feel any pain from the cautery as healthy ones would, because their bodies are already completely corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is necessary that the cauterizations be large and small according to the limbs and joints, as you will find in the manner of the iron's devices.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	Afterwards, wash the wound with flour and honey mixture and other treatments until it is healed.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When there is inflammation in any limb and it is treated with medicines, oils, and bandages, but remains diseased, then I make cauterizations on the limb according to the size of the limb; and have the cauterizations slightly penetrating into the root of the wound; then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And never is a cautery done with the hand and foot and back, at the exit of the nerve that paralyzes the limb, and thus such flesh is removed; and always no one should intervene if it isn't someone knowledgeable about limbs and the exits of moving nerves in the body.
de albaras	From balms
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease known as "albaras" progresses and medicine in the form of remedies proves ineffective, then apply heat from a cautery slightly over its surface, according to the thickness of the blood found there, until the pus is removed and the color changes; then clean with flour mixed with lentils and rose oil, plantain leaves, and blood from a sheepdog and an almond, each in their respective parts; mix all together, wrap it with a cloth, and leave on that part until it heals.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The treatment for the chancre by cautery
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When gangrene begins and you see it start to occur, if you catch it early, apply the cautery instrument that appears as a circle, all around the circumference of the gangrene.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And always, the wise advise to apply the cautery also at the center of the gangrene; and I do not find this good either, because I fear it might lead to ulceration and corruption, a situation I have already resolved not to encounter again; and more correct is that you should cauterize around it, using the cautery called 'circular', as we described earlier in terms of other types of cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of swelling that cannot die
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	When some have an illness which is called "adubelati", and it hesitates to die or due to the excess that it produces or due to old age in sickness when one is decrepit (meaning too old) and they have little blood, or due to weakness; and you see it hasten to die: then apply a cautery with small fires here and there. After this leave them alone like this.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	And it will hasten to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see that it penetrates the entire cauterization, then heat the cautery as described here:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And place your hand in the middle of this disease which is called "adubelati" while letting the cauterizing fires touch all sides, and make those fires such that the patient feels them to the outside in such a way that the process of decay is alleviated.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And after the cure as long as it has been made perfectly.
li cure dou feu par fer	The treatment with fire using a metal tool
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another way of disease is called 'corrodens', and it's no other thing than a member ailment, for it consumes limbs as if they were dry twigs.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	If you see this disease in the body that can endure fire cautery, then heat the limb-sized iron cauteries small and large, according to what is needed for each part of the body where the illness is; after cauterizing from all sides until you eradicate every corruption throughout, and leave nothing behind, ensuring that whatever has been corrupted is completely removed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	And then leave it for three days, and apply a broth with oil to the cauterized areas while the burn marks from the fire are healing, and address all the corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the treatment of ointments that produce pus.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if you see after three days that the healthy one doesn't grow, it's fine; and if this does not happen, then start using the cautery on what remains from the one corrupted in its original position.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	And this remedy has been cured by medicine in place of the fire cautery; but nonetheless, fire cautery is a greater help. I have already spoken about the cure for medicine fever in the section: take the quantity you need when required.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	The text discusses conditions that come with stones.
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Often, stones that come out during childbirth cause a disease called "cloacal" according to our understanding, and it is a large, bleeding mass on the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cauteries for this disease can be done in two ways.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	This means fire cautery, and hot water cautery.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	The fire cautery requires that you heat it up to the point where it becomes as hot as a goose feather, and it should be made of strong iron at a size that can capture nails from all directions, with delicate margins. After heating it thoroughly on the nail, turn your hand around the entire nail until it reaches the very tip; and leave it like this for three days until it begins to cause gangrene; then make an ointment from ground wild garlic mixed with oil and apply it as a paste over the whole night, and the nail will come out and be removed from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the area with ointment, ensuring it is not applied when it's dirty.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	And if they turn outside the nose and happen multiple times in fingers or on heels, you should take a hot cautery treatment; do it like this: use a spider's web or iron rod, or a goose feather, place them on the nail and the althelul (healing plant), meaning for warts. Place the stick so that its tip touches everywhere, then apply a bit of hot water, hold your hand well and press it in such a way that the tip of the stick reaches the root of the nail, and you can find that the hot water penetrates deeply to the root; let the patient endure a moment of the hot water's burning for an hour; then leave them like this, and they will be completely uprooted at their roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Proceed one after another like this until you have treated all those who are within your body, then cure the sores that generate pus.
li cure dou trembler	He heals by shaking
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When some shudder from cold or nerves, or from a quartan fever or another sickness, it is necessary that you apply four or five cauterizations on the spine of their back. One cauterization between each spinal bone; and one cauterization at the chest, under the olive-shaped cauterization; if they continue to shudder, hasten their recovery from the cold illness.
des pustules puans	pus-filled boils
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	None of these appear by the outward signs, or pus-filled sores that come from large putrid matter.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	When they appear, it is necessary at first, for each one of these sores: a subtle cautery made from the wood of myrtle, where its tip is held over fire, or from the long root of aristolochia, or using a lens-shaped cautery.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	And when they are cauterized in this way from the beginning, as indicated, and do not grow into further infections, but expel their excesses that cause them, becoming healthy. Yet it is necessary for this to be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	When the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many times great flows of blood from the artery that is cut at the wound come outwards or during incisions on an abscess, and similar things; it is much distressing to smell it.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And nevertheless, whenever this happens to no one, if you hasten to place your index finger on the wound of the vein and hold it as tightly as possible until his pulse is calmed under your finger, and that no more drops come out; then light several small and large olive oil cauteries until they are all red. Then take one or many according to the size of the wound and apply them where the artery was running, and place the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, and keep the cautery there until his pulse is fully restored.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it jumps out when you lift your finger from the vein, and the cauteries are extinguished, then quickly take another one of the cauterizing instruments that are at the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not cease to perform this one after the other until the tooth becomes black; and be careful that you do not burn the nerve which is beneath, and that no harm comes upon the patient; and know that when the tooth comes out of the artery, it cannot remain well even if the artery is large, unless this is done through one of these four methods that we have mentioned: by cautery, by extraction if it has not been treated already, by strong string tying, or by medicines placed upon it which have the power to harden blood; and let it be tied and restrained in due course.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Who will administer hardening through tightly binding with cloths or placing things that burn upon it, or similar actions, if they do not benefit in this way.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this happens to anyone and they have no means or medicine at hand, so they should place their index on the wound of the artery in the manner that we have said, and stretch it well until the area above the wound and above the artery is hardened; and do not move the finger but dampen it with cold water often as much as can be cold until the tooth becomes frozen and swollen and hardened. And prepare for cautery and medicines for what needs them.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	This begins the second book of treatments for surgery
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have told you in the first chapter all about every disease for which it is necessary to apply a fire cautery, or medicine that heats up, and we discussed their uses, causes, instruments, and forms of application; and I put that chapter dealing with the head until the feet, and now I will proceed in this chapter along the same route as those things are found more easily for what you want.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And as I begin this one, it is necessary for you to know that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first book about cautery, so here greater caution is needed.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in treating wounds, and extracting arrows, and cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I advise you not to undertake foolishness.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	And none of the ways of people come to treatments.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	if they come from those who suffered so much with their illness that they died lightly due to the foolishness they found in their sickness, and the great suffering of their disease; and one should have fear of these.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	And there is someone who gives their insight and says: "Wait, I am brave"; and the disease is spiteful.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	It is not fitting for you to agree with those who come to you in this manner, but place greater caution in your honor than in your covetousness, and do not hastily but wisely rely on what you are certain of and can know; and use prediction and indication in your treatments where health has been converted; and this will help you gain good reputation, glory, and enduring memory.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Dear child, Our Lords grant you good understanding and righteousness, and if you wish to aspire from the holy inspiration of their hand, Amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or I have instructed you this chapter by discussing chapter by chapter, according to what is before or the chapter on cauteries, which I discussed from head to heel, because you will find it easier for that which you will need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	full of water at its head
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	Know that this sickness comes very often to children at birth, and when the mother presses too hard on the head of the child; and it happens none other time because of some reason that cannot be identified.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I never saw this sickness happen outside of children, and among all those that I have seen, their death came quickly; and because of this, it seems to me that I should abandon the practice of this disease with such remedies.
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw one child of these, his shoulder was full of water, and the head swelled each day so much that it could not bear anymore; and he thought it to be too much moisture until he died, and this moisture is assembled right over the bone under the siphon, between the heart and the bone; and the veins are like this when the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and abscesses are small that you cut through the head a wide crack; and it's as long as two fingers, as long as the moisture flows; and see here the shape of the spathile:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is more extensive, and the abscesses are larger, make two cuts in the manner of a cross, according to this shape:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is under the bone, and the symptoms you see are that the corners of the head open on each side, and the water jumps when you press it from your hand inside, and this does not respond to treatment: then it is necessary that you make three cuts in the middle of the head according to this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after making an incision, remove all moisture completely outside.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	After holding the incisions of bandages and powders, and then applying wine and oil, leave it like this for up to five days; then remove the dressing, treat the wound with bandages and ointments, and allow the head to heal evenly. Finally, let the patient eat dry meat from a source that is free of moisture until the limb is comfortable and healthy.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another method of incision is that you look at where the large opening of the abscess is, and the assembly of the water; for it is not always in front; nor always behind; neither always on the right; nor always on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Cut accordingly where the abscess opens and the water filling it, making the incision according to what you can do, and watch that you do not cut the artery; let a flow of blood, so that the patient dies due to the loss of blood and evacuation of moisture.
de reume	Of cautery by fire, command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When it comes to any illness that is called "catarrh" affecting the eyes or at the bottom of them, and this sickness is ancient, and the medicine cure doesn't help, then the last resort treatment if is the cautery with which one cuts off the two main arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	Therefore, when you can see your patients again, have them take off their headwear; after that, rub the scalp with a coarse cloth until veins are visible. Then remove the patient's neck collar to accommodate all one piece of cloth; then observe where the pulse is taken, and examine both sides up to the ears, noting if they were previously pulsating; then mark their temples with chalk, then cover each side with a sharp cut from two parts, cutting until the bone is visible. This should be done considering the width of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see it, clamp the spatula over the artery and above it, cut also like two thumbs through.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, make the patient jump from above continuously outwardly.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not open to touch it, you should measure out the space of three fingers. Then press and push until you reach the bone; that is where one must remove six cosses, plus or minus a bit according to how the patient can tolerate it and the reformation of the artery. Afterward, inspect the wound: if there remains any part on the bone close to the syphacus [a specific medical term], and if the pus-filled abscess has not emerged from the opening you just made then compress the wound site, seal it up, apply ointment until fully healed.
de emigrainne	From sanding
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When old age comes and severe congestion occurs, due to moisture from tears and heat in the temples and ears that have been known for a long time and similar things. Medicine treatments are done using methods of medical cure and nothing of this benefits it. We extract the arteries in the temples and apply cauterization, as we have detailed.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the method of extracting them is that the patient sweats after their head hair, and listens to the artery that opens in the temple, for it opens well due to its pulsation, and responds only in some who are too cold; if she responds, then pull the neck with some cloths, then rub the area with a rough cloth, and warm water until the artery becomes visibly apparent; then take the sponge tool as described:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	Then slightly scrape the skin until you feel the artery, then pull it up with forceps and make sure to remove all of the tissues that are in the area from each part; if the artery is thin, then cut it at the tip of the little finger, after which take out and discard the parts corresponding to those two fingers.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it isn't cut, neither will escape all pain completely.
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And treat bleeding for two days and nights. And if the artery is large, you must bind it with two thicknesses of a strong silk thread for two days before, so that infection does not occur during wound healing and to prevent blood loss; then remove excess between the two threads at that same moment. If possible, apply the cut cautery up to the bone as long as the shoulder is cut; this is the surgical procedure if the patient doesn't have fever and has a warm complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For the cauterization helps to finish off moisture issues: because this is more effective against moisture compared to other methods.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	When it is necessary for the extraction of arteries, one must fill the wound with old cotton and place well-made wicks on top; and when they are removed, they should be treated with dried medicines that produce pus, and wicks, until cleanliness occurs; and if there is no artery to cut from them, you proceed as you would normally, then hurry to apply cauterization, or use the space of vitriol and tighten it in your hand so that the artery becomes hard. And if you don't have this available, you can place water on top until the artery freezes, and lift the cold water over it until it stops bleeding and is tightened as necessary; and the one that is softer and easier to extract from an artery should be cauterized with this cutting cautery across two parts, but make sure the cuts are well spaced to retain heat for a longer time.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instruments are too tight, they hold less of their heat.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And should have between the two knives an inch of space, and then when you are ready to apply the two edges, place the hot iron until it reaches the bone, and cut the vein in two places. And keep them separated by the two heads because there is no welding from this cautery across; and this is the shape of the cautery:
des larmes	of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears of the eyes are draining from the veins that are located on the back of the head's neck, and medicine doesn't provide any benefit for this ailment, you notice the skin turning red due to it, and feel or see sweating on the forehead as if in a fever; and when they are damp and wet such that the paper hair falls off, and the papers become heated, burned by the heat of the tears, this is where one needs this treatment.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	And they called the old "healer of injuries", and when you apply this treatment to the patient with this disease, let them have hair or front. Then make three cuts evenly on their forehead according to its length; make one cut as wide as two doves across the forehead starting from below and moving upwards until it reaches the nose. The other two cuts should be two as two doves long over each eye, making sure not to incise any of the arteries that are located above the eyes. Keep your hand away from the continuation of the two jaws; make each wound three doves wide across; have a piece of sponge and some cloths ready to wipe off the blood, then use a sharp tool from two sides as shown here for this form:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	From the incision that is below the temple up to the second incision; and peel off all the tissue in between the two cuts until you reach the membrane covering the bone, then continue cutting from the middle incision up to the other second cut, and then remove this pus.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	If you use the first opening tool which is called 'cultellaire', and it is very sharp on one side, while being blunt, not sharp, on the other side, and this tool has a shape:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And make the cut towards the inner flesh at the edge, and the bone cut towards the bone, and the blade until it feels at the half fracture.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And pierce all the vessels that descend from the head as veins until the cut is continuous up to this one opening at the edge, and then do another part along the middle fracture up to the other opening; and then extract the equal blood equally, and express the body with the blood taken; then place a piece of old cotton in each fracture, and put wet cloths covered with wine and oil and asphodel on them, and ensure that no pus appears; and on the third day loosen the bandage, and apply large quantities of water lilies, then take care with the ointment basilicon mixed with rose oil, and other treatments used for wounds until it heals.
dou reume des eulz	from the pus
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When to any sudden cough occurs habitually, and you see the eyes weak and small, and weakening of sight, and burned paper; and the hair falls out, and one sweats profusely from the forehead in a fever, and the patient experiences intermittent pain; then know through these incidents that those materials and that mucus come only from many veins, and the curative process underway is this.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And you instruct the patient behind their forehead, then make a large incision along the forehead, and another one slightly wider than an inch below it.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	Start from the temple on the left to the temple on the right with your incision, and let the cut go until it reaches the bone; keep your hand away from the nerves in the temples that move during eating. And when the bone is exposed, drain all the blood using a sponge. Then cleanse inside the wound between the two lips of the incision and put in old cotton, followed by linen. After that, cover with wet cloths soaked in wine and oil. Avoid cutting into anything unwanted; once it's taken out, you should rub the bone until cartilage begins to form, then clean it with desiccating substances, which encourage cartilage growth.
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this manner: take two parts of the flower of wheat and four parts of colofon, and make a plaster from them; and administer it to these wounds to promote cartilage growth everywhere.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	regarding ear piercing
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All that is found in the ears is one of the four things: grains, or beast, or mine stone or similar thing like iron; or seed, like beans, peas; or something discharging like water and oils and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When it comes to the hole in the ear or any other manner of thing that does not fit into the ear, nor grows within the ear, place the ear to the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	If you see the stone, if any violet oil or saffron oil drops out, then proceed with extraction; and have them inhale camphor, and block their nostrils when the inhalation comes, and place pieces of cloth or wool inside the ear; and hold the ear above.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	This treatment often fails; and if it does not work, then proceed with needle extraction, as follows:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it leaps out with the forceps, that's good; if not, proceed to extraction using a fine double curved needle; and if it doesn't leap out through this, make an arnica stick and pinch the tip of the stick or the ear's wick very hard, then plug the area around the wick with solid wax so that nothing can enter with the wick; then pull forcefully because many times it helps as we have said; and if it doesn't help in this manner either, take some glue from this and put a little tool to its point for doing this thing, and place a bit of cotton inside; then press the glue onto the stone or anything else, and pull forcefully.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if she does not allow these things that we have spoken about to take place, you must quickly pierce the ear in this manner so that pus and blood drain out, and muscle contractions follow. And the method for piercing is as follows: first prepare the patient with a cold application on the area of the head, then remove the blood according to the size of its strength, afterwards put the patient's head between your hands and turn the ear upwards, make a small cut in the root of the ear towards the fat that hangs down; and let the wound be like a crescent moon until you reach the bone. Then break the bone according to your ability, and suck it quickly into your mouth; continue treatment as long as it is healthy.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it's grains (probably referring to small infections or swellings) and they are present and cause swelling, you should administer an extraction; and if he cannot come out, then perform a fine incision according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	And perform the incision on that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But do not do this if you think the grains are wet due to the ear's moisture, until you have extracted many pieces; then remove them with fine needles and suction, as we said before, so that the extractions are gentle.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In an ear infection, then when someone sneezes in the ear, it is necessary for patients to perform some preliminary coughing actions, and widen their ear with old cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And let there be healing within that same ear where the infection is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If it jumps out into heaven, that's good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	If heaven doesn't allow it, take many stones according to their size and gently. Warm them slightly on fire and put one or several inside the ear of the patient, and blow them out from another foot, and strike with another stone against the stone in the ear; continue this action of one stone after another until all the infection comes out entirely, then it will jump out completely; if you can see, take a bit of wood and put one piece of shoulder into the ear, the other touch with fire until the more tender part of the wood is burnt. Then redo different pieces of wood until the entire infection has come out, as we have said about stones.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the extraction of worms, if they are small like fleas and similar creatures, treat them as we have explained in the division; but if they can be felt due to their large size, then perform worm extraction using forceps; this is the easier thing to remove from the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of tangled worms in the ears, if you're applying treatments as we have described in division and using distillation methods, but no cure is effective, then it's necessary to observe the ear with sunlight: if there are no worms visible, use fine forceps for removal; if nothing is visible, take this form of cane here that corresponds.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And make it narrow below and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	And place the finest needle in the ear according to the amount of suffering of the patient, then puncture through the entire canal; do this repeatedly until all the pus comes out.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if they do not want to come out, stuff the cotton wick in as I have said for stones in the ear canal; and if they do not penetrate like we have said, administer distilled liquids that the old ones tested in the treatment of worms, and you will find information on these distillations elsewhere; and if you distill your oils and medicines in the ear with this device, as shown here is how you should proceed:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And it should be made of silver or lead, being narrow at the bottom for .i. small openings and wide above to distill from; and for pressing inside the distillation use a well-made tool of lead suitable for this purpose, and if you see take a blade and wrap it around the end with cotton; then pour your oil or juice onto the wick, and what you see of your medicines in the wick, and let the wick be in the ear; then press within the blade all the cotton, and press your hand properly until the oil is distilled or when the ear feels relieved; and feel inside the patient, and do one portion of heated distillation as if it's being distilled into the ear; and make sure it’s not too cold, because the medicine wouldn't be so good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	regarding ear piercing
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born without any part missing in their ears; and this same thing happens to people due to wound impact or a fetus being born inside the ear. And these impacts often happen within the ear if it cannot be seen; and it does not occur twice, so one can see well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	Therefore, what comes inwardly, if one cannot see it, is due to grief in the process of healing from multiple conditions. And concerning this where we can see, you should put the ear close to the sunlight; and look inside: if you see the obvious pus, that which forms like this from the material within:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And do so and cut evenly in front and behind it all the way through, without hurting the ear; if the pus is from a fetus or a part of the ear, if you have subtle pincers, gently pinch it until that flesh is completely removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the earwax is far in the ear, take a fine, light probe and heat it slightly on the flame, then insert it into the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	If you notice the inflammation of which the ears feel irritated in hearing, gently pierce it and ensure that you do not injure the nerves of the ear; then place a tent into the ear according to the size of its opening, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do this every day until the wound is healed, or take an eardrum and stuff it with rose water ointment, and apply powdered vitriol. If you see swelling in the ear, you should remove the eardrum and replace it with another one that's moistened with a wick made of rose oil and beeswax, until all the swelling has disappeared; then treat it until it is clean.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if bleeding occurs, soak a cloth and wring out cold water, then place it on the ear, and apply other treatments that stop bleeding, which include therapies involving distillation processes.
de la char des papieres	From the ashes of the papers
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	When dealing with hairs that come from the eyes when they are wet and then dry, it's necessary to spread them out with tweezers and forceps, and take off their roots with a pincers. Then, place sulfur in the area where the vinegar is applied.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if they are not peeled off, apply a fine lens cautery to them and do the cauterization after incision; and repeatedly check, because nothing remains of their roots. And when they are cauterized with fire, those roots burn and don't return.
de la gresle	From the ice block
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Many times, in the sheets of parchment, there appear some things that seem to gleam with their form and texture, and because of this, it is called "hail" disease. This ailment is an assembly of large moisture on the surface and inside of the sheet; here are the actions: be cautious when the hail stays still from one side and another, and this is a simple thing to know; then cut it broadly, then lightly burn each part, afterwards pinch it, and scoop it out.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	If you can't cover it without piercing a bit of the paper, so long as it doesn't harm the patient; and if it tears greatly, stitch it together with one seam, and treat it until it is healed; and if it's small, don't apply force there, for the ointment will heal it quickly and promote new flesh.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the granule goes down inside the ear towards the upper part, invert the paper and there are granules on one forceps, extract and press from both sides; and if the paper is moved away by the incision, it doesn't harm anything; and when the granules have been extracted, wash out with salty water, and cure the wound until the patient's healing progresses.
de la graisse des eulz	of the grease of granules
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	Exinach is a grease that saturates the paper in its sheets; this happens more often with children than adults, and it doesn't harm their eyes much; they experience weeping catharre in the mornings, and cannot look at the sun's light because tears quickly accumulate in their eyes. Thus, they lie down in their diapers right away, sleep on them, and have their papers moist under their eyelashes; as a result, the Exinach appears and changes their appearance, spreading within the eye upon opening it.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press the hand with your fingers and feel the exit between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the method of this treatment is such that the patient places their head in your healthy area. Then take one linen sheet and set up a tent in manner of a circle according to the quantity that contains extraction from each part, then place it; and press with your fingers on both sides so that the extraction be assembled within the circle. Then make a cut through the wetness in the middle of the moist area, creating an opening of the length, not more than the wound as we do for cutting a vein; and make the leather fit perfectly until you see the extraction through it; and in various arrangements comes out the extraction from the opening according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Extract it then as one piece of coarse cloth between your fingers at the front, and turn your hand to the right and left until it is scattered; make sure you do not stick in the opening, that you do not come up to all the inside skin till the eye, that you do not hurt it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the incision doesn't open at the beginning of the cut, increase the cut gently until it opens; then pull it as we have said, then moisten with cloths and water, and place on the wound, and strain with wrappings.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if there are such places where they grind flax and place it to corrupt that moisture which has remained.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the treatment should be continued as long as he is sane.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there appears an abscess in the hand, then the treatment with plasters should continue as long as he is sane.
des poilz des papieres	"Des poils de papier" translates to "paper hairs". This phrase might be used metaphorically or in a technical context depending on the broader context of the text. Without additional context, this could refer to fine threads or fibers that resemble hairs from paper.
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When hair grows on the face in a manner not natural and as it ages, these hairs can cause trouble for the eyes and lead to various illnesses such as watering eyes, papillary swelling of the eye area, and albuminuria; all this is due to damage caused by the hair. And here is how one should treat: through a method involving fire (cautery), or with medicinal waters according to what was discussed in the chapter about cauterization methods, or it can be done through incision and suturing, or with threads, following what I will explain next.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	It is necessary for you to place the head of the eye in its healthy position, then turn over the paper of the eye with your left hand; if it turns correctly, that's good; otherwise, if not, you should pierce one thread at each of the two ends. And do this either inside the margin where hair grows or right above these hairs on the paper. Then draw the second thread across all the paper, and turn them over with a rasp tool. Afterward cut through the part under the paper, under the adjusted hairs, until you reach the corner; then extract one thread, insert a small cotton tent and lace inside the paper, then mark an engraving on the paper like a bay leaf pattern. It is also necessary that the figure matches the size of the raised area of the paper as it's marked for all.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	And if there's part of it that requires handling with great quantity according to how the paper becomes soft; then do so over the entire spatula on the two lines you have indicated, and start with the large oil jar until it gets smaller; and make a fissure near the natural hairs in the growth size of a root, then place an ounce at one of the two corners of the keel, then burn everything else; then join the two lips into a stitch with a fine thread on all one needle made of wool, and let blood out, and let dry the excess threads on both sides of the stitches if you see fit to do this; and if not, don't worry about it, then leave the stitches and threads for three or four days; then treat the wound without stitches with dried and binding substances because the paper heals due to the adhesion of the wound and assembly of it, but the stitch gets moist (as was said by the old ones), and this work is without fear; and there's another way: you engrave the paper into a figure that is as like the leaf of myrtle, as we have recounted, with three ounces removed according to the form which is here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	And cut that which crowns the lesser powers evenly according to the form which is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	And if you do not have the strength to hold the forceps, and the object is not even, then take a needle with thread, and insert it through the center of the object; and pull out another strand from a large hole, and the second strand from a small hole. Then lift your hand evenly, lifting all the skin above where you have incised, as we have described before, then suture the two sides of the wound together by suturing them. The cure should only be applied when it is clean. And if pus appears at your incision site, then apply ointment and soothing balm to it. And every time the paper hair turns out: you should use what we have said about incisions; but the suture in one or both areas becomes more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The treatment of canes follows this form: and it is that you should convert the paper and make a cut according to what I have said, then create two canes by art, and two small stitches as well; they should be long enough compared to the paper width, taking into account the thickness of the membrane covering the eye. Cut off two parts from each end of the thread; afterwards, skillfully assemble these two small stitches under the part that protrudes out of the paper of the eye, then pull apart the two canes in both directions and shape them accordingly; leave it like this for a few days, the skin that has been tautened will soften and heal completely until it comes out naturally.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it takes time, and the object has certain forces, then treat it until it is clean. And when the wound is healed, and the paper is lifted, and no longer hair will grow; this is the form of the two strings you will make according to this figure, and according to this length and width.
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	The surgical procedures are as follows: you should take a delicate needle and bind two threads of silk that are fine and smooth, then attach the shoulder's head parts by carefully knotting them together. Make sure the thread lengths measure roughly one hand span in length; next, prepare another short piece of silky thread to tie around the head firmly. Put the patient back into their healthy position and ensure sunlight reaches all areas for clarity; this is because it involves intricate details and small actions. Insert the needle to its end near the root of the hair, piercing through paper rapidly while you pull it up from natural hair above it; then extract hair until reaching the tip of the thread in the paper, and firmly tie that hair within the hole if there are one or two hairs present or more. Remove your hand as soon as the hairs appear fully out of the paper along with their natural hair length.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the groove is treated and the hairs do not come out with it, you should pull the groove from its opposite side until all the thread you have ordered is used, as long as the groove goes beyond halfway up and you can see it through your eye's vision; then remove the groove and the thread, and leave the eye closed for two days or three, until the hair grows back to its original place and new flesh forms above; and if the hairs are small, accompany one long hair from a sheep naturally, and lift it along with that or let it hang until it has grown longer, then tie it.
de la porriture de l’oil	Regarding the corruption of the eye
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	When this illness, called 'congestion' or 'decay', comes to the eye, if it can occur in two ways: one naturally and the other unnaturally.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And happens suddenly from wounds or cuts, or from cauterization, and by similar actions.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And the way to perform it is that you cut open this bond, and open the skin of the affected area, and insert linen wadding inside, and leave it until it heals; and you should not use in its treatment any things that dry up and restrict.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	But if you do this, the disease will come back worse than before; however, use remedies that soften things, like fenugreek; and apply aloe water or vinegar with linen seeds cooked in it, and oil from any other source, and wrap him in a tent, and treat him accordingly.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasures of your cure are that you must beware not to seal it according to its former shape; and these works which we have spoken of are not out of remedies for this illness, so as to not return according to its former shape.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	Of the fluid which comes in the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease, which truly is called "axacrati", and it is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	Accidents come from wounds, splits and cautery, and similar things. The way to perform this involves using a needle with a double thread, inserting it into the flesh, and making the needle pierce through on the left eyelid as if aiming for the right eye; such that the threads go in two parts of the flesh. Then the flesh rests above the entire length of the needle, and there is enough space at the tip to widen.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the figure on the paper matches what is supposed to be done, it's good. If not, take a piece of paper and put it in the split, then turn the paper over and make two splits within the paper. The ends of these two splits should form the two corners of your cut when joined together; so that the figure on the paper looks like the figure of a letter which has 'I griesche' (a specific handwritten script). Then remove the flesh according to how many layers it is and from where, starting with where you started the paper cuts. After that, adjust these two sections which are now separated by the cut threads using thread needle. Then apply the treatment as we have spoken about for softening medicines and bandages until it's healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the illness is due to a cut or suture or cautery, it should be that you make an incision full of the hairs on the paper, and according to what was said before; then cut between the two sheets with one knife, as I have said; and must perform the operation according to the shape of the illness, for she is much varied in shape, and the wise surgeons equip themselves everywhere so that they know how to make the figure return to its natural form; and the patients themselves, according to what needs to be done and instruments can be in various positions.
dou soudement de la papiere	right away from the paper
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this stitch happens with hands in such a way that the paper above is sealed with the white of the egg, and cannot move or do its natural actions, then you should put the tip of a razor under the paper and lift it up; and stretch it using pincers until you can touch the subtle pulp underneath which should neither be too thick nor too thin, so that the patient doesn't suffer from an overly thick pulp causing irritation to the eye; make your incision carefully on the assembled area, ensuring the paper heals according to its natural form; heal all the assembled part and do not ever put in any sharp salt water in the eye, but instead lift it with fresh water and a colander; then place between the paper and the eye a linen tent, and put wet wool on the eye; afterwards for several days apply oil and other soothing treatments until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	From the eyelid of the eye
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	Know that the eyelash can be done in two ways: it is nervous and resembles a hard wax, and another which isn't nerveless but seems like frozen moisture. When one touches it with iron and cares for it using forceps, it cannot; both of these appearances start near the large tear duct, grow slowly and slowly until they cover all the eye, all the light, and the movement of the eye.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the method of incision is such that you place your patient's eyelid in its healthy position, then open up the eyes. Lift the paper with your hand, and then pull out the nail with small forceps; proceed to cut above it. Then take a needle and insert two horse hairs or one hair from a cow or ox, along with strong thread. Double the needle point slightly and insert it into the nail, piercing all of the way through, and secure the nail with thread and place it above. Then burn all the way across the side of the nail which is under the eyelid and the silk hairs until you reach the root at the tear duct, leaving only the most delicate parts of the mucous membrane and using fine force. Let nature take care of the eye-liner region so that the usual tears do not leak out through the incision; and then merely extend the nail to the corner alone and thread, as we have said; then burn away all the mucus from this point forward, which is where this form begins:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And make sure that the pincers do not touch the fleshy cloth and break it, and that the pliers are not pierced. And after incision, pour a little powder into the eye, then make a bracelet of bismuth, and leave it until another day; then cure as it requires when he is well.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail is not nervous and you cannot push the needle in, and the cuticles do not enter, many times this semblance of a nail made from medicines is cured; and grows as I have told you in the division, and if it appears thickened, the eye sees by the disease, take the pincers slightly sharp according to this form.
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And cut the nail gently from above, and if you see that it does not thin at all and the reason presses it, then distill from your mouth into the eye a bracelet made of bismuth and a red bracelet and some powder, and cover the eye until another day; then start the next work according to this same process, until everything is extracted.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If there is nothing contrary to your sight, for instance abscesses, then proceed, and first treat the abscess by cutting it open until it's clean. Then resume your work as before, until it is clean.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh at the eyelid affects the eye by great harm, then suspend it with vinegar, and cut out a part but not entirely, so that no tears come forth; then apply red oil to the eye which is made from litharge.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	from the flesh that grows at the pupil
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	Hair of some men is born with redness, covering the eyelid and fixed on papers, and resembles a rose in color; and in this way the eye moves. The treatment involves when the patient's head fits into healthy position, then move the eyes, and do all that part of tissue as necessary for this task, and sustain it under force; then remove the first tissue layer, and shave continuously to completion while you protect the eye from injury; ensure that incision is done delicately like in the clipping of nails or removal of small bones, as shown after this chapter's description; and when the incision has been completed and all tissues removed, apply olive oil with red distillation or similar corrosive medicines to the outer part of the eye; place cotton with hard-boiled egg on the eye if it is warm for the purpose of applying soothing to hot pus. If no response comes and there are no pus discharges, should you suspect hot pus, leave the eye as it is and treat any pus with soothing methods; then return to your work until healing has been achieved, thereby making all tissues fit in the eye through this process.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But still it is necessary that you treat the cure of each weak oil in its natural way; and also for accidents in the way, in iron work; and do not insert your hand into any of these works until you see that this member endures that work.
des voines des eulz	of veins and eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	When the veins are red and covered over the eye, and tolerate their work on the sight and weaken the eye for several days.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	Therefore, at the first, you must observe where the eye is, in which the disquietude [sebel] lies, and apart from that there is no other illness than this; then treat it thus: instruct the patient to place their head on your healthy part, then suspend those veins across all arteries according to their judgment, and let the arteries be finely doubled following this shape.
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And let there be two inches by degrees in one corner following this shape:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then perform this operation by carefully suspending those veins, and let the blood flow after another hour, until you see those veins being removed from the eye; make sure not to cut into the eye with the tips of the spatulas. Perform this procedure at noon in front of the sun, and be very meticulous in your work so as not to remove more than just these veins. Once you have done this, apply a colloid of green and red color to the eye to decompose what remains from the sebel.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you do not have the ability to perform all of this in that time, then make a poultice from things that soothe the pain in the eyes and leave it on for some days until the pain is soothed and assured free of pus, then resume according to this method as was mentioned before until it is healed; and this is the form of strength:
de la fistule de l’oil	of the tear duct of the eye
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The treatment for what is called "arissati" fistula: when you cure it with a cautery and by means of hot water medicine as I have said before, and if it's not fully healed, then there's a method in cutting above the abscess, at its place where it should die, and draw out all the moisture until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is exposed, and you will see corruption and darkness, if you remove it with all the tool which this text describes; and name it "hard head", and make it of iron to about one inch in thickness, and point it like a file as it is presented here.
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And place the corrupted part of the bone under your hand, then press your fingers on it until you know that this corruption has been removed; and do this once, then return the area with medicines for drying.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	When the veins are sewn up, and the heart starts to grow, and the skin of the bow is sewn up, and remains like this for forty days, and does not heal or get infected, nor do any bad accidents occur, you know it's healed; if that doesn't happen, there is no other way than to bring back the fistula to its original position along these lines: and when you uncover the bone for the second time with a blade, and with water medicines, and when it has been uncovered, take the cut according to this shape, and place the iron joint at three angles, and the shaft is thinned until it reaches the head as shown here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then place it on the bone at the corner of the eye, and keep your hand away from the nose a little bit. Then move your whole arm until it pierces the bone and you feel the pain in the body where the wind passes through if he holds his hand on his neck; then return the part to dry medicines as I have taught you, and when the pulse appears and hardens the parts, let the substance go towards the nose; if there is a lighter thing in the body for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	from the passage of the eye
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the eyelashes open completely and there is no disturbance in the heart or diminishment, it is necessary that you bind the patient; then heal him, then apply suction cups or a suction device without piercing to draw out blood, then place on the eye .i. an incision made from myrrh and aloes and frankincense and sarsaparilla, and then strain the eye, and plaster it with bands and cloths; and the way of the cloths is that you take cloths quite soft enough and fold each one in half four times, and then place them on top of each other according to how many inches the eyelashes require. Then strain over it from above with a hard band formed, and repeat suction without piercing; then remove the suction cups and let the eye be strained day and night until the bandages loosen, if necessary, you should strain the area quite firmly; then remove the bandage after day and night, and if you see that the eye is healed, it is good; if not; then continue with plastering and cloths and the bandage and suction cups until he is fully recovered.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	From the bursting of a vitreous membrane
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When disruptions occur in the vitreous membrane, then it opens and contains pieces like a grain of resin, which is hard to see; so if you look closely at this, the operations are as follows: you would poke an opening into the part below the eye up to that point, then poke another hole with one thread from the part behind the eyelid. And make the punctures, and let the first needle follow the arrangement; then cut out a part of the vitreous body with the double thread and tie it around inside, tightly, then remove the needle and place greased wool on the eye; and leave it until the thread breaks along with the vitreous substance, then cure the eye with soothing things until the wound is healed; and not once should a wound be left restrained by the vitreous body each part of a circle of cloth, until she is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eyes have a significant appearance, then pierce through the delicate watery part that comes from under the eye, and remove the moist albumen and let it go down on the vitreous substance, and enter into this place immediately; then extract until it is healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	By the way of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	This disease known as "alcunnati" is not cured simply by the oil that gathers in the ear, resembling water flowing down, and this isn't actual water; and the way to see its effect is such that you have the patient sit on a chair and straighten themselves, then hold their head with both hands from two sides, and move them until you see the oil come up above your nose; then it should be removed, not let descend again, nor scatter light, and observe all the things as they were; and if it doesn't ascend immediately, know that it is water, and when the descent of the oil isn't apparent like we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you have the patient sit between your hands, then take the delicate saphene vein and make cuts along the corneous membrane on the inner side of the knee joint up until it exits; and once it has exited, if you pour in hot water from an eye, mixed with honey, or hot water that has been boiled with fenugreek leaves and honey, then apply other treatments until she is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	Of the tears of the eye
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	We have the appearances of the waters in the division, and what needs to be pierced; we carry out the work according to health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	It is necessary that you have the patient sit with their head between your crossed hands, away from light for the sun, and tie the healthy eye tightly; then place the paper of the eye on your left hand where the eyes are together, or on your right hand if they are apart. Then take in your right hand (if the eyes are together) the tool called 'almagda', or with your left hand (if the eyes are apart), and position the tip of the tool below the corona by about the thickness of a finger in that part under the eye's inner corner, then push the tool called 'almagda' firmly, and twist your hand until it pierces through the inner corner of the eye, and you feel that almagda reaches into the empty thing; and it is necessary that the size of the path of almagda matches the size of the space which begins from under the eyelid to the end of the dark part; this is the cornea of the eye; if you see bone in that paper due to the transparency of the corneous membrane, then place the tool until it reaches where the water is or where the eye is, and expel by another way one after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	Let the waters fall now, so the patient sees his wounds before him and the tool in their eye.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	After the rest, I placed him slightly. And when the water ascends in the second canal, apply force with the tool, and once it is firmly in place and does not ascend further, gently pull out the eye ball by rotating your hand 'poc' (slightly) repeatedly; then add a little bit of powdered pearl water to the oil and extract the eye from within.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then place the oil-soaked bandage or wet wool in oil on top and plentifully with an egg, and bind it with healthy oil.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	Yes, and those of our time, let's use common broth with plenty of eggs.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if it cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, for there are people who have too hard eyes, then it is necessary that you take the tool called 'alberit', whose form here is specified:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And puncture only the conjunctiva, do not go too far inward but make it subtle. Then apply the pearl powder as we have said; and upon completion of the work, provide the patient with rest in a place where they can sleep on their back. Make sure to avoid all movements, eat light meats, and do not move their head either to the right or left. Secure them according to their position until mid-day. Then release them in that same dark room, observe their vision, let them see some things, then reapply the bandage until seven days; it should not be done during the healing process or after the incision now, but you must do this because the water rises quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	Blood boils up at the incision of pus. And after seven days, you should release the eye in front of the eighth day, and use the remedy for abscess drainage; and when it is healed, then release the vision and place an eyebrow on his face I orilliet to cover one day, and stay in that dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	And then leaves the house little by little, and adapts to his situation; know that no students should meddle in such a case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one came to us from the Marches, who told us that among them they practiced bloodletting by means of a needle, through which water was sucked, but I never saw any like this in our land, nor did I ever read about it in ancient books; and perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the appearances of the forms of almagda, for those who do not know them see them; and they belong to arsenic properly:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And it is the head of this very subtlety, and the last one in three corners sickle-shaped.
de la char sor le neis	from the flesh of the nose
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	None times are born or have mixed various creatures, of which some seem to be scorpions with the legs of birds; and if there are such cases or if a creature is painted with a red color, and if it has flesh of good color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	In the case of these creatures that are flesh-colored but not painted, it is necessary to make the patient sit between your hands against the sun; work on their nostrils, and pour vinegar over those creatures, and drive them out. Proceed as you can sustain a thin sharp edge on one side until you know that this creature has completely ossified.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if there is nothing left that we can't take, then open it all up with two fine, light instruments, ensuring there's nothing remaining; and if you don't exceed your strength or encounter an abscess, treat it as required; and if they are malignant ulcers, hasten and cauterize them until the pus stops flowing and all the hairs are removed. Then remove or excise easily either with water or vinegar.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	Cutting the nose, and moisture coming up to the palate until it reaches the throat, you should know that it is blood; and if the moisture does not break in the right way, you should understand there's new flesh on the bone above, which stops the tools from cutting: then you need to take a linen thread somewhat thick, tie its ends with your hands, and leave an inch or less of space between each knot; and insert this thread through the nostril into the nose of the patient as far as it can go, and pull it out smelling good until it comes out from within the nostril in the mouth; children do many times such exercises at school, and it's a simple task for whoever wants to perform it. Then hold the head that comes out through the nostril with one hand, and the other head coming through the mouth with the other hand, know them in succession while being close to us who are holding the thread.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	Do this until you know that the new has corrupted that flesh, then draw out the child, drain the blood, and moisten the thread in Egyptian salve, and place it back at its previous location; do this for three days or more, as long as the ointments consume all the remained of flesh; and afterwards put a line of opium for some days until it heals, and if there is need for dried medicines, use them; and this is how to prepare the instrument for purging the head, on which one distills oils and medicines or vinegar.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And use silver or lead, resembling an open lamp, like a cane, and guide it in the same way; and if you see fit, make a closed cane, and fill these tools to clean out the head; and have one hand for holding the head when heating the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	from the flesh of the nose
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times in the head there arises a disease called "telul", it grows and becomes large to look at; because of this you should cut it off at the beginning, and remove all bone, then put on the head the cautery or hot medicine; and if you delay cutting until it is large, when it is hard, notice if it has turned color, lost sensation: do not touch it with iron as there's an abscess inside; because once cut, great harm can come to the patient. And if the abscess is due to heat touch, not from changed color, and you see that it can be completely cut off, let the patient bleed freely under fear, and cure him of dry things and restraining substances.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	When the nose is cut and sewn
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Know that when the solutions of continuation come into one of these venous valves, they benefit little, for in some people.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Thus it is necessary that this not happen to anyone else. If the wound is fresh all over with its blood; then adjust the two lips with a stitch and treat until healed. And if the lips are dry on both sides, it should be scorched thoroughly from all parts of their keur until they heal, then join the two lips with a stitch, bandage them tightly, and apply powdered dragon's blood and incense. Then cover these powders with a piece of plaster or another welding plaster, let it heal by itself through discharge, and rub with ointment until healed.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The method of stitching is that you assemble the solution: or with needles, as we have said in the stomach stitch; or with thread, which I have shown you.
des apostemes des levres	Of abscesses on the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	In the mouth, within the lips there are abscesses that are hard like grains, smaller and larger in size. Therefore, you should open the lips and cut into each lump individually, then remove them with forceps from every part; afterwards, apply the mouth to a vitriol incision until the pus is drained out completely; then empty it gently, and clean the mouth of dry things until it heals fully.
de la char des gencives	Of the flesh of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times, a whitish substance is born on the gums, which the old called "albulus"; it must be held in tweezers and cut at its root. Allow blood or blood to flow out of the wound; then place on the site with vitriol powder, or other drying and constricting powders. If that flesh returns after cutting, and does so many times, if it is cut a second time, and cauterize: if it doesn't return after the cautering; these are the forms of substances used to cut.
des sordens	of the stinks
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Many times they are assembled at the head of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, where the skins are ugly and rough; and many times the tooth becomes black and yellow with wormholes until corruption reaches the gum, making the tooth stink; it is necessary to hold the patient in your hands and his head so that you can see the teeth or the skin appear, until nothing remains. And thus make it smelly and green, yellowish and other colors, until they are removed; if what is extracted at the first attempt is suitable, it's good; otherwise, start again from the second day to the third, until you have everything out. Know that each tooth requires different cutting instruments for extraction according to its work shown by the dentist, as the remover of teeth outside the teeth has other forms than those used between the teeth; and these forms and others should be with you ready.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	When you treat someone for toothache pain, delay the extraction as long as possible because doing so is not bad; indeed, it's a very high substance up to this point where there should be no excuse for removing it.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Then when the patient is forced to undergo treatment, it must be ensured that you are aware of where to prick.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Many times the pain causes concern to the patient and it should be understood whether its a toothache or not. If it's dental pain, make sure you prick well on the healthy tooth; however, do not let the pain leave until the cause is removed completely, as we have already instructed for these soldiers. And when you're certain about the tooth causing discomfort, then you must apply heat inside the tooth up to a single spasm, ensuring it affects all parts of the gum. Then move your hands or with your fine forceps to the first pinch and pinch until it is fully heated; afterwards secure well the forceps. And place the head of the pain in your holy between your knees, make sure it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After extracting the right tooth without breaking it, and if there is no force exerted, take none of these tools and insert them gently from each side, and move it as you did previously.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	And if the tooth is pierced and broken inside, you should fill it with wadding where it was damaged; and if you retract it slightly with tongs, making sure not to break it during the process; and you must carefully open under the gum in order to remove the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And make sure you do not break it while doing this, and leave a part of it, causing the patient more pain from the root than at first due to the mischief.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And be careful not to do it like the ignorant surgeons who break the tooth in haste and through their boldness, causing more pain every time than necessary. Instead, follow our advice as we have explained: they bring this great disease by cutting into the roots that remain, or by breaking the tooth itself, which is often the case; and when the tooth has been pulled, wash the area with wine or vinegar and salt; if bleeding occurs, which it often does, then use vitriol to clean the area; and if that doesn't work, cauterize the area.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The tools you use to pull out the teeth, which come into contact with the tooth first, should have long points and thick handles, so they do not bend when you are pulling a tooth; these are the types of tools:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And may have thick limbs that do not bend when pulling, and they should be made of well-crafted iron, and should have teeth for gripping during use.
de la racine des dens	From the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	When the root remains during the operation, it is necessary to put moistened cotton with butter under it for a day or two.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	Until the thighs are softened, then hold the pliers called "algefri," which make the cuts appear as if they were well cared for; and do it like a file, that is their shape.
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out with all these forceps, it is necessary that you expose the entire flesh around the root, and put in the tool called "althali", which is known as pincers, this is its form:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And make it strong and large enough so that it doesn't break at all, and if the root jumps out through this, it is good; if not, use all tools, as their forms come after:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if one uses this tool which has two prongs, of which here is the form:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	And other tools that are positioned before in the row of teeth, and with this tool that looks like a large pair of forceps, here is its form:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And may these tools be such that they cannot be broken, and know that many instruments for teeth exist; and similarly with other tools which are not numbered; and let the wise master find his own instrument by himself, according to what his tasks and illnesses demonstrate to him. For there are parts of diseases where the old ones did not teach any tool because of the diversity among these, and if they break nothing from the caries or of other bones, or if it rots, then he seeks for the tools that suit him, which I have told you about, and aids in gestures, here is its form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And let them be large and well holding for keeping the bone, so it does not escape, but can keep and remove it; and then restore the site with medicines suitable to this, and if there is rot in the bone, and if it is small, then take all of this instrument to retrieve it.
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the tooth appears not according to its natural form, and its shape is ugly, especially in maiden women, you should know if this tooth has been born after the real tooth, and it's not straight; then you can't file or grind it. Therefore remove it; and if it is mixed with the real tooth, take this instrument that is described here which has a form like half of a small beak, and made of sharp iron.
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the file grinds slowly in your hands due to the hardness of the tooth, and because you don't move the others; and if it is visible that one can grind it, then use a single piece file as described here:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	And similarly to how one makes needles with the steel from nails; and by grinding down a tooth gently in short bursts, so that it does not move until it is thin; then in the end grind away completely without leaving any burr. And if the edge is too sharp and hurts the tongue, then you must smooth down the roughness of the edge until it is even, so as not to hurt the tongue nor corrupt speech.
quant li dent lochent	When the tooth becomes dull
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	When the tooth in front is removed, whether through percussion or impact, and the patient cannot press it with what they eat so that it doesn't bleed, and you have treated them with restraining medicines, and this isn't enough; if you need to restrain it with gold thread, because silver threads turn green and rot, but gold never changes. And the thread should be neither too thin nor too thick, according to the size of the space between the teeth; and if you see that the teeth are fitting together, take the thread and the double end between two healthy teeth, then place the removed teeth between the diseased teeth, if there is one or more, until you can comfortably reach the healthy tooth on the other side; then continue covering up to the part where you inserted it, and pull your hand skillfully and carefully, so that it doesn't move at all; and tie your thread at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	Then hold the teeth with a thread using some forceps, and join them together, then place them between the healthy tooth and its socket. Place it so that it doesn't irritate the tongue; then leave it like this as tight as possible without causing pain. If they move or the thread breaks, use another thread to fix them in place. If it stays and serves well throughout its time, this is how teeth are supposed to look and fit between two healthy teeth, as you can see.
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth is dislocated, if it's returned to its place, again and again, as we've said; and do not interfere with someone who isn't a professional or suffers from pain, and each time shape it like an osine (a type of bone) tooth, and put it in the position where the defect is, and hold it like we've said, and remains and serves thus for as long as needed.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	of covering the wound on the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	None of the ligaments that come from under the tongue or are natural to birth originate like this; or by accident in a wound that is stitched together. The procedures are as follows: you work on opening the mouth with the aid of the tongue, and hold your head above the healthy side, lifting the tongue; then cut the nerve ligament sufficiently wide until the tongue has moved from its place, and if there's stiffness or swelling, it's due to sudden trauma; if necessary, insert an uncinate into this area and cut off that particular ligament; remember not to let the cut be too high as there is an artery beneath; once you've completed your work, take away something of a pinkish hue or cool water, then place a linen bandage under the tongue for each night until the ligaments can no longer stick.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	And if blood flow is present, place the glass tube in its place; and if it fails to stop with this method, cauterize with the slow cautery iron, which suits such situations well; then proceed with other treatments until he stabilizes.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it being of any color or black or hard, such that the patient doesn't feel it, and doesn't touch it either, because it's a chancre; and if it has started to turn to blenchor, and there is moisture, if pus secretes, and one cuts with a fine needle, and discharges from both sides; and if it refuses you in your operation, then apply vitriol oil until it is completely cleaned out. Then return to your operation as long as you're removing all the force. Then raise the limb from the side and the heel, and treat it with other remedies until it heals.
des apostemes de la gorge	of the abscesses in the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	No matter comes within the throat cavities which are called "godath", and they are properly referred to as two almond-like structures. When you treat them, as we mentioned in section division, and if they do not stabilize; be careful: if it's hard pus with a small sensation and fusiform color, don't touch them even lightly with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if they're red and the root is large, don't touch them with iron for blood flow reasons; but leave it until it heals, then you will remove it, or it would break on its own. And if their color is whitish, and the root is slender, prepare your tool to cover, but first make sure the pus has settled and calmed down.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Therefore make the patient stand in front of the sun, and let him breathe evenly, and have his hands on his stomach, and have him open his mouth and hold his foreman's hand between his palms, pressing the tongue down to all the instrument, as it is shown; and may be made of silver or fine brass just like knives.
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	Can you press the tongue to all this instrument and see the abscess, if one takes an ounce and puts it into the almond, and moves it above as much as you can; and removes nothing from the threads with it. Then control the tool, from which this is shaped, like some strength; and always make the head bent, and each to its place, and are very sharp, and made of iron or steel:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you don't have this instrument now, take the tool from which this is shaped:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	And be it sharp on both sides and named; and when you have done one almond cut, do the other in the same manner, and after incision gargle the patient with hot water, or water that is hot and easy to drink, and if bleeding occurs, gargle with hot water, or with cooked currant almonds, or bay leaf, or similar things, until the wound has healed; then treat them until they are well; and let no new abscesses form in the throat other than the two almonds, so cut them accordingly.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And I treated a woman with an abscess that was inside her throat, which is known as the small abscess; and had nearly completely sealed off all of her throat passage, so that the woman could not breathe due to the blocked pathway, nor could she eat or drink, resulting in her death if she continued like this for one or two days.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	The abscess was so high up that it had been placed two inches from the mouth.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	I acted quickly then, and inserted an incision in one side, after which the other was cut out, with a large portion of the wound removed. Then made another incision on the opposite side near the nose, and opened it up to allow for mouth opening; afterwards put the incision back together again while pressing on the tongue; subsequently inserted the incision into the abscesses, and took away some part, from which only a little blood escaped; and thus cleared out the passage of the throat in this way, began now to drink water and then wine, not ceasing to cut parts of that abscess for a long time. And the abscesses grew back immediately, filling up the space that I had emptied out until they became quite large; then closed it up again and cauterized inside the throat: thus did not grow any more; and left those sections, only God made anything from him after me.
de l’uve	of the eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	When return begins within the eye, and it is swollen and elongated, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is out of size large and round, it is called "eyeball".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	When it is treated as we have said in the division, and the treatment doesn't help, and you see that the extraction of pus has calmed down, and it feels soft, then it should be removed; and if it's roundly gathered together and isn't elongated; and if it's bloody or a blood-red color or black, then it should be avoided cutting into.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger for the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	Therefore, when you see it, according to the method I have said, concerning its brightness and length, you should place the patient in front of the sun, and press their tongue with the tool we've depicted earlier; then insert the needle into the eye, move it around, and remove it after. Cut it using the two tools I mentioned for incising the two almond-shaped parts.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And it is necessary that you do not cut more than the excess which is beyond the natural limit; for if you cut too much, you hurt the voice and speech. And after incision, use what we have said about incising in the two amandros, and treat until she is healed.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient has fear of being cut, it is necessary that you apply something related to cautery for the sense of fear.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the way of the cautery is by using hot iron.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And let the patient apply their head to your healthy part, and then press their tongue with the tool we mentioned or in the chapter on cautery, using a live sharp chaus, so that it is neither too thick nor too clear; and use the movement of this tool, as described here:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there is a hair or part where we apply the medicine, like how a spoon moves, and place the instrument with all the medicine on the wound; and the patient remains still on his side so that saliva and moisture flow from their mouth into the medicine within, not descending to the throat and the neck; then hold your hand on all the medicine and press it onto the wound for half an hour's quantity, until you see the skin dry out and the actions of the medicine cease; and when you notice this, take cotton and wrap it around any tool, soak the cotton in the medicine, and place the instrument entirely covered with cotton above the cloth; continue to keep the cotton moistened over the wound as long as necessary; and do this repeatedly until the cautery is perfect, then let it dry, and heal after four days or five. And if you need to repeat the application of medicine cautery, do so, and after that, rub inside the wound with cotton dipped in butter, and clean out whatever remains within the medicine; and wash yourself with cold water, and continue gargling until fully recovered.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This cure is safer than incision or the cautery method; if it's treated with fumigation following this manner, take calamus and rosemary, and oregano, and rue, and chamomile, and yarrow, and other similar herbs. Gather all of them into one pot or any of them alone in a single pot, place it in the pot, and bring to boil; ensure the pot is well sealed with strong earth, and inside the pot place one tool according to this manner:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	And be it of silver or lead, and let one of the shoulder blades lie in the mouth of the patient until the vapor goes up to the testis through the scrotum, while the testis is necrosed; after this repeat often, until the testis dries out. And remember not to perform this at the beginning of the appearance of a chaut abscess, for many things occur then; and do not do this as it declines in the chaut abscess.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And if this instrument is not present, take a thorn and place an eggshell in the patient's mouth, so that the throat of the patient does not become too hot; because the eggshell does not let steam accumulate on the mouth, and it makes a good treatment together for health.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times it emerges in the throat bone or spinal column of fish, without anything else; therefore, if you must treat what you can see, press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument so that you can perceive any movement; and for what does not reveal itself to you, which is stuck in the throat, you should induce vomiting in the patient as if their food was cooked in the stomach; by chance if expel the obstruction through vomiting; or if the patient ingests a piece of sponge, a piece of navel, a lettuce root, or one small chunk of dry bread; and bind the sponge with one thread, then swallow it. And when it reaches its place, if it gets caught, and then pull forcefully; and if this does not work as what we have said, take one diving tool according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And have the instruments bent towards the head so that it may more lightly enter the throat, and raise the head high; and be cautious not to touch the epiglottis, that nothing might slip down or push the bone inside; and move when the patient pushes the instrument in, because if they are moving or obstruction is forced through; if it is pushed back down, or if it is pulled out forcefully with all the instrument evenly, until it is pulled out.
de la sansue de la gorge	from the saliva of the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	Never heal by the sweat of the patient, as I have said in division through medicine treatment; and when this does not help, then look into the throat of the patient at noon, then press their tongue with the instrument I told you.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see it bleeding, treat it with all possible precision, or use fine forceps that are suitable for this purpose.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if that doesn't work, take a single hair and insert it into the throat of the patient, then push or twist the end of the hair until it becomes hot, and repeat this often.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if you bathe the patient in water every day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Then fill the eyes with cold water, and operate on the mouth, pour it in such that they cannot swallow, and move it often; and as soon as the blood feels the water, it will defecate.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	And if it doesn't defecate as we have said, subfuse the patient with asafetida using the instrument mentioned for the eye treatment in fumigation; do this many times because it will expel without pain.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And the way of fumigation is as follows: you take a pot where there are charcoal sticks and have it covered with a lid in the middle, and holes made through this cover for the tool's head to be placed. Then pour your fumigation, place the stick at the patient's mouth using the tip of the tool, seal their mouth so that no smoke escapes but goes up until it reaches the nostrils; now the nostril should start expelling (smoke), if not, repeat the fumigation several times and allow the patient to feel thirsty, consume salty things and similar items, don't drink water. Then it's necessary for her/him to exhale through this method.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the shape of the tool used to treat blood is like this: when one can see it, it resembles curved scissors meant for entering the throat; and it has a likeness to a doctor's beak, and it is sharpened with grinding, so that whatever she takes, she cannot leave it. And here is the form:
li chapistres des apostemes	The chapter concerning abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	Wounds from abscesses are, as the memory brings after one and another in this book, diverse both in puncturing and in size; and it is in two ways which consist of one that maintains its own appearance, and due to which it holds moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second way is for when they are within the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	For the abscesses at the head are different from those in the foundation, and the abscesses within the body meat are different from those that come in joints, and each has its judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And if one has abscesses that should not be pierced until the body is dead according to their completion; and if there are such that it must be pierced when they have grown, and do not die according to their completion, like abscesses within joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscesses come from joints, and it is left until they are rotten inside, perhaps the ligament and nerve of the joint have been corrupted by this, causing a contraction in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	For the abscess is within the main limb, and if you delay the perforation until it's dead, it will harm the main limb. Or if it's within the foundation, then piercing or doing so when it's dead; and there should be no piercing of an abscess without digestion completed, except for that which is within the foundation, where it would rot from underneath, being inside, and lead to a fistula; and cannot heal properly over a large period.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And you must know the time of draining an abscess which is done according to completion, and this occurs when the pain subsides, and the departure of fever, and the diminution of pain and redness, and during the movement and sharpening of the head of the abscess, and other signs; and it is necessary that you keep the drainage hole as close as possible beneath the abscess, and where it opens outwards. And make the drainage hole long along the center line, and if the abscess is near the hands or feet, or at joints and in necks and arteries, and everywhere uniformly where there's no furrow.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In these that bend, according to that member.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when abscesses is in the fatty part of the body, it is advisable to wait until the perforation is confirmed after full completion of digestion, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	For if you pierce it before that, then the body suffers from the poison of itself and is full of worms; and by chance hardens its skin and the inner parts of itself.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if there is no abscess pierced across the width of the body, according to what the limb requires.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And it is necessary that you use small abscesses, small cuts; and for large abscesses, large cuts, and many slits according to the appearance of the size of the abscess; and if there are such abscesses or it requires a seal, and covering; when they have become as stiff as cloth, and are softened, then it is necessary to do it like one does with wax: and for those that are split into three angles, and for those where you cover them like the leaf of myrtle, like abscesses from angles; and for those where you make a round cut, and other cuts and similar cutting methods.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	For those without a head, like superficial abscesses, it is necessary to pierce them completely through. For large abscesses that have formed large blisters, if you prick all the blister in one go would not be ideal; instead, puncture only a part of the blister when first doing so; then let the abscess drain until reaching another spot, then leave nothing for healing; do this procedure multiple times with increasing size, until the whole blister discharges; similarly, if the patient has weak constitution, or is pregnant, or young children, or elderly and decrepit.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For when an arrow pierces through, it vibrates several times with the exit of the bow, causing perhaps death to the patient, and you should not neglect this.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, be cautious in this chapter, and when you have made your incision if it causes a wound, observe whether the incision from the wound is small. If it's a simple cut, use strips of linen or old cotton; and for large abscesses with numerous pus pockets, place tents under each one so that they lie against each other. If you have cut into the pus sac through part of the skin and stitched it together internally, fill it with old cotton or linseed rags without moisture, bind it up to the third day, then apply dressing until it heals naturally.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if blood bleeding occurs in your operation, apply cold and gentle treatment, cover it with moist cloths, and place it in the correct position by doing so many times.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if bleeding continues persistently, apply a regulated treatment and care, using the powders I have mentioned in this book. If it's infected by ice or cold weather, and if your area or if there's pus present, it is necessary that you place wet cloths soaked in wine and oil on it; and if it's inflamed, and the area is fleshed out, then it's proper to apply wet cloths soaked with water and oil, or wine and cold oil until the third day, as we have said; and afterwards remove the pus and clean it, according to what is required, until it heals.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And this must be known universally in treatments of abscesses: I have told you how one should proceed before the treatment of abscesses, and here is the chapter.
des soros	Of these
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	For the small abscesses that come from the head, and are like our mannerisms found in cloths, such as a locket on a cat, and many resemble this.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	There are those that have too much moisture like grease and oil; and there are others that are hard and stony to the knifeman, and there is no doubt that they are arteries, not to do otherwise.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the operations of the knife are that you must try with all the tool called "intermediate", from which the form comes after, something it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, then you cut through long over.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And when the moisture has been drained, then scorch without leaving anything of the skin that contains that moisture, for it returns immediately if nothing is left behind; then dip cotton into Egyptian ointment if available; otherwise in water and salt, and apply to the wound, and let it heal until another day; and this will remove whatever remains from night.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And begin repeating the cotton application, as previously described, on the second day, and the third, until you are sure it does not persist through the night; then treat the wound with an ointment suitable for that purpose, while it is still clean.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the abscess remains hard, do as described in this form, longitudinally; and cut out your incisions, and peel it from all sides, and apply all your treatment force to the cloth where it is; and if the artery goes against you, then do what I told you after.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And also treat the abscess if it is stony, and cut and cure as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And when cutting on the stony abscess and wetness, it is lighter because there is little blood involved.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if in any of these abscesses or head or there is no moisture, and from the foresaid abscesses that I treated or treated a head from an old woman; and found the abscess to be like a soft stone, rough and white, and it could not be broken; and if one had pierced none, one would have done as well to make incisions as with a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	In other abscesses coming or towards the head, I have found that those which come near the child's head and the roots of their ears, the opening should stay open for as long as possible depending on the size, so that the pus can escape; and treat them as they should be treated.
des scrophules	regarding the instructions for dealing with scrophula (also known as King's Evil or leprosy).
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times these abscesses occur at the neck, under the armpits, and around the throat, and not anywhere else or on the body, they are small and interconnected.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And each scab is properly within its coat, like the nut and the abscess at the head, as we have said; and the appearance of these scabs are many.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some that contain moisture, and there are others that don't want to obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	In this case that you see with good arrangement in the stomach, and it resembles the color of the flesh, and silent from each side and is not mixed with the muscles under the neck nor near the artery or in the ducts, and is not deep; then you should handle it above, and remove it part by part, and straighten the two lips of the mouth at the seams, if necessary as we have said about abscesses at the head; and cut a little bit at a time, and be sure that you don't cut the nerve or the vein, and that there is no spasm or trenching, so your hands do not escape and see too far ahead, making sure you only remove what you should.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	And if you sever the vein or artery, and this does not allow you to open it, then introduce vitriol paste into the wound, or any powders that expel blood, and restrain the wound; and leave it until the abscess is soothed and the wound becomes soft, then begin to decay.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	And when the wound has healed, return to your work until you complete it. Then according to your skill, if there are any small pustules remaining, remove and clean them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if there is a large vein at the root of the pustule, it should not be severed directly from its root but rather wrapped with a thick doubled thread and allowed to fall out through that area without harm. Then dress the wound with old cotton dipped in Egyptian ointment, then treat accordingly.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you cover the whole scab, it is necessary that you bring together the two lips of the wound, and make the stitch now, then there's no need for excess due to the size of the scab.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	It is necessary that you prepare to extract its root, and drain pus, and stitch as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For those scabs that are due to excess, pierce them wherever they have opened up and drain; then pierce in the same manner as previously mentioned, relying on it, then apply ointment and similar things, so that whatever is infected from decay rots; and when the wound has been properly cleaned, apply anointing oil over the flesh until it becomes healthy.
de squinance	Of squinching
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The old ones spoke and discussed about the surgery of the throat; but I have never seen anyone do it in our land, and this is their written word.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	For those with squinching,[1] it is necessary that the incision of the throat known as "epiglottis" be made; and one should not attempt this, for all the veins and the lungs are vulnerable to illness in these who have abscesses either within their mouth or in the throat or .ij. amandines.[2]
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the channel of the lungs, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to avoid the loss that comes from suffocation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	Thus, when we wish to cut the epiglottis, it is necessary to make the incision across three or four small cuts through, between two circles, or by the size of the cut, not in the cartilage; and this allows for the sectioning of the epiglottis so that there is no meat, and the vessels are long from within.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	And if the surgeons are fearful, it is necessary that they stretch the skin of the throat throughout the chestnut, then cut down to the keel until you reach the navel; and avoid any veins, if you see nothing, and then open the belly button, as we have said; and this can be demonstrated by the rupture of the stream in the navel which leaps out through the chest that has been broken, and by the absence of voice; and leave the wound open a piece.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the time has passed since one begins to doubt strangulation, gather together the two lips of the wound as neatly as possible, and sew them all smoothly without the cartilage; then apply medicines that cause tissue growth until it is healed.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	All right, if you do not perform this until the throat is completely swollen, and the patient is judged as dead, and the defect remains.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	Then cut through the epiglottis because the organs cannot be moved, and he breathes from the wound, and thus you are saved from death; and for this reason, the elderly instructed to leave the wound open until the disease's malice has passed, and it passes in three or four days. And then they commanded to stitch up the wound and clean it, as long as it was cleaned; and I will tell you what I observed.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I saw that a young lady took the knife, and stuck it in her throat, and cut part of the windpipe. And I was called to treat her, and found her as dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound, and found that blood was flowing from it, and indeed she did not have a cut vein or pathway leading out except for her throat, and the air entered through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I hurriedly treated the wound, and after it was healed, she was able to speak again; for this reason, I say that in tailoring the epiglottis, there should be no fear.
de la grosse gorge	of the swollen throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	Cystic abscesses are called "neck hernia", and they are large abscesses with a black coloration resembling a blackberry, occurring frequently in women; they can occur in two ways: naturally or accidentally; natural ones do not have any cause.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And the accidents occur in two ways: one resembles being fatty within us, and the other way resembles an abscess coming from our arteries; there is fear, and it doesn't involve making a large incision except when it's small, and the proof should be searched thoroughly for inside everything: if you find it as fatty but not in any artery, cut it like we cut ourselves, and adjust to its entire covering, if there's nothing else; and search very well then, and treat it according to how it should be treated until it is completely healed.
des nous	after us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	Many ways exist for us, of which I will mention all parallels; hence it is necessary that I explain the entire distinction between us and outcomes.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I state that the cause is heat and fever continuing until the boiling has passed, and the corruption is completed; therefore, the fever and heat must cease.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	With the new one there is no fever or pain and contains pus, which is its own sac and is according to the color of the body, and begins also like a boil, and becomes large; and they are according to two appearances, greasy or moist, and many colors are as I have described in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary, when you come to the treatment of the new one, that you first test and inquire about all the instrument which is called 'entromissoire', according to its form or chapter that comes after.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	And the method for cutting pus from us is that you squeeze more moisture out of it than you find in the pus, and twist your fingers a little at a time, until you know that the instruments have penetrated the skin, then according to the size of the pus; then remove the exudate, and be careful not to cut too much.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	If there is moisture in the cut, whatever its color, if you make the incision as I said about other abscesses; and if after the introduction of a probe no more moisture comes out, know that it is fatty, then make the incision diagonally, and take it with forceps, and lightly burn each side and watch where the garment lies underneath that you pull it out clean with the thread. And if you cannot pull it out clean, then remove it in pieces so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	For if nothing remains, it will come back to you many times; and if only a little remains, and it doesn't bother you, apply some corrosive powders to the wound, hold the wound steady, and put things that soothe abscess heat on it, and treat it with other abscess cures until it is clean; and if the pus is large, then close both sides of the wound, and treat it with remedies for those who drain flesh.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	And if the vein is more than two inches against it or otherwise urgent, prepare and use the iron tool for a short time, leaving it in place for two or three days until the wound heals, then continue with the copper treatment that has been left over from the new one.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	Here are the descriptions of the surgical instruments used for incision, and they come in three forms: large, medium, and small. There are three types which are called "albaret," and one that is called "breb." These also come in three sizes: large, medium, and small, to encircle abscesses from fistulas. They are similar to needles used for removing sources, made of aragonite citrine, iron, or silver. The ones which are yellow are valued similarly and are more effective than black lead when encircling the twists of a fistula. There are three sizes: large, medium, and small according to the size of the width of the cuts.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	The forms of scalpels resemble the following: large, medium, and small. There are also pairs of scalpels that have two twists in three ways; there are those that have three twists and they come in three forms as well; there are also pairs with two twists each and they too come in three forms; and all these are necessary according to their size.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	The chief of these to whom one makes their incisions, and of those who do not cut with force but from only one side, where one scorches the flesh, because in such cases one does not damage the vein nor the nerve; and of these instruments are the knives held by hand, so that the patient is unaware at the opening of abscesses; and they come in three ways: large, small, and medium, as you see; and none are used with force but only on fatty areas such as legs, arms, nipples, and breasts, and in similar places; and every other time one makes another small instrument resembling scarifiers according to this form, to which one stops bleeding.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	And we place it at once within its healthy location where all veins are properly connected, and with arteries, and in no way follow such grand form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	None of the men's nipples swell when they begin to become corrupted, resembling female nipples; and they remain swollen and puffy, and those who wish to cure them should proceed according to this method from point B until point G:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	Then remove the fat, and apply medicine to the wound in the form of a stimulating paste. Then join the two sides of the wound using stitches, and treat it until it heals; and if the nipple slants downwards due to its size as is often found in women, cut it into two halves along these apparent fissures, leaving one attached to the other at both ends so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this shape: from this line .b. up to this line .g.; then remove the skin between the two sides and extract the fat; follow the instructions we have given for stitching and powders, as well as what is necessary in treatment until it heals; and if it has not healed or if the incision has not been completed entirely due to lack of rest for the wounds or because of blood leakage, it's appropriate to fill the wound with wet cotton in a corrosive ointment and let it stay until it starts healing and then the fat. Once it has started healing, proceed with treatment until it is fully healed.
des apostemes des asselles	of abscesses and scabs
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	Abscesses that come from under the skin are manners of hard scrofula or when there are nodes, and if they contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those who contain moisture, it must be cut according to this shape, from line .b. until line .g.:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the pus from within the abscess is drained, one should fill the wound with old cotton and leave it until another day. Then remove all the cotton and apply balm to keep it clean until it heals.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess resembles lymph nodes, one should open it as we have described for fissures of lymph nodes, and if the wound has pus, then apply a cautery in accordance with what we said previously.
de la routure de l’artere	from the rupture of an artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	When the artery is cut, and the skin is sewn above it, then many times abscesses occur, and this also happens with cut vein and abscess; and if one knows how to do this properly, such that the abscesses are long and deep; and when you feel resistance in your fingers, you feel the constriction; and when it's about the vein, there appears a white bulge beneath; and cutting such an abscess is foolishness, especially where there are nodes and angles and under the chin and around other parts of the body, and they are very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, you should avoid iron cure and the one on top must be avoided as well. In this one, when the artery is swollen from above with the skin until it extends, then many times abscesses occur, and similarly it happens in veins. When you know how to do it correctly, so that the abscesses are long and deep; and when your fingers feel resistance, there's constriction felt; and when it's about the vein, a white bulge appears underneath. Cutting such an abscess is foolishness, especially where nodes and angles exist in other parts of the body. Then apply treatment as before, until the artery is clearly seen, then sew it off with double thread according to what I have taught you in extracting two arteries from temples; then cut open the part between the two strings with a tool so that whatever is inside comes out completely, and free yourself of the abscess. Then treat the wound that requires treatment, until the string is out; then apply ointment where it's due, until it heals properly; and if the abscess is due to swelling in the vein, you should color the portion of the abscess as much as possible over all the skin with your hand, then insert a needle through the tissue that you hold in your hand and pass it through, and let there be double thread so you pull from the other side; then tie up the abscess just as I have told you before. If you doubt whether the threads can pass through properly, then reinsert another needle all over the abscess at the point of the first needle cutout and tie up the threads in three places; then cut off the excess tissue until it passes out completely. Then trim the wound neatly and leave what is tied. Then place on the skin a bandage soaked with wine and oil, and treat it with poultices and ointments until it heals properly.
des apostemes des ners	Of nerve abscesses
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	As with pus coming to the artery and the vein, pus enters the heart when it is cut, or due to too much work, and similar occurrences.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And this happens more often with shoulders and elbows and in all places where joints are present. It's related to abscesses, and their color resembles the color of flesh, seeming unaffected by various dispositions without pain; and when they're squeezed firmly, one feels the patient's pain, not matching the sensation of flesh but below the bone; and moves uniformly from all directions, neither advancing nor retreating, neither above nor below, and that which is in joints should not be covered with iron: there could be a contraction; and those on head or forehead make the skin reddened.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the abscess is small, take one of your forceps and cover it at its base; and if it's large, hold it with your thumb and index finger, and scrape it off, then cut through the bone, stitch up the wound to the edge, and let the treatment continue until he is healed.
des grosses boces pendans	large hanging masses
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	For some times it happens in the belly and nowhere else, and it is a disease that is called "fungus" by its resemblance, and has subtle roots, and big buds; and there are small ones and quite large ones; and I knew someone who had two bellies which looked more like fungi than anything else, and there was no difference, they were white, had little root, they split open, and began to rot due to moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	I found and weighed them in one they were 18 ounces, and in the other 6, and the organs from the incision show that the diseased flesh is moist. The color of the wound is white and wet with a subtle root; if you cut into the larger part, and have the fire cautery present for it to be seen.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	For the barber surgeon encounters many times excessive bleeding from cuts, and if it escapes you, then quickly use the cautery; and when you see the patient alarmed and fearful of the incision by the iron, take a well-made silk thread, tie the knot as we have said, and leave it for two days; and then restrain, do not cease pulling the silk thread until it copes the knot, without any work; and if the roots are thick, then fear to cope them all similarly for the stomach, but you can comfortably cope half of them, then cauterize so that it does not re-bleed; then treat the wound, and make sure you do not cut off the thylux which is a red color and has poor sensation and milk-like appearance.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For this is an abscess, and I will come to the treatment of gangrene afterwards.
quant li boude ist fuer	When the bladder is full,
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	The appearance of the boil comes from the cautery of wounds or fissures in syphilis, and it is on the belly and there are some of the boils, as happens in other types of pus discharges, or bleeding coming from veins or arteries as described previously, or due to windiness; and if this is through the syphilis discharge and by the exit of the pus, then its color is similar to that of the flesh, and it is a mild sensation without pain, and opens up through various exits.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it's due to the issue of the intestine, then it's more diverse, and when you press it with your fingers if it responds and then returns, and by chance if it's squeezed and grows much at the entrance during bath and for strong work.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it's due to moisture, it is a simple matter, and opens well when you press it with your hand, not constraining it; and if it's due to blood, it will open through these signs - the pus being large and hard, and spread according to its quantity; and if it's due to wind, there's a swelling at the toucher, and the veins show themselves when you look for their appearance is by the blood of the artery, or of the vein, or wind.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	It is necessary that you let the treatment proceed.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear about it, as I have explained in the chapter on abscesses, for the artery and for the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And if its appearance seems like that of an intestine or a boil, it is necessary that you instruct the patient to cut their alinea, and spread it fully straight. Then puncture all around the lump; then command them to apply pressure between your hands, and go into the area where you indicated, spreading up to almost the entire skin, then remove half of the pus above each large uncus. Then tie that off with a strong string or a firm silk thread, securing it tightly. Next, tie the remaining half of the pus extended on this string, and hold your index finger against the intestine; if you find that it is caught by the string, release it, and pull the intestine out from behind the belly. And if you find the boil, take it with an uncus, and remove any excess. If the artery forces itself backwards, or the vein, go straight into action again and take two needles, then insert two threads on each side of what you pierced previously. Then draw out the pus in three parts through these needles, and if you can see it, remove the needles, let the area heal, and remove the dead flesh by itself; or remove it when it is soft and cooked, then treat according to what is necessary, and clean off the pus as we have said. And extract any blood or moisture that you find, then treat the area accordingly, and stitch up the wound.
dou chancre	And the ulcer.
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have discussed the appearances of ulcers and how to open them with medicines, as well as how to avoid iron treatment. Let's say that an ulcer can spread in the mouth and there is great caution needed when treating it; the old ones said that if you find a sore that can be scraped off, such as one found in the armpits or on other similar locations, then you should remove all of it when it starts. But if it's large and old, don't touch it because I have never known anyone to heal from ulcers; no one heals from them in front of me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And in the procedures, when it is in place or can be removed as we have said before, you must cleanse the patient of black bile once. Then make them clean if there's evident overfilling, then perform the cleansing procedure properly for the operation; then remove any scabs or ulcers from everywhere, and the flesh from everywhere without leaving anything behind; and let the blood flow freely, pressing the area well with your hand or nothing, and if the bleeding counters the incision of an artery or vein, cauterize until it stops. Then treat otherwise when they are healed.
de ydropisie	Of dropsy.
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	We have discussed the symptoms of dysenteria in the division and how water assembly is done, as well as signs for each symptom, and the treatment that is done through medicines, and what is treated with iron: these are clear instructions; and iron should not be used in these two symptoms: it's to say, peritonitis and typhoid fever, since this is deadly matter; therefore when you find dysenteria resembling 'eclites' by medicine and the treatment doesn't help, if you see that the patient is weak or has another disease other than dysenteria, such as abdominal solution and similar conditions; then iron shouldn't be used because there's doubt; and if you notice the patient's condition to be very pale green and they have only dysenteria without any other diseases, and their age isn't too young or old, you should act like this: lift the patient's legs straight on your hands, and instruct the assistants to press the belly upwards while pouring water in the lower part of the foot at its lowest point, then take a spathimile (a type of surgical instrument) according to this shape:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And let it be divided into two parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	Make a point, and ensure it doesn't penetrate too deeply so that it reaches up to the intestines when inserted, without causing bleeding; then check if there's ascites spreading towards the intestines: if you need to cut open upwards of the peritoneum, make three cuts in front of the belly button; and if there's ascites due to liver disease, cut on the left side of the belly button, three inches from it. And if it's due to peritonitis, cut on the right side, not letting the diseased area lie under the cut so that excess fluids don't flow into the weak part; then pierce through all the skin with the tool and pull outwards, lifting your hand over the fatty layer between the skin and abdominal cavity in a manner akin to slicing an inch or more deep as you would when searing meat. And cut the fatty layer until the pus rises up about eight inches from the belly button, this being the area of the water, then pull with strength using that tool described above:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	And it resembles a fine silver rod, or a slender polecat or swizzle stick, and in the area from which is small nubs; and if it costs on one side, three nubs; and two on another side, and one more on another; and it makes the head of the shoulder cut like a feather, and this is the shape of the incision that the writer cuts the feather to:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	At the top is the alemelle, such that when the instruments come to the water, they now descend onto the instrument; empty it then, thus half or one third of its volume. For if you were to empty more than what should be at this moment, by chance the patient might die from the release of his spirit due to the action of the weapon, or he might faint, or he would come closer to death. But you must empty according to the strength's quantity and in accordance with what the signs of strength in the patient indicate, and his pulse; then take the instrument and retain the water, and it is retained now for the stupefaction that numbs the nub on the syphilitic lesion, as I have described, that you puncture in this manner. Then start using the instrument again another day if you see the patient suffering from this, and draw out a small amount of water; do this without stopping any day, but only keep adding a little bit of water.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	And if you doubt about the patient, and leave some water on them, if the burial or sand heats up, and through much sweating or bathing in sun, and it gets tanned; and they should drink. And the treatment of drying medicines until it is healed, and cauterize on the stomach and liver and spleen after the removal of water, as I said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	on commands the faulty one to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they pierce at their base, hold them steady so they don't move until they grow.
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	No child is born without any prepuce on the penis, or if the prepuce is small, or it isn't in its place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If it suits to pierce him immediately for all the very subtle pus until he discharges in this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	Then place or let the very thin scrotum membrane hang, and secure it, and keep it that way for three or four days. And when he feels like urinating, remove the closed membrane, allow urination, and then reapply it. And if by chance there's no need for this, because the urine that comes out does not leave him closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	Those whose bodies are sensitive to it, if they take a potion of liquorice, as we have said, should see its effects expand.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those who do not possess this ability in their body turn blind, for no one is born with the ability at the tip of the penis, so they cannot urinate before lifting their penis upwards; and they cannot father children due to this, because the matter cannot come up until it reaches the testicles, and this is a serious ailment.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the method for the operation is such that the patient lies on their back, then they lift the head of the penis and the belly in a manner akin to half the width of a feather, so all parts are exposed, as it should be; and beware of blood leakage which happens repeatedly during this procedure. If it occurs, stop it with someone who can staunch bleeding, and treat the wound until it is clean.
des pustules de la verge	The pimples of the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times, abscesses come in the penis, and there is a disturbing appearance of an ugly lump; and among them, some are bad and some are not. It's necessary that you remove those which weigh one twelfth ounce each carefully, then cut and clean all of them thoroughly afterwards. Then place moistened cotton on top with Egyptian ointment. Finally, cure it with clarifying ointment until it becomes clean.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if bathing becomes malicious, causing skin discoloration and lesions, it is necessary to apply the cautery treatment.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	When you have treated it, and if bathing has affected the penis being inside and part of the skin and part outside, it is necessary to remove the affected part that is inside first; and when it heals, then treat the outer part.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you are treating it together, do not allow the head of the penis to be punctured, and a blackness and corruption enters into its penis and anus; therefore remove everything that is dark and corrupted, then place on the plaster made of honey and flour which is created from the peel of watermelons and garlic, then treat with other remedies until it has healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And when blood drainage occurs, apply the lunar cautery according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	The cautery should assist in two configurations: this means, during blood drainage and corruption; if the head of the penis becomes corrupted and removed, then you must prod or guide from the penis a rod of garlic, so that the patient can urinate. And when the hair is reversed at the tip of the penis which occurs for those who have never been circumcised, or due to wound or abscess, then it's necessary to burn this area with an ear-piercing instrument until all threads are untied and the head of the penis is freed from everywhere; if it's difficult to carry out such a procedure, then you should burn around the frenulum just below the tip of the penis and skin; then cut neatly between two, and apply a fine linen bandage soaked in cold water, so that it doesn't reverse at the tip.
de la circoncision	From circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not merely about continuation like other wounds; nevertheless, when we perform this work by our own will and specifically for children, it is necessary that we do the best job, and cause the least harm to health.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the old ones did not mention circumcision for their children, as they do not practice it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I have wanted the majority of masters and officers who practiced circumcision within the first two days, as well as the forces, and on every newborn; some were left because there are two layers, and by chance if one is performed above the other it remains below the former.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	The recipient receives treatment and experiences double pain. In the operation where the knife is halfway in, the point of the limb is not completely certain; and in the operation on a nail, by chance the iron escapes from the hole and runs through the work, and many times it grows like it should not require an operation, and this I have observed.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	The operation that is performed at the force on all the thread tie I have found to be advantageous from experience, as the forces cut precisely equally above and below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you squeeze your hand, if they cut equally like an I then all the sides are tight; but let the threads be well fastened between the skin; and make the method of the first operation such that it makes one think of the child, if it listens, that you only bind the thread around the penis alone and afterwards make it move in all the ways that you can; then place the baby straight between your hands and distribute forces evenly under or near your feet so the child doesn't see them or any of the instruments; then push your hand towards the penis and blow or whistle, and pull it up until the head of the penis is inside; then thoroughly cleanse away the dirt that has accumulated; then tie the knot with a double thread, and later bind each knot under another; and hold it in place for two hours at the pouch and on the first fingertip index, insert between the two threads, then take off quickly and pull the head of the penis; then let the bleeding gradually stop because that's the nature; apply powder and powder over the paste made from a quarter of an egg boiled with pink water, mixed with rose oil and fresh, and leave it on until another day, and continue treating it until it is healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form for the process of purification is as follows: let the two heads be held and be penetrating, and make sure that the heads are also large as the fingers equally:
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error of the world's transformation happens when the kidneys inside start to leak during incision; therefore, it is necessary that you stretch until your fingernail, so that the kidneys can create an abscess; and handle them evenly, and if you cannot hold with your fingernail, then use tweezers, and then treat them.
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if they penetrate for three days, and the one near the penis is swollen, let him wait until the formation of an abscess subsides, and gently scarify; handle them as much as you can move, and avoid touching the part of the penis, it will not harm it.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, treat the limbs of things that cause pain in powder as we have said or treated with powders. If you handle too much of the knee and it goes beyond, it will not harm; therefore, treat them as we have said until they are healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	The retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	The retention of urine can be due to the formation of stones, or blood freezing, or a blockage, or birth remains, or similar issues as we discussed in division; and if the urine is not liberated, and you observe it being retained by the stone in the kidney or at the bladder neck, then the patient should have their body leaned back on their elbows; and they should be placed with their feet under the back, and extend their belly from above the back part, and restrain them so that they remain upright as much as possible; and thus it forces the neck of the bladder to express stones above, for which reason urine is liberated. If it does not come out, as we said before, and if the patient feels great pain, then you should administer an extraction using all equipment known as 'syringe', which here is described: it should be made of delicate thin metal wire, such as a bird's feather; and its length should be about one and a half palms long, and it should taper at the tip.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And the way to relieve urine is like this: you take a double thread, tie it around the small part of wool or cotton at the head, and put the head of the thread inside the syringe; remove excess wool and tie up until it reaches the end of the syringe, then smear the syringe with oil or butter and yolk of egg, make the patient sit on the chair, and let him lift his bladder and penis with moist oil and olive oil and vinegar; then gently insert the syringe into the penis, as far as to its root, then double the penis upwards towards the opening; then put the syringe just before it reaches the bladder and feel the urine coming up to the void thing, and this is not done according to this order because whoever leads her goes in a twist; then tie the thread slowly bit by bit with all the wool, and the urine follows the wool, then squeeze out the urine, and correct the urine flow; and repeat the syringe until the bladder is emptied, and make the patient comfortable.
des maladies de la vessie	diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When burns or blood come into the bladder, or when pus has assembled there, and you see distilled waters and medicines, if you make for all the tool called 'clepsidra', and it is in this form:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	It is sealed and if there are three pinches: two of one kind and one of another, as you see; the limbs through which medicine should be administered is such that it numbs the penis without addition, if moisture can be treated and forced when necessary; and when you see your medicines flowing in the bladder, place the head of the patient on the source of moisture, and direct this to the one who is treating; if you draw out the moisture from the doctor's direction, then firmly replug the area where treatment was performed; should moisture enter again inside, reaching the bladder now, so that the patients feel it; and this is the form of the subtle cystinuria which involves catheterizing the bladder: in this way the medicine goes to work.
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And it is made of silver or lead, and the shoulder is higher up; and below one breast or near where the shoulder rests; then take a sheep's bladder and place the source of moisture that you need to catheterize the bladder into it. Then insert this at the base between the two breasts with a strong double thread, heat the end of the lead over the fire; then plug the head of the catheter in the penis, then stretch your hand on the bladder until all excess moisture has been used up, so that the patient feels that the source of moisture has reached the bladder. And if you do not have a bladder, take a piece of parchment and make a circle, piercing it smoothly around; then firmly insert this thread into the two pinches, then join the circle just like one joins a ring, and place inside what you see from the outer skin and moisture and water, tying with this tool. Do this as you did with the bladder, pressing with your hand until all the moisture reaches the bladder.
de la piere	from the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have discussed in our division the methods of stone extraction and amalgamation of medicines; and we explained the difference between stones that are removed surgically like kidneys, and all their signs, and on which stone one should perform a size operation; and about the bladder and penis; and I will explain it openly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I state that the stone inside the bladder often occurs more frequently in children, and this is a sign that there has been a urinary tract ailment similar to an internal one; it opens, and causes great pain for those afflicted, and they can perform many actions, after which it heals; and at times of these occurrences, the base becomes weak; and until the child reaches four years old, their recovery from illness is relatively easy, but is much more problematic in older individuals, particularly those transitioning between youth and age. And generally, the treatment for children with larger stones is easier compared to those with smaller ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to treatment, it is necessary to first prepare the patient by purging them with a laxative, in order to extract all the contents from their intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	Because there is often obstruction when seeking to cut into the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	Then grasp the patient by their sides and lift and move them backward. This way, the stone slides down to the bladder's base and escapes never from above. Then make him sit between your hands, and his hands placed under his thighs so that the bladder is fully inclined downward. Then touch and feel inside; if you sense the stone in space, now hurry to cut into the stone immediately.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	And if they don't urinate all the way at the rectal toucher, moisten your left hand's index finger with urine, because if the patient is young, or your middle finger if they are of full age. Then push into its foundation and touch the stone, and when you sense it on your finger, remove it from the bladder's neck; then press towards your finger, and push out where you see to cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And command the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and instruct him to extend his right hand above in front of his other hand's fingers, and hold the skin that is over the testicles in the part where you make the cut; then he should squeeze out the semen sac containing this form:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	And make the operation between those who are between the joints and the foundation, not in the middle but at the side of the left snow; and be straight on the stone, and your hands should be against the foundation or the wall, and be in proportion to the height traversing it so that it is wide outside and narrow inside, according to the size of the stone, not too large; by chance press the hand which is at the foundation, for her strength will work without difficulty; know that there are parts of the stone where there are angles and edges: they should be cut off as they come out; and if on a part it is below, resemble one of a pea, and round, whose outlet is easy.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	And in those places where there are angles and edges, make the size larger; and if she doesn't spring forth, it's necessary that you tighten against the tongs which are as sharp as a file to squeeze the stone so that it doesn't escape; or you punch through from below with an intricate fine curved instrument. And if you can't implement this method, it’s better to widen just slightly at the back edge, and if left untouched, force it with vitriol; and if there are more than one stone, first break out the largest at the neck of the bladder, then drill upwards, then pull downwards forcefully, and the smaller ones afterwards if there are more.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if she is very large, it may need to be cut off, and create a larger wound.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	For two things occur to the patient: or he dies, or his urine starts coming out immediately through him since his thighs can't be stitched together; but nevertheless you must strive to extract it, or break it off with pliers, as long as you pull it piece by piece. And when you have completed your work, cover the wound with incense and aloes and dragon's blood, bind it up, and place under it a strip of wet cloth in oil and wine, or oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the inflamed area; then bind the patient back onto his leg, and do not remove the stitches until three days have passed.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you loosen it, rinse it well with oil and water, then treat it with the ointment of dyafinicon and basilicon until it is clean.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And if abscesses are present in the wound and corrosion occurs, or blood clots are found in the bladder, and it is due to this retention of urine which manifests itself in this manner that without a leap with urine: then you should apply your needle into the wound, and remove that blood, because if it remains, it corrodes the bladder and damages it; then drain the wound with water and salt and vinegar, and help him in every way possible until he is healed; and whenever you treat him, tie his two thighs together, and gather the medicines onto his leg.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	And if the stone is small and it's located where the penis leads and stuck inside, causing urine not to come out; when you treat as I'm saying, that you cut multiple times, and excuse cutting due to this treatment.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have already acquired this experience like this.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take one iron stake according to this shape and have three points fixed in one nail:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	Then take a thread and place the knot around the penis near the stone, so that it cannot come back into the bladder. Then pull on the thread lightly in the penis until you reach the stone; and then gently move the thread inside the penis back and forth while making small movements, until you can pierce the stone from another side; if urine starts to come out, then press your hand against the one remaining part of the stone that is inside the penis.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it breaks suddenly and urine starts flowing, the pain will subside and the patient will be relieved. If you cannot perform this operation due to any impediment, tie a thread around the stone and another on top, then place the penis between these two threads at the location of the stone and pull forcefully. After that, release one of the threads and clean off the congealed blood in the wound; continue the treatment until it heals completely.
de la piere des femmes	from the vagina of women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	Sometimes, the stone can become trapped in women and if this happens even once, it requires a cure. It is forbidden for three reasons: one possibility is that perhaps the woman was a virgin; and secondly, no one could find a married woman who knows how to protect herself from sight, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	And the third method is such that by chance one cannot find a woman well versed in this art of hands; and the fourth method is that the stone in the woman is further forward than the stone in a man, so it requires deeper cutting, causing great fear. And if necessity leads to this, you should seek out a midwife well-versed, touch her abdomen gently, and if you do not find anything there, take no action; and give her a well-made belly during childbirth or a woman who knows part of the art, command her to perform what you are asking for regarding stone inspection; and examine the woman very carefully to see if she is a virgin: then they should thrust their thumb or base and search for the stone; and when she finds it, force it out from under her thumb, and instruct her to press her thumb or grasp the lump firmly onto the bladder.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	If she finds it, then it is necessary for her to move it gradually from the entry of the bladder up until under the skin, as far as she comes to the root of the thigh; then cut in on the bone at the root of the thigh against the middle of the knee, where the bone instruments are found, and feel the bone in that part; and do not move her hand above or below the bone, and make it small at first; then push out the rib on her small stomach, if you feel the bone increase the wound as much as the bone can protrude force, and know that there are many kinds of stones: this is to say, small and large and hard and smooth, long and round, and those with grooves.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	If you understand the signs, then you will know how it ends.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if it does not hurt them, put sulfuric acid on the wound and hold it for an hour until the pain subsides; then return to your work as long as the stone is still inside you. And have the instruments I told you about in removing stones that will assist you in your work; and if the pain does not subside, and it's because of a cut artery, put the powder on the wound and bandages, and do not repeat this again, leave the stone and don't try to remove it, lest by chance it kills the patient; then heal the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood has subsided and the limbs have recovered, then return to your work until the stone is hard.
de hernie carnouse	regarding fatty hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Aqueous sprouts are nothing else but assembly of moisture or white yolk, which is inside the cover of the balls, that contains the egg; and it's called "yolk", and once properly in the membrane of the egg if one thinks it's an .i. other egg; and this is the skin under the balls containing the white yolk we said; and this does not have a hole.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the formation of these aqueous sprouts is so weak that it comes to the balls, and this substance spreads out.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And never does such come about from percussion on the kidneys, and this moisture comes in many forms: or it is a color that declines to jaundice, or it has no redness, or it's black, or aquous white, and this happens more; and these are signs to recognize this assemblage, for if its white is so pale as we have said, then it is an abscess with pus, which lasts as long as the figure of an egg, and does not reveal the kidneys, because there is moisture throughout.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if there is moisture in the proper layer, then it indicates pus with part of an egg, and one might think that's another egg; and if the moisture lies between the skin of the kidneys and this pale white, you can feel it well; therefore, when you know the color of the moisture, test throughout the whole inner surface to confirm, as shown below.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	So, according to what comes after the inner examination, judge about what is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when we heal it with iron, it is necessary that the patient be treated according to our ability and the health of their body; then sit behind their back on something slightly elevated, and put a layer of cloth under them. Then sit on their left side, commanding the minister to sit at their right and extend their arm towards one of the two ribs near their heart. Then take the wet sponge, and cut the skin of their chest as far as beyond the knife throughout its length, making sure the cut is straight like a diagonal line from the white muscle, cutting it subtly according to our ability; then pierce the white part full with water until you drain all the water out, and then put your fingers in, and have your thumb up by this time; do not touch the chest itself but only let the wound alone. Carefully cut through the ribbing of him from inside themself, if it is not done properly, water will return; and if the egg jumps to your task, reposition it where you originally placed it when you've finished with the wound up until this point; then join the two edges of their chest close together in a seam, then treat it like other wounds as long as it heals.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the egg corrupted by another disease, it is necessary that you tie the vessels that are hanging down, while doubting about blood flow; then cut the foreskin to all hanging parts, and remove the egg, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	And if the wound is divided into two parts together, know that these are two branches; so handle the other half as you did the first equally, then let the blood out, and apply wet wool soaked in rose oil to the wound; and place another piece of wet wool immersed in wine and oil above it, and put them on both parts, cover them with folded cloths, and bind them around using strips according to this form:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take two cloths and lay them out with frayed wool according to this appearance, ensuring they are stitched together at the waist of the breeches. The first cloth should cover from the foundation up to the back, and the other one reaches till the knee part; and place another piece above both shoulders, making sure it is all sewn together tightly in the loop of the garter; and apply this method for treating this branch of cautery using iron size, and take a fine cultellary cautery, remove the skin from the joints, heat it as we have said, so that white residue from the water becomes exposed; then take the cautery according to this form, puncture this whiteness with oncines, and cauterize with this fine cautery until it burns:
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And the operation in all ways that you can, until you have finished everything; and be careful that the fire does not touch the egg; know that this work is more saved; and beware of bleeding, and beware that the surgical cuts are made properly; and if anything goes against you, or pus appears or bleeding or other thing, then cure what goes against you according to what was said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And if the patients are afraid and can't wait for this operation due to its horror, then you should perform a puncturing procedure as I instructed, and understand that when you are very sure based on the explanations we have provided that the watery substance is there, make the patient sit upright; then pierce the abscess in the part below the head across most of the skin surface, and create the puncture long through the body; and if the wound opening is wide enough so that all water flows out; afterwards place cotton on the inside, bind it, and let bleeding occur from the remaining water until the wound heals; then treat it as far as needed until the infection clears. And should a white skin not leave water coming out of the mouth of the wound, you should stuff this with a feather or tool used to drain fluids in dropsy cases, as described earlier; and widen up this opening of the wound knowing that water would return and assemble again about 6 months or afterward, and once it has assembled like before, then the patient's illness will pass.
de l’aposteme des coions	From the removal of pus from the anus
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	Know that in the area of this branch there is much fear in several situations, which makes it seem to me that caution would be wise here; and I will tell you about the procedure and descriptions of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	So I say that many abscesses come from orbes and even from kidneys; and this happens by chance.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	This is to know about the excess of sour and fever, which spreads among the animals or by impact; and its color in relation to that of the body; and there's no pain, it's a pus-filled abscess; and sometimes an abscess appears purple and hard, with a discolored appearance, and it doesn't come from the inside of a blood vessel, or swell veins.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	When it's due to internal bleeding, you can recognize by the presence of heat during an abscess examination when pressing on it with your fingers; and it doesn't suit you to touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	Those who are created from swollen veins can be recognized by their layout in relation to the body's touchpoints with both hands. They can perform this well based on this likeness and across other parts; and you should feel the shape of the kidneys, then place them so that the egg is at the top, and the white is fully formed and clear, and release all suspension from the egg from every side.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	When the egg is already connected with these parts born from them, then it's necessary that you guide the egg and take hold of it; if it's full and white or within vessels, it must be released completely, and you should handle it roundly.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birth of the child is or behind the belly, it becomes necessary that you remove all around it, and extract the egg, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your operations are completed, dress the wound with wet wool in oil and wine, then treat it with other remedies until it heals.
de l’aposteme des coions	From the removal of pus from the anus
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	This is an abscess wrapped in a semblance of a knot with the softening of the kidneys; and when they move, the patient suffers greatly; and the treatment for this disease is as well planned as before, but still we will tell you about it according to what the old ones did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	It is necessary for you to make the patient sit on an elevated stool. Then stretch the testicles up towards the inguinal hernia, touching all the vessels near the groin, and pull the masters' foreskins over them, then spread them out accordingly; next cut deeply into the scrotum in a broad diagonal from one corner to another, until the vessels are exposed. Then cauterize each side separately as we explained when extracting arteries in temples; then sew on an awl with doubled thread, attaching it at the original site where the needle penetrated and then attaching it back-to-back to the other head of the penis; next cut straight down the middle according to the length of the body, removing all corrupted moisture. Then treat the wound as you would when tying off a vein or artery, so that no vessel bleeds where one of the testicles is situated; for this causes no harm and if all vessels come out with the incision, then you should remove both testicles; thus preventing loss of semen due to cutting of the veins, they dry out and can't provide support anymore.
de la routure dou syfac	from the rupture of the uterus
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	Events in this chapter occur through tearing or rupture, or elevation on the abdomen at the part of the groin, because the intestines descend from that tear to one of the kidneys; and this tear is either where there's tearing or the elevation of it, and these two ways of being caused come about: by percussion, or a leap, or a snort, or raising the stomach weight, and through similar things; and signs when it's due to elevation at tearing are that it happens slowly over time, in long stretches, and does not come suddenly; and with abscesses they're equal until near the front end, because tearing causes the intestine.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are present when it's from the section of syphilis, causing sudden pain to appear at the beginning, and the abscesses are variously noticeable, near the skin area, and this is due to the exit of the intestine and the body part behind syphilis.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And every time it happens that the loops come down with the intestine, and are held back, and cause great suffering to the patient when pressed, even if it is pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these iron treatments for fear, one should avoid them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	The method for the operation is such that you order or direct the patient to pull out the intestine with your hand inside the wound, if it can fit back in; then cover its neck area between your hands and lift up the buttocks; then move the belly upwards, and remove all the skin around the hips until it reaches the entire length of the buttock; then force the inner lips of the abdomen inwards according to how necessary you need to open the wound, so they can come out easily; then scrape the abdominal fat as much as possible from under the skin until the white abdominal fat is fully exposed everywhere; then push your index finger into the place where the intestine enters, between the white fat that lies underneath the egg's skin and the second abdominal fat, and remove what comes behind the egg, and between the second abdominal fat; and then use your right hand to move the abdomen up inside the womb of the buttocks, lift the white abdominal fat onto top of your left hand, and lift the egg towards the waist; and order the assistant that he should extend the egg upwards, and untie what's behind the intestine loop; and check with your hands if there's any piece of intestine or white abdominal fat remaining, and if you find none, place it back inside the belly cavity; then take a needle of the kind used for large threads made of ten strands, and insert it into the rear section of the abdomen where it comes out after the skin around the hips; after the waist line, remove all the protruding parts that are visible from these threads until there are four of them; then join them one on top of another in a cross-like manner, secure the abdominal fat with this joining method we have described which is under the egg's skin and done tightly for two strands; then cover and bind the threads, securing them firmly with two strands each way so that no loops made by the strings can enter into them, ensuring no abscesses form inside; and make a continuous binding following the first longitudinal binding of this length, and after these two bindings leave a considerable part of the abdomen which is under the buttocks large enough for about one finger width; then proceed with this tying according to the roundness that the egg carries throughout; then clean the abdominal area from any remaining skin or muscle so it aligns properly again like we have described earlier; then apply wet wool oil and place it on the wounds, and apply the binding we have described.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And once the white silk that we have mentioned has been cauterized, after the incision, in case of bleeding.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	For this happens many times, and let the wound drain through him; and if it takes long to heal, then heat water, and place it where we have said, while letting it drain; then treat the wound with another treatment, until he is completely healed.
de hernie carnouse	regarding fatty hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this branch, I never see anyone who dares to perform the treatment with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the old ones said it is done like a branch tied together with twist, in such a way that you tie the vessels, after trimming them lightly on their underside; then pinch between your fingers and treat the abscess of what operates, until the vessels drain. And treat it as we have said, until it is completely healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	None of the times comes rupture in the lungs, as we have said, and open their mouths; and no substance of the intestines escapes through them, and if there does escape, it's little, and repair all hours; and always if it stays too long at this point, then the wound or phlegm occurs until the intestine escapes; and this happens because of the extension of phlegm in the lungs, as we have said, because it is extended, then it softens and inflates their mouths and opens; and treat it with a cautery, as we have previously stated; and never cure by iron in this manner: and let the patient lie supine on your hands, then cut the swollen area of the inflammation according to the size of three fingers; and then extract the phlegm that is under the skin where it follows, then take out the root and put it on the protruding part of the phlegm; and press at full against the abdomen, then cut the two visible parts of the phlegm near the root of the tendon, and cut one by one; then extract the root of the tendon, and do not pinch or extend the egg or any other thing as I have informed you in the treatment of the branches of intestines; then treat it with the treatment of wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you stitch up the children, if it heals and treats the wound, until it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The heart is confined, and does not show itself in the operation, and the cautery becomes wetted in this place, and closer to salvation.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of softening the skin of the heels
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the skin of the testicles in some men becomes soft due to the fluids within becoming softened and it can be observed; and when one wishes to treat them, one must make the patient relieve himself on his back, and let out the softened skin towards the natural skin. Then it is necessary that upon wishing to heal them, one frees up the discomfort on their back by removing the soft skin from three stitches or four firmly; then cut between the stitches, and sew the wound like any other injuries until it heals, and cuts the thread.
dou chastrement	of punishment
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	Know that punishments are abolished in our law, and because of this I would prefer not to speak about them in this book; and they are only necessary for two reasons: the first being that one must know how to respond when asked questions about them, and how to treat them; and the second, because we often need to punish some animals to assist us, such as goats, sheep, dogs, and other beasts.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	So I say that punishments are carried out in two ways: either through attraction or by making a wound.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	In this method of punishment by attraction, we place the animal in hot water until its horns soften and are manageable. Then take them with your hand, until they are restored and you no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	For the process of tail mutilation: you must mark the beast, and press its skin between your left hand and the clamps, then attach the amputator, cut around each opening as much as required; and leave no hole deep or shallow within the veins. And this method of mutilation is better than that which uses suction, because suction might sometimes retain some skin fragments causing the beast to crave lust afterwards; then treat the wound until it's healed.
des hermofrodites	Of hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	Hermafroditism exists in two ways according to one's anatomy: one way is that between the two openings they resemble the natural figure of a woman, or it may have hair, and sometimes within them the urine flows.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And the other way is in women, and has at its bellybutton like a penis and two openings.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	And the treatment for smallpox and plague is that you cut all bound strings, and treat them as other wounds; in the second way, for men whose urine jumps through the skin of their heels, there is no treatment.
de la tentigene	Of the measles
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	Tentingene is a bound string on the natural part, as long as it's too ugly to see; and some women have it as large as a hand, and this is its treatment.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	It is necessary for you to dye the excess of the tentingene with your hand or on nails, and remove it lightly; and do not cut too deeply, so as not to cause bleeding, then treat it again differently until it heals; and at another string that comes out of the mouth of the marriage bed, and in intercourse, and by chance a wound occurs, and is like a cow's hoof, and because of this they called it the old 'cow disease'.
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If it is necessary for you to perform this operation, as we have said about the lancing procedure, and treatment until it is healed.
de erratique	Of cautery from fire command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	Erratic is if the nature of the woman is not completely understood, or if the organs are small; and they have their natural disposition at birth, or accidental positions due to illness that has occurred; or it's because of union with a man, or due to an intricate substance within her body, whether subtle or dense, and these can be found in the breasts, along the ribs, under the breasts, or wherever they may be; and one must understand how conception occurs, and childbirth, and by chance the flowers for reproduction; and the knowledge of this is through observing the pregnant woman's condition.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If there are visible injuries nearby, look at your hands or to the side.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	If there's an intricate subtle issue and it's close to the lungs, act quickly and do this: place both your index fingers together, and have the woman on her back with her legs spread; then form both the lungs such that the subtle intricate parts are enclosed and cover the injuries. Then take a piece of thread, oil it up, and apply it over the lung area, making sure she lies in bed every day until it can fuse together, so that it doesn't stick.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if it's hard and tough at the syfine, you need to strike with the cautery as if it were a leaf of myrtle.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it's a birth mark, raise the patient to their back and apply; have the止血 medicines ready to stop bleeding, such as myrrh, dragon blood, incense, mixed with plenty of egg yolk. Then administer an infusion made from a large amount of poppy that prevents the wound from healing; do this for a long time, then cover them with a linen tent. Proceed with other treatments until they are healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when it comes to marks born with them, if it suits to treat in this manner, if they are abscesses that need draining.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For the abscess that is in the mark and needs to be drained, one should not use fire to touch it.
des emorroides	Regarding piles (hemorrhoids).
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	Bleeding wounds are openings of veins which without proper treatment, and when bleeding wounds become thickened they do so. And we have discussed these similarities earlier in the division, and their symptoms, and I will now explain those that require healing.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that the bleeding wounds and the thickened ones, when they heal in the stomach, do not show themselves to touch or smell, other than by iron treatment.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those that are at the mouth of the stomach, one can feel them, and those one can treat.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	Therefore, you should put the woman in a cold house, then place her on an altar with tongs and a pot at her roots. Then sprinkle medicinal agents that restrict blood flow, such as comfrey and dragon's blood and incense, among others; then immerse her feet in ice for an hour, then set her in cold water; if bleeding persists, let her take a decoction of sumac and the peel of red apples and gall, among other things. Then take cornmeal and mix it with honey and saffron, then apply it as a plaster on her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if it stops bleeding, that is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	If not, make him lie down and apply suction cups on the back and breasts without piercing; then take wool, and the moisture in the sap of plantain or in the sap of agnati with old wine, and apply this on his body.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the abscess rests, treat his body with ointment until it is healed; and that which is called "albathir" is red, resembling a hard head, so cover it as I have described for thulul; and then continue to treat him until he is healed.
des apostemes de la marris	The contents of the wound
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many forms of abscess occur in the mouth, such as gangrene and pimple-like abscesses, herpes, ulcers, fistulas, hemorrhoids, and other abscesses that I have mentioned in the section.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	So then it is necessary that I speak in this treatise about the pus filled with mucus, which is not among pus clotted by bow; and if you wish to know how to handle ironwork, look for whether the pus is clear at the beginning of its arrival, and full of heat and fever, and if it turns red when you can see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	So do not hurry to pierce it immediately, but let it die as long as the pain is relieved; and then have the patient sit on the stool, with two small stools under his knees where he leans forward, supporting him from behind and assembling his legs towards the parts in front of the leg; and make sure his buttocks are spread out, put his arms under his knees and bind them well with a good bandage; then encourage him to blow against his right side, and introduce an instrument into the opening of the throat, which follows next; it is necessary that when you see this instrument being introduced, you first determine the depth of the throat so that what enters through the instrument does not go deeper than it should, and does not hurt the patient; and if the instruments are larger, cover the depth of the throat with cloths, so that the instruments do not weigh down on her; and have him put the funnel of the instrument above, and cut the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	And when the abscess has opened, and you treat it manually with gentle touch, one should cover it at its head, at its neck or in the pit of the shoulder blade; and when the wound is drained, it is fitting to put wet cloths in olive oil or in dried thistle oil; then place the cloth saturated by the wound's edge into a mixture of marjoram, and spread that on top with another clean wet cloth dipped in water or made with cooked willow leaves and aristolochia roots; afterwards apply this ointment after two days, until it heals; never lift off the marjoram and wound through a cistern of water and honey, then with water or with cooked root mixture of willows and aristolochia; then again, revive with this ointment.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound has returned to being in the marjoram herb bed, then you must guard against heating with iron, but treat it as we have instructed when dividing tasks.
de l’enfantement	Of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	Master comes first in the dance who knows the form of natural birth, and its signs are this: when you see a woman about to give birth from below, and smell the scent: then the child急于 to escape; you should understand that this delivery is according to the natural form, and comes out through her head, with the placenta afterwards; and when you see these signs, it is right to gently press her stomach, so that the child will come quickly; for when he descends from his head, it follows him, and is freed from his excesses by good delivery process; and this does not happen otherwise.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	For it comes at no time over its feet, and comes out through the body or shoulder, and hands, or comes out over his stomach, or belly, and is transformed by chance from his neck, and by other harmful shapes; this is necessary in the dance that she should be wise and subtle in these matters, and beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the forms on how one must help it.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	When the baby descends through its head by a natural outlet, and the woman experiences severe labor pains, if her strength is weak, she should sit on a stool or have women hold her. She should eat food from fenugreek that has been cooked, and then have the midwife place between her fingers a small spoon (spatumile), as shown:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	And cut the second one, and remove up to his moisture until it is expelled; and take hold of the woman's abdomen as her child descends, and if she doesn't, then administer castor oil with fennel seed paste to the woman. Then have her drink and sneeze on consin (an old term possibly referring to a type of broth), and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: now let the child come forth.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And if her two hands come forth, you should gently pull them in and out; and if they cannot enter, then place the woman on a stool, and lift her feet up. Then remove the stool from under her, and cut open the woman so she doesn't defecate during removal; and if her hands can't enter and her child is dead, then use a knife that was placed beforehand, extract the child, and pull out equally.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	From the birth of the child on its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	When the child comes on its feet, it should be lifted upwards; and then turn it little by little, until it is even; then press down on its feet and spread them little by little.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	Can it jump to its knees, if you command and make it whine with consideration; if it jumps further, may God will it.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it doesn't adhere as we have said, if you twist a little bit by a little bit, until it is according to the natural shape.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	Therefore, make it lightly.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	And if it doesn't jump like we have done, say to take a muscilage of height and oil of sesame, and melted gum, and grind everything in a mortar; and apply this ointment inside and outside the woman's body, then make her sit in warm water until under her ribs; and when she is moistened there, make her wear myrrh collar, put it on her, and leave it for an hour; then have her sit on the bench, then make her whine and restrict her mouth and nose, and lightly rub her stomach, because the child jumps now.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	from the birth of the child onto his knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	When the birth takes this form, if she puts her hands gently and gently on him; then stand behind his neck, and hang his feet downwards from above, and let him lie on his side at bed. And bend his arms gently and gently, and then hold his hands on his belly, and move the knees away until he is prepared from below; and if the child does not jump, take his feet firmly and shake them, then shake the belly upwards, then I push my hands; and extract the baby gently; and command the woman to pray as long as the child comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	from the birth of the child which proceeds with one hand during
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	It's necessary to engineer in order to bring back the hand: if one cannot bring it back, make the woman stand up and walk; if she can't walk, make her sit on the bed and lift her legs. Then apply the massage that I have described; and if she doesn't give birth, make her sit on a stool, then try bringing back the hand; and pull out the baby according to its natural shape, and make her sneeze, and command her to pray as long as the child comes out fully.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	From the birth of the child at its neck, have it spread its arms, and twist its face towards its mother's back.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	It is necessary that you touch their hand gently, then turn it gradually and gradually, and lift them slightly. And when they are equal, place them on the natural muscle tension of elevation and oil, as we have said, then command her to move gradually; and once you have accomplished this task, make her sit down and command her to pray; and make her sneeze.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	In the same manner for all the second part.
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	When it comes to this manner for the whole second part, if you have removed the second part at your nail, as long as moisture is being cleared out; and if there's any child inside and under their chin and neck region, you should let her go from the birth canal so she doesn't get trapped, and kill the child; then expel the child inside, until you've placed them properly in accordance to how they need to be, and command that the woman pray every time: then gently remove her.
de l’issue des gemelz	from the birth canal
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	You know that twins are born often, and sometimes three or four at once; this is not an unusual thing, and it doesn't happen frequently.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	Two things are removed, and do not live anymore, if I am not mistaken; I know this much, that they multiply, and get burned by the fire which devises them, which is bound to the oven; and no more come out naturally like all under, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And if they are pulled out painfully, as we have said for the treatment, and that is in a subtle way, and do it quickly and lightly like she does; and do it similarly according to what benefits health.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	They are never formed in the Maris I to XV or more up to XV, and they are all shaped like an infant by the measurement of the glorious womb, it is necessary that the midwife know all this because such a thing might happen to her; do according to what should be done.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	When you treat the woman with the dead child or belly, as I have said in the division, and if it doesn't come out, and you are forced to operate by hand; then you need to know whether the woman is healthy or hasn't had a miscarriage; also that the woman be conscious on her back, and has her shoulders slightly forward, and her legs raised; and guide her head tilted at half of two parts, or if she's tied to the bed so she isn't moved during the expulsion of the child; then anoint the mouth of the mother with moist olive oil using a muscillaig mixture of rosemary and fenugreek seeds, then grease her hands with these oils and these muscillaiges; then pour them onto the mother lightly, then when you want to move her hand or she moves her fingers that are movable for this, take care that the child appears equipped to descend on his head; if plant the seeds in her eyes or at her neck or mouth or in her palate or under her beard or at the throat or near the ribs, and if it descends on feet, then plant or pierce her with a knife along the mid-side; and it is necessary that you grip the seed with your right hand, place the curve between your left fingers of her hand, and guide them gently with all your hand until it comes to the empty thing; this is the form of the seed:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	Then find another oak branch, or if necessary the third one, so that the extractions are equal; and then make them even by moving from side to side, for ease of exit, and ensure that the branches have teeth to hold during extraction, as illustrated here:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if any part remains, if there's a scab on some of its doves from that area, and treat it in that part, and pull out the other part; and if no part remains, then place this branch or higher up, and do as much until everything comes out fully.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	And if one hand comes before the other and cannot be brought back by squeezing, it's necessary that you wrap around the first glove until everything comes out; then cut in the place of the joint on the sole or at the wrist, and similarly do with the other hand, and for both feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	And if the head of the child is large and it is twisted at the exit, or it has a sharp tip assembled, then you should push the spiny spur between your fingers, and form the head and remove the sharp; or you will cut it with the instrument called 'almidach', which comes with the tools or chapter after this one; and thus similarly cut off the child with large natural head; and then pull hard on the bones with tweezers, and if the head twists and holds to force, as long as the moisture at its base flows out; and if it cannot come out, you should puncture in pieces until you can move them; and if it is swollen in the belly or around the sides, then you must cut as much as the moisture runs.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if birth takes place at the feet, there is a light pull, and the connection to the mouth of the vagina is also light.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	And if it is twisted in the belly or at the udder, then you should pull it out by its skin envelope on the hand; and stretch the belly or the udder, until the moisture which is there runs off; and if any other member has osteitis, and the head remains, then push your thumb down from the palm of your hand, and pull until the mouth of the teat is reached; then push in a ring or two, and pull hard; and if the mouth of the teat has narrowed due to an abscess that came there, it would not be right to remove this forcefully, but it should be treated with moist and fatty things; and apply ointments, and dip into water-based soothing and moistening substances.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if the fetus is under his ribs and you can put him level, follow what we have said about administering to live children; and if it cannot be done this way, if you pull by parts, and leave nothing of the second part.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And once you have done this, follow what we have said about administering to those with abscesses that come in the middle region; and if bleeding occurs afterwards, place it in water while restraining it, and apply other treatments.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman in whom an offspring had died, then another one was conceived within it, and the other one was expelled by it.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After much time passed, an abscess came in the belly, and inflated to such an extent that it opened, causing intense pain.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was summoned for treatment, but I considered for much time, and could not secure the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I placed it on a strong plaster, and from it came out a bone, and after several days another one.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was very amazed because this person's belly has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I attend to the wound, and with my hand in her stomach as long as the woman was at her best point; and I let the woman stay like this for such a time, and it so happens that she is slightly better by then; and I have remembered this chapter only because of what happens when masters find an unfamiliar thing, they should know how to provide aid.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to bring back the wife to her place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	Next comes the form of the presser, with which one works in the books; and at two turns for each pair of four limbs.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	In every way, the horns should be more delicate than a retractor, and made of ebony or boxwood. And let the opening at the end of the rod be about as wide as two fists, and the groove for the sticks should be cut, and measure half a palm long, or slightly longer; and in the middle between the two sticks there should be two attachments of the same rod, which must fit tightly in each other, from half a palm's length to somewhat more; and these two attachments are fastened at the mouth of the trough to open when one turns the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Another form, resembling it more delicately and lightly, should be made of a rod from ebony or boxwood according to the appearance of the pincers; and have at its two ends two attachments, as you see, each about half a palm long, and two sticks wide; and when you observe the woman open with all the instrument, make her sit on the bed, her legs hanging down and her thighs spread apart, then position the two attached parts together in the trough, holding the head of the instrument between her buttocks; then work your hand over the entire instrument just as you would do with pincers in a similar way, according to how much you observe the mouth of the trough opening up, until it carries out what she desires.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	This instrument is all mounted high and multiplied in appearance; and when you see them arranged, work faster, and stand higher for their size.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	Do not lose hope with the instrument until you have set it up, for its necessity is unacceptable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	When the second thing is retained during childbirth, you must command the patient to hold her breath and then make her inhale with consideration. And keep her hands at her mouth and nose; if she jumps because of this, it's well done.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	If that doesn't work, take a glass or cover it and put in herbs that can open the mouth of the mare, such as calament, rue, anise, chamomile, cassia and centaurium. All these herbs, or any of them, should be cooked or steeped in water on fire; then place a reed or gourd over the pot and another end in the mare's mouth, and hold it until the vapors enter the mare; then make her inhale, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If you jump to the next quickly.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	And if she remains after this treatment and lacks strength, you should instruct her to moisten her left hand in sesame oil or musk oil, then apply the balm onto herself, and proceed with the second part. And when she finds it, take hold of it gently and stretch it slightly straighter, ensuring no difficulty in extraction; but must move it lightly to the right and left, and then pull; if this comes easily and is relieved.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	And if the uterus is tightly constricted, we have said that the treatment of coughing and herb fumigation applies. If she doesn't respond to all that we have said, then you should refrain from applying ointment too aggressively; however, it's necessary that whoever is handling the uterus ties it to the woman’s ovary, then administer a turpentine ointment enema; she will take care and return strength. But still, when she appears fine, if there emerges an unpleasant smell in her stomach and head, or if the patient gets irritated by the treatment.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	So, then it's necessary to use applicable fumigations for this: none of the old ones have proven that fumigation with watercress and dried figs works.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the instrument used to fumigate the woman during childbirth retention or postpartum is like this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And it is to see something like a reed, and place the subtle head in nature, and the broad shoulders over the fire; and apply smoke above the coals, and remain until she is burned, then start another.
de percier lou fondement	To pierce the base
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many children are born without having the subtle foundation perceived, but rather have it distorted by a syfac: therefore, at birth, ensure that she perceives this syfac according to its rightful position, and do not allow her to pierce through any sharpness, and guard against touching this positioning; then apply wet wool soaked in wine and oil, and continue with the ointment treatment until it is healed.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will not return, place or insert a piece of treacle and let the hand stay for several days, then remove it when the child wishes to move into chambers.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And suddenly these blisters on the wound or abscess often occur; it is necessary to deal with this suddenness: if you treat them, as we have said about treacle.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula from the base
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	Fistulas originating from the foundation are blockages, and those that originate beneath the foundation or in the space between two parts, whether for one fistula or multiple ones; and when this blockage is old, if it works, and absorbs moisture to form a white or subtle bow shape, and on no occasion are these fistulas painful; and they are known by the fact of there being discharge or windiness when the patient expels, and sometimes in her movements.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if there are fistulas that penetrate up to the bladder, and up to half of the penis; and reach up to the junction of the thigh, and up to the root of the scrotum.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And thus one knows the fistula persists at the base, and does not persist: it is when you press on your index finger or base, and stick in a slender needle or spider's leg or iron wire into the fistula when there is no winding.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	And if it has winding passages, if you stick in a slender thread or a horse's mane, as long as you feel the thread or hair on your finger; and if you don't feel it, and there is no discharge of pus, windiness, or worms, as we have said: know that it does not penetrate; so hurry to clean.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula extends to the bladder or to the passage of urine, if the urine jumps in it, and cannot be soldered with medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	If it has penetrated up to the joint of the ankle, then there is a thread coming up to the knee; if there are no winding passages and an internal pain, then it is in the bowels, and doesn't deserve medicine or immediate treatment by ointment; and in these persistent fistulas there is no cure but labor, and vain efforts of those who interfere.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	In this neither Persian nor ancient medicine, there is hope for healing through iron, as I have proven, and that the patient lies on their back; and you lift their legs up to their thighs, and lean their thighs forward towards their stomach; then place a tent of spider web, or of snail shell if there are tortuosity issues, until you know where the tent comes from.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If the patient feels something under their foundation, it is necessary that you place your index finger there. If then you sense that the tentacle has pierced them; and find out where you feel between your fingers either sputum or pus, then know that it's Persian. If there is no movement from this point, one can't cure it.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	One can still manage to heal quite well, but this happens rarely. When assistance is provided, one heats the fine cautery according to the size of the fistula, as previously mentioned; and then he puts it all hot into the fistula until it comes out from under the foundation; and do this twice or three times, until you know that those pus sacs are burned away, which resemble a bird's feather. Then cure with wet tentacles in butter until that pus comes out, then apply ointment to encrust and fuse the area.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If he's thus healthy, that's well.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	If this is the case, nothing else can be as healthy. And if you attempt it inside, and doesn't puncture up to the muscle which is or forms the foundation, and in between your finger and the tent, there's a thick covering of flesh or syphilis, and you see the fistula under that skin; if the pus starts coming out of this, and pushes towards the tent before the tent, and then apply the cautery after that, until it reaches the tip of the tent; and the tent will be removed, and drain out. Then cleanse those fleshfuls that seem like a bird's feather, and leave nothing behind.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if it doesn't heal with the skin, cut between you and the wound, then apply either fire or an ague medicine cautery.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	For the fire cauteries combine two good things: that is, the burning of these joined fleshfuls, and the evacuation of blood and the removal of moisture; then treat wet tents with butter or ground substances, as long as the pus comes out, and the flesh burned up in the pus; then heal the wounds from congealed fat or hard flesh, which are dried medicines.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, if it is healed and does not recur.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes just up to half of its depth, and is far from the body, seal it with your hand or the base, and inquire about this.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If you feel the tentacle and it's in the weave or the syphilitic ulcer or pustules, close to bursting, if there's no exit other than a fiancé's path and hope, through administering one of three ways: or cauterize it as we said, or dig down until you reach rock bottom, or if you can pierce it then treat with an ointment; don't go too deep for fear of removing the foundation's support and allowing discharges to happen involuntarily; then heal it following our method; by chance it will be healed, or remove that covering and clean then once it has been dug down from under the foundation, or with another pointed instrument; then cleanse that pus-filled part in the wound as much as possible; then study how to restore the wound, and to keep the fistula open at the lower part of the foundation: if this is a lighter task for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And at no time are canals done in this way: and when you press the tent on the canal, and it is where it rests below the skin above, if take a tent pierced to the head according to this shape:
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And tie two twisted threads together, and press the tent into the hole until it reaches the head along the entire length of the thread.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	And if it is Persian at the margin beneath the foundation inside, then extract that thread of that torn one, as you press your finger or foundation; and pull out the head with the thread, and assemble the two ends together, and bind them to each other, and leave for one day or two; and bind it every time until the thread fits these cores that are between two, and closes them; then treat the wound until it is healed and cleansed.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not open, make an incision in all possible ways until it opens, as long as it is not too close to perfection.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not suitable to do this procedure of placing a splint correctly first and then treat, as we have said, until it heals.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	The shape of the sharp spathilium used to make the canal is quite small and on one side it cuts through; and on the other side no, because in that case you neither take nor should not be removed, as you see here:
des emorroydes	from bloodletting
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	Fat embolisms occur in two ways: either they are within the foundation, similar to a resin grain, and there are small and large ones, and when they infiltrate blood, and whether there is one or more, and are external from the foundation and towards the top of the foundation; but those that are external have little moisture, and also near the bottom where there's a bit of yellow water or a bit of blood, and have the color of flesh; and for treating these that are within the foundation, you must order the patient to expel them through his body, as long as the foundations exit it, and you see the filaments; if he hurries and grabs with tongs, or you hold him by your nail, then cut at their roots; and should one of the fragments not be able to stay due to its moisture, then take them with a sloop, or cotton, or a piece of leather; and extract them with your fingers, then cut them, dusting over any heated powders that are in place of a cautery; you cauterize them just like it's said or chapter about the cautery process, for other treatments until it heals; and if the foundations can't exit, then cleanse the patient with cathartic remedies, biting sharply to wash what is or near the foundation, so that it may exit smoothly; when the patients recover, and see their filaments come out from the foundation, then the treatment becomes lighter; and you take them by your nail or tongs, then cut them, treating them as we said until it heals, until he fears a metal incision.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If you need to stitch the wound according to this manner: take a twisted thread and tie it onto an awl, then pull the thread upwards and make the awl pierce from another side, and loop the two ends of the thread around the awl, making sure they are wide; hold the thread tight, then tie the thread into a knot, remove the awl, and do so for all others, leaving one to absorb excess blood. Then put on each base an oil-soaked cloth or plaster, and place it onto the base, instructing the patient to rest; and then leave them until they heal completely, once they have healed properly, apply ointment and other treatments until they are well.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	By drying through the fire or the foundation
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times, there is severe bleeding in the intestines, due to nature's compulsion and when the illness has become old and medicine no longer provides benefit.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If you need to scrape the tip of a spathile or the skin above your fingernail, do not let it get wet. Then treat until it becomes hard as necessary; and if it does not become hard, repeat the scraping more forcefully than before, until some healing begins and there's been enough peeling off; then treat until it is completely healed.
dou fremit	with trembling
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	Formice is a small appearance before the body, and it goes from side to side; and whenever the blood flows through the veins, and one feels it too like death throes, and it comes throughout the body, and more in the hands than elsewhere.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	And the treatment is that you take a stick made from an goose feather or a strong vulture feather, and place this stick on the death throes until the purple circles completely surround them. Then move your hand with the entire stick as long as you cover the whole of the death throes, then move it to all sides, and rid it of its roots by pulling out the death throes.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see fit, make it in the form of a reed or iron stick like this, and ensure it is thin going under and thick coming up.
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	Do not make it too thin; you must hold onto both ends and squeeze it. If you can see, use the cautery to cauterize the twitching as shown or described in the section about fire cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	From the shape of the bladder
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Never make a bladder out of silver or archaut, or molten iron or maillechet; and never make these small and large tools according to their intended use.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	So therefore, when dealing with the treatment of children and those who are weak and painful, they should be small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The shape of the bladder, whether small or large, is thus above broad; or the stomachs are bound in this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and there is a need where the belly should be closed up as you see fit, and where the head should penetrate inside it; and at one of the sides are two holes, and on another side just one; and let the belly receive medicine from a beast's bladder or parchment, and have these penetrations entirely filled with small holes, and between each hole there is an inch of space. Then insert in each hole a thick thread of raw yarn twisted in X or an equal number times around, and close up the belly as tightly as a sheep would; once the medicine is inside, bind it with the tool facing forward by one strong thread, then perform enemas; this is the shape of a circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And let the medicine not be too hot nor too cold, and smear the head with oil or yolk of egg balm, or similar thing, then gently rub it in; afterwards the surgeon assistants handle him between both hands until all is visible, then remove the clot, and lift the patient's legs to show them off, if he desires the medicine to come out, do so as much as possible; and should he sleep through an entire night, further assistance will be more beneficial.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you use it in the disease of stomach passage and the medicine starts to escape quickly, redo it as long as it is safe.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And if the bleeding is from a wound or its base, or an abscess, even when it's as thin as for a child; and this is the shape of the thin clot where the skin is being compressed:
des plaies	of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have spoken about the treatment of wounds in our division; now we will discuss hand surgery and medicine according to completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I state that wounds are varied according to how they are made, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and for why they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	The causes for injuries are due to the impact of stones, sword cuts and knife wounds, or spears, arrows, axes or similar things; they can also happen according to the parts of the body. For instance, injuries on the neck, head, chest, abdomen, liver, and other body parts. I will now describe how each injury is treated, starting with head injuries since my recollection will come in handy for this chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	I say that when a simple wound occurs or bone is broken, and the bone isn't fractured, be careful if it's from stones or similar objects, and even though the skin has completely been torn open and the wound is large, and you slightly doubt whether pus will come out: if it starts to clear immediately from the head region in the same way as from the wound, and there is a little blood coming from the wound, then do a wet dressing on the affected part; and if the patient fills up with wine and heavy foods.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it doesn't start to clear, reduce their meat intake, and don't drink wine or eat heavy foods; put some on the wound, if pus comes out, use wet cotton in oil rosewater or rose water, or in astringent wine; and if no pus is coming out, apply to the wound, if it's fresh with all its blood, and isn't being dried by the air, with powder, which I will mention shortly; and if it has been dried by the air, apply some ointments until they are healed.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large like that of a sword and similar, and the lips cannot be stitched together with bandages, then stitch them together, as I will explain for wounds on the belly, by stitching.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	If the wound exposes the bone, it might stick but can only hold for a little bit if handled; then treat the wound with medicine, restore hard tissue instead of skin, and instruct the patient to consume large meats like testes, cooked wheat, such as pulses, and similar items.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if you find or smell flesh decay, and it doesn't reach the bone, then extract all of the decayed flesh, pour out pus, then treat; and if there's an artery in the wound or vein, which cannot be stopped by medicines, so remove the artery, and if you find it dislocated, tie it with a thread; and if this doesn't help, then cauterize.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, treat them with a light cure: and you should put on this powder which seals in such a way that when the heat has passed, it stays firmly.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And the method for the powder is as follows: take one part of incense; dragon's blood two parts; live charcoal three parts, and finely grind them all into a powder. Apply this powder to the wound, packing it tightly until it fills well and binds with all the blood; then apply firm pressure and allow it to air properly without swelling. Don't remove the medicine until it heals completely, as you should leave it in place until it no longer swells.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And one performs this only with salt alone, when one does not have the incense or the blood of dragon, but when the medicine has healed the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the heart has healed the wound, even in that state, if you do not add this powder to it; but apply some digestible ointments, or oat flour made with water and honey, until it stops bleeding. Then treat further with other treatments until it is sound.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And if bone bruising accompanies the wound and it's small, then apply fine forceps to it; and I will tell you about bone fractures later.
de la plaie dou col	From the wound of the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	That wound comes from the neck and it is simple; if there's no distinction between one and another in the neck or around the throat, but when the neck veins or the artery are cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	If it's the nerves, without any other treatment than leaving the cure alone and not applying anything that restricts them, as they harm the nerves and make them recede; and don't place anything cold on the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold, and their continuation with the spinal fluid is within the highest limbs; but use warm medicine, such as oil rinsed in soft water, mixed with rose oil, and other earthy substances prepared this way, and wet ointments.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, one sews and binds it with bandages, then treats it as long as it heals properly.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wounds are deep and full of pus, if you pierce them or even below them; and if there's blood vessels cut, causing bleeding then, you must open it, seal it again, and cauterize which requires skill; and if the spinal cord is cut, or there are openings of blood elsewhere, guard any passage that food travels through, make sure not to touch the throat but reset it according to its natural shape; and then apply a dressing for days afterwards until healed. And if the wound has spread into bone, you must seek it out; and if pieces of bone exist, remove them all if possible, leave what cannot be removed till the wound heals and discharges cleanly before cleaning it and preparing the exit; and if the wound is fresh, apply powder as I've said on top of the powder.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone in the wound and it has an opening, treat it as instructed in this chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	Regarding the wound from a spear or a knife.
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	If it's a lance or knife wound, and the injury is deep, observe if there's an airflow from the wound so you can tell that the patient might be in danger. If it isn't deeply injured, and it's fresh with all its blood, don't apply powder at first hour or bind it without the blood dispersing through the entire depth of the wound and returning to heart, causing stress on the patient; instead apply a healing ointment, bandage twice a day; and if you lack an ointment, fill the wound with old cotton to soak out moisture and let the patient rest for three days or four, or more; if no convulsions or heart tremors occur due to the stress of it all alone; once you see the good changes, and know that the injury is saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	Treat it with other remedies and treatments as long as there is healing; and if it cannot heal naturally, work at it, knowing that there may be a fistula; treat it according to how one should.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And if the wound is from a sword or knife cut and it's simple or worse, or on the back, according to the treatment of whoever is present; if it's large, stitch it up; and if it's small, use powder; and if it's deeply in the bone, and pieces have been removed, then handle the wound accordingly, and let the removals heal over time; and for other wounds on other limbs follow similar judgments as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	From the rupture of the belly
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	Abdominal injuries are large, medium-sized and small; from a major wound there is often rupture of the intestines or their linings, through which foreign objects can enter. Stitching wounds in this area is more difficult and it's generally not better than smaller wounds, as when the intestines come back they're placed multiple times until it feels warm again because the intestines swell upon coldness; thus, a small wound proves better since one must massage the intestine back to its place compared with others. Know that abdominal surgery occurs in four ways: common stitches occur during abdominal surgery and other stitches for wounds on the body and other specific areas are common with other wounds; however, they're generally more precise when it comes to abdominal surgery, I will describe each of them separately.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	I state that when the wound is small and nothing of the intestine sticks out, and there's no injury to a thing, this can be done by one of two methods: either due to the smallness of the wound as we have said or because the intestine is swollen due to cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And when it's cold, warm him in this manner: soak a sponge or dip a cloth in hot water only, or you cook it in boiling water with soap and herbs, and expose the intestine until the swelling is removed; and after doing this, make him sit up so he can release his swelling.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	And when you see the swelling depart, wet the intestine in water or heat and make sure it's cooked until it softens. This way, the entrance can take only a small amount of food; if it cannot enter that amount, then widen the wound slightly using the tool used for extracting worms; and after this initial treatment, allow him to eat as normal unless there is urgent need not to do so; this is the instrument to cut: if you carve inside along the curve and outside not, follow this shape:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound has widened, and the intestines have been displaced, if you are able to reset it according to its natural form in its proper place, do so, because this is better than allowing it to remain misaligned.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	When the wound is large, and it's in the abdominal area, you should make the patient lie on their back with their legs higher than their head. If it's below the belly, put the head and buttocks higher than the parts below; similarly, if there's an abdominal rupture in one of the two halves, position yourself so that the removed part is higher than the other; and thus you should apply what I'm saying about both large and smaller wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	For small wounds use what you are equipped with, then have the surgical tools ready that cut the entire wound at your hand and stitch it together; and this is the common way of sewing. Use one or more needles depending on the size of the wound's width, and leave a space from the head of the wound to two inches, and insert a needle where there is good strong thread; and pierce both ends of the skin with both ends of the suture needle that are inside the skin, until you have pierced through that part, then join the three parts together. Then tighten the thread of each needle inward around one side of the wound stitch, then join the two ends of the wound further on, leaving another space and insert another needle; then sew with this thread as you did with the first needle, doing it according to how many needles you need until all the wound is secured; use needles that are neither too fine nor too thick because the finer ones cut through all the flesh, and those that are too thick do not fit well: they should be of medium size; don't sew them too deep into the flesh and skin so they don't cut and damage the wound before stitching it together; then pull out the ends of the needles to avoid bruising the patient during sleep, and cover the needle holes with bandages or cloths for support until the wound heals; this type of sewing stitch is better for small wounds because a single second stitch is common, where you join both ends of the skin thread with both ends of the suture needle together at one needle that has strong medium thread. When you have pierced all four parts together, remove the needle from the part where you began in the way how you sew clothes and leave space between each stitch as large as two inches; this stitching heals the person, and I stitched a wound that had been cut open by a knife which was deep into the belly with a length of more than one palm's width, and contained intestines about two palms' width long, and it was in the center of the abdomen.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I returned the intestine to its place after it had been there for 24 hours, and the wound healed up until 15 days later. I treated it and it became healthy.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And when they saw that he was about to die, it was a miracle; I did not treat him with ointment since there was no oil or medicine where I was. Instead, I put old cotton on the wound twice a day and washed it with honey water until he recovered.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	Or I will tell you the two proper methods of stitching: take the needle, and insert it from the outer part up until it pierces inside; when she has pierced straight through from left to right, then hold the snout or side where you have inserted the needle, and make her pierce again from the inner part outward until she reaches the outer boundary. And with this stitching technique, just like a marten stitches fur, you sew in such a way that you leave one end of the snout on one side, then take it up on the other side, repeating until all the sewing is completed.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	The second method of sewing, as Galen properly stated, is such that no one does this method naturally. They gather two parts together and apply the needle near each peak. Here's how it should be done: thread a needle or peak of silk near both peaks, then only pierce this area of the body, leaving the two peaks untouched; afterwards move the needle, have it pierce through from underneath until it reaches inside to the two peaks; then pierce through in both areas from underneath to inside as well using another two threads similar to silk that are on the other side; and this is how sewing should be done and is the most common method.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	Galen said this word and no one denies it: that one must stitch the belly with two needles or threads in each; and you should insert one needle from one side, and the other from another, like those who sew buttons. And know that when the wound is in the middle of the belly, then the stitches are more severe than most others' belly wounds.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	The judgments of the wound are like those for other wounds: and when you find the fresh wound filled with blood, just as the surgeon has made it bleed, then suture back the intestine, and the skin; afterwards put on an attracting powder to the flesh. And if the surgeon has made it bleed, apply no ointment that might be available, until the wound heals; stitch up the incision, and the anus, and the navel; then treat the wound as for others, until it is healed; and if you do not have medicines, as soon as it begins to heal properly, use old cotton wool, and clean it twice a day until it is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	For you need no other medicine in multiple conditions when wounds are simple; and if you doubt that the wound might affect principal members, it is necessary for you to moisten a light woolen cloth in oil of tempered heat or rose oil, and place it inside the armpits, and around the groins. And if there feels pain or gangrene in the belly, and happens repeatedly, then you should enemas black wine twice, and especially if gangrene comes near the intestines; and pierce from within, and know that when this is a large intestine, it heals more easily than smaller ones.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestine which is called 'young' cannot heal when it is inflamed, and this is due to the location of the blood vessels there, and because of the delicacy of the whole body, and its closeness to its nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	And if the knot jumps from the wound, then reset it back in the same way as the intestine when it is fresh; and if it's old and has turned to red or black, you should tie the black part of it, so that no bleeding occurs because there are blood vessels and arteries there. Then cut what's between the tie, and hang both ends on either side of the wound all the way out, in order to ease extraction when the knots fall off, and the wound will heal.
de la routure dou boueil	Of the rupture of the boil
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	When the intestine is raw and the wound is small, one can sometimes restore it in any position because I have observed that a man was pierced by a lance or a sword; and there was a wound on his right side of the stomach which became a fistula, causing digestive waste and flatulence. I treated this according to what seemed suitable, and did not stop refining the treatment until it healed, then sutured the wounds.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	And when I saw it fastened together, I wondered if the patient had pain in his stomach. There was no harm, but he remained in better conditions, eating and drinking; and an experimenter said that when there is a small injury inside the intestine, it should be handled like this: take large testicles, then bring the edges of the wound together, and when the testicle opens its mouth, place it over the two edges so she holds her mouth open; then pinch the head, and hold it in such a way that it cannot come loose, then put another testicle after in the same manner as before until the entire injury is covered; like this, the wound stays.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	In cases where the injury occurs in the intestine and there's no harm to the patient, it is possible to bind the intestine with a thin thread cut from an animal intestine. The procedure goes like this: take the end of that intestine thread so that most of it is fleshed out, then tie on another thin linen thread to the end of this intestine thread. Then sew the threads onto a needle and stitch the intestine together, sewing it in the incision; this way of suturing testicles merely follows the path of faith and hope. And if the injury is large and broad, especially when located within one of the intestinal loops, as long as there's no obstruction or stagnation, due to its subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of a sinus or if it be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Know that any wound or abscess, when it matures, is universally called "fistula", and even when it is hairy and filled with pus.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	And fistula is according to the true nodulation hard and white, or one does not feel pain, and it is also hairy like a bird's feathers; and sometimes it contains clear pus, and other times thick pus; sometimes little, and other times enough; and I have spoken of this in the division of wounds, that any wound that has not healed, and if there is no flesh, it can only escape through one of the nine causes: namely, because of the smallness of blood or pus; or due to its malice; or because there is hard pus inside, and on the lips, which does not allow new flesh to grow; or there is too much pus; or the organs are rotten, and the matter has a bad quality; or the medicine used in treatment was not good; or because of the way corruption resembles pestilence; or because of its slow digestion and delayed recovery, and expelled naturally; or there are veins or bones: and I have already shown all these causes, and their signs, and treatments with medicines in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	So it is necessary for me to inform you about the treatment of a fistula which is done by manual work.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	Know that fistula occurs in all members of the body. For there are fistulas that come from large veins, and arteries, and nerves, either at the root or in the intestines, or in the bladder, or on any rib, or on the spine of the back, or on any joint of hands or feet; and if it happens to affect the main property of the body part.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And all the fistulas that occur in this manner cause distress during healing, and there are no other issues but labor and lack of knowledge; and if there is any fistula that does not reach up to where I've said it should, then you're on your way to a cure and can identify it. If you take an araneae tent or iron one, if the fistula is straight, use this tool; and if the fistula is crooked, seek out a delicate plonk tent as the plons bend around its twists. And if the fistula has lost limbs and you cannot properly locate it with tools, flush it through the lost parts, for moisture flows from one limb to another and cleanses; then cut it carefully according to your ability, understanding whether there's bone or nerve inside, and that it's filled all the way, ask the patient about the pain they feel when pressed on by your hand, and where this sensation occurs; and when you truly know its location, if it is far from joints, nerves, arteries or veins, or any of the places I've mentioned, treat it accordingly, remove foreign debris and corrupted flesh that's within; and then continue with treatment until healed. If the fistula has been well placed in the right spot, your cutting should be as thorough as possible, then place moistened cloths soaked in medicated waters inside, making sure they reach up to the tip of the fistula, until these waters corrode whatever remains of the excess; and then apply healing swaddling bandages until it heals. If it doesn't heal through this method, cauterize it as we've described, and if the bone has been corrupted by the fistula, cut it out.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If the vein or nerves are not obstructed or the main limbs, as we have said; and if the bone is exposed, and there's corruption and darkness, you heal until all the corruption has been removed, then cleanse the surrounding flesh until it heals properly; and if it doesn't heal properly, proceed in this manner as before, know that you are not finished until you uncover and cleanse to the bottom, removing all the corruption, then restore the joint; and if it is healed properly like that, it's well done.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	If it isn't so, know that the corruption is too deep for removal, you can only leave it to nature's course; and if there's a small corrupted bone, if you can extract it with forceps, use an appropriate instrument suitable for this task, and if there are many bones, remove them all, not leaving one behind; and if moisture opposes you and there's no fear or danger, then cope with the moisture along with the flesh, and liberate the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	And if you cannot remove them within an hour, place something that promotes putrefaction on the wound, and leave it until the bones are completely decayed inside, and then they will have lighter bones; and if it's a large bone, such as in the leg or thigh, only let the corruption continue until all of the black part is removed, then close the wound; and if there is a significant part rotten to the core of the bone; you must take care and cover it up to the point of decay, and then treat it until it heals; and I will tell you about a case that occurred in someone's leg where you can take an example and help from your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	He was a young man around thirty years old, who had pain in his leg due to something coming from within the body, until substances reached the leg, and was filled with a large abscess, and there was no reason to open it; but through their madness they opened it so much that the pus came out, and they ate away at a lot of tissues, and became a fistula, and brought such losses that all the body fluids were swollen and moistened; and many doctors treated him for two years, and no wise man knew about surgical skills, until I was called and saw his leg and the medicines used to treat him, and what corroded through the wounds caused great bodily harm; and became red again with youthful complexion, and had a yellowish color of the body.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I pitched a tent at one of these bumps, and then searched all the bumps, finding that some came against each other from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	I hurriedly proceeded and cut out a piece from one of the bumps as soon as I discovered part of the bone, finding it corroded and perforated. The corruption reached up to the inside of the bone; I suspected that there was no further corruption other than what appeared in front of me since it seemed to stop at my discovery; I began treating the wound with medicines for a long period but couldn't stitch it together properly. Then, I resumed surgery, exposing the bone as before and discovered the corruption continued within the bone. I proceeded to cut out that part and then stitched up the wound. But I could only manage to stitch until halfway through a palm of the bone; I removed it completely along with all its flesh, treated it with medicines afterward; it healed and was stitched together quickly without needing to repeat the operation for reasons of the weakness due to illness which couldn't bear any further surgery and because of fear of death that I felt towards them.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For often in the bleeding evacuation, but it was completely healed. A hard flesh formed in its place of the bone, and it had good disposition. It did not cause harm or opposition at all everywhere, neither inside nor outside, neither going out nor coming in.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, as it should be done: take hold of it and stretch at the protruding end of the bone, commanding that it extend upwards; and tie another piece of thicker cloth around the flesh inside the bone, pull the corrupted flesh away from underneath, revealing the healthy flesh where you want to place the bone, ensuring not to hurt the flesh; place a firebrand or a board under the bone to cover the corrupted flesh; one should set it in such a way that until corruption is seen and felt, and do it again if necessary.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	And if the bone is rotten and does not open, and if the corruption is in the middle or a part of it, remove all the flesh. Then place the heat over it and then go from one part to another through the corruption, and do this as long as needed considering what we have said; and if the corruption is at the joint, cut off the rotten joint and place the bone on the other side; and if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, there should be no other angle than this method; and if the corruption is under or within a finger, it would be very strong but still needs to find out about that corrosion according to how it opens; clean it with all methods you can use, but ensure not to harm the vein or nerve. Know that the incision and tools used for bone are numerous depending on the structure of bones and their size and subtlety, as well as their grandeur and littleness and hardness; hence each work should show you its tool according to knowledge in this art and testimony of disease treatments; so consider the tool needed according to what suits.
dou feu	The fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	The members suffer either from within, or due to external factors; and when you have treated that corruption through medicine and it doesn't improve, it is necessary to amputate that limb up until the point of corrosion occurs, so that the illness escapes via this path towards death or from malice, which is more powerful than the fault with the member. The signs for this are that the limbs turn black as if they've been burnt by fire and after turning black, because of this limb's corruption spreading throughout the body; you should hasten to amputate quickly, if it’s due to the impact from certain venomous creatures such as sea scorpion or snake and alike, if corrosion is at the head of two, then cut it off and do not give any space for it to spread up until the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	And if it reaches up to the wrist, if you cut at the joint, so that corrosion does not spread up until the elbow; and if it affects the elbow, if you cut near the elbow; and if it passes through the elbow, this is death, and there is no cure except for what remains of its virtue; and do similarly whenever corrosion occurs or appears: If it reaches at the first joint, if you cut after the other joint; and if it appears anywhere else, if you cut all the way across that spot; and if it ascends into the leg, if you cut at the knee joint; and if it comes above the knee, there is no other means than for you to allow the illness to reach death; and the manner of cutting or preserving the limb is such that you tie on both sides over and under, stretch one strip of linen from the lower link, and another other strip of linen from the upper link, and you cut through the flesh between the two links with a width as large as possible until the bone is uncovered; then cut or preserve, and place linens of each side, so that the preservation does not touch the healthy part, and brings about further injury to the sick.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	And if bleeding occurs when you're working, cauterize the wound immediately, or apply some stoppable powder; then continue with your medicine until it's finished. Then bind the limb securely with a reliable bandage and heal it till it is well; and I'll tell you what happened to this man: he had a burn that seemed like fire poisoning, and that corrosion came first in his foot region, covering all of it. And when he saw the corrosion, he rushed to cover his foot, and then he recovered. A long time after this, the corrosion returned on one side of his hand, and he came to me, and I applied things that reverberate following the purgation of his body. But could not stop the corrosion; and he insisted that I cut off his hand, but I did not agree as I had hopes of reverberating matter; and doubted also if cutting his hand would cause him harm, because his body's virtues were weak. And he lost all hope, returned to his land, rushed to cover his hand, and then recovered. This story is only told for reference in a situation where something similar might be required.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	No time comes pus in the edible flesh, and stays for such a long duration that it assembles many worms; and afterwards these worms eat and puncture, and the worms jump inside the body causing an assembly of worms. And then they stay, like vessels, inside the patient’s limbs, also like a jug. And the skin above is also as thin as fine cloth, and doesn't extend up to the bone or nerve, and this disease is called 'healthy', not called 'fistula'. But if it extends so far that it enters through the bone completely, then it's called 'fistula'. And the skin is such that you can pinch all of the skin intact, also even when it is thin, like fine cloth; and doesn't open up from its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if you have noticed that the skin is burning and corruption hasn't reached all parts of it yet, and the skin beneath is full of pus, then treat with catharctic: observe if the breasts are large, and if there's a foul smell from them; thus prepare a cathartic with Egyptian medicine as follows: take ashes, oil, and litargy equally, put them in a vessel over fire until the medicine turns red, and becomes as thick as honey; then use this according to your need, mix it with water and honey, apply it on the breasts, and hold the application down tightly; let the medicine sit for two hours, then squeeze out excess. Repeat this process until the breasts are freed of pus and dried up; if you do not have access to Egyptian medicine or ashes, use water from vine wood instead, pour some over the paste, let it soak in, apply, repeat until you're sure the breasts are thoroughly cleaned; if it is too harsh for the patient or doesn't tolerate the Egyptian medicine or ash water, then prepare a cathartic with water and honey, where honey has properties to clean and wash, while wine makes pus burn away. Once done, ensure that the breasts are indeed cleansed properly, then apply cathartic that produces pus in them, use plaster of Paris for this purpose; mix it with rose oil or wine. Alternatively, you can prepare a cathartic using other medicines and ointments whose properties I have explained concerning ointments; if the indrawn part is small beneath the breast, and there's no room for your catheter, widen slightly with an iron tool and apply a layer of Egyptian medicine or basilicon ointment until it is wide enough. If the wound is too large, make only a slit at the level where your catheter can fit in; if pus lies above it, pinch out the bowel or even further down than that.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	For when the bowe is in place, one should not allow it to become contaminated; and if you are unable to cover over the opening as you see fit, do this: arrange such that the bowe goes down directly, without leaving any part of the bowe; take consolidating medicines to be placed under the skin, and they are laid out on the linen covering all the healthy area. Then cut close to where the hole is slightly wider than the first, so apply ointment on another piece according to the size of that hole, and place it under the hole towards health to alleviate the bowe, without removing much of the large linen until after several days once; whoever is under the hole in the chest, frequently remove for alleviation of the bowe, and know where it comes from the bowe, whether it's poison or pus or too much, or digested, or indigested; take care if the patient feels pain or no change, and whether there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has been extended in this manner until you see the nature that leaps towards the hole of health, know that the chest is now healing, approaching health; then release in the morning, or on the third day, and when you release the wound, change another linen, renewing the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breasts give off undigested excrement after many days, know that the breasts are not feeding properly.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if venoms are subtly cut after a long time, do not despair of health, for health approaches.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	For there are individuals who take too long to heal in their wounds, and those who do the opposite; and if indigestion comes across immediately after several days from within the breast, you should know that the breast does not recover. And if the breast takes a long time to breathe and is far away, adjust your medicines with dry and moist substances, as with ointment of diafinity, because there is a large part of vitriol, and this is the last medicine; take ointment of diafinity and mix it with roset oil, then pour it over old equal wine in substance; then cook and use it; and similarly, make cooked honey thickened when ointments of diafinity are not available, or you take myrrh and aloen and incense, grind them, and add the powder to honey that has been heated; and then stick this to a cloth and put it on the breast, and administer an aristologist longly, and lily roots which are also like powdered twice and centaury; and use simples or compounds: grind them, make into powder, place over the honey I have mentioned, and use it; and if the treatment lasts long without being cured by this cure, you should know that corruption has spread inward and made an impression in bone, or parts hardened, or limbs; if one treats the wound of fistula, as we said earlier.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the abscess under the nail
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	Panarice is an abscess that arises under the nail of the knuckle of the hand, or under the foot, or by chance in other toes; and when it becomes old, if one does not take care, then the abscess spreads, runs and causes damage for as long as it reaches the root of the nail, and by chance it can reach all of it; and corrosion comes until the bone, as long as there is stinging pain, and the toes turn white and become discolored.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have instructed in the section on division, and if the treatment doesn't improve the situation, then you should take action for it. Cut off all that remains of the nail, then apply a cautery to the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	The cautery should be quite large if the bone is healthy and the nail is intact. If the nail presses into the surrounding flesh, starts to poke out, and becomes inflamed, you should place the red hot metal under the nail so that it touches the flesh, then hold it at a height above. Cut off this thin and delicate part of the flesh gently, and apply heating and corrosive medicine onto the wound area in order to remove everything. Then treat with ointments until healed.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	And if the corrosion is in the bone, you treat it by cutting and applying force, because as much of the bone that is corrupted, it can't heal. And if you see that the nail has become rotten, you cut it off immediately as explained before, then treat until it heals; and if it's hardened and splintered, and there's great pain when touched, you must first make it well. Then cut across diagonally above the nail bed while taking care not to cut too deep into the flesh under the nail, because the patient would feel too much pain from this. And if such happens, place something that soothes over it afterwards.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the pain of the numbness in the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	I must adjust those that are born in the hands of some people by chance and have thick flesh, and by chance there is part or they have bones, and none of them has a nail, and none of these are born at the root of the joint, or the birth is in no way connected to the thumbs.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	Those who are born in any nook do not move, and those born at the joint sometimes do move; the size of the fleshy one is so light that it behaves like this: cut them down to their root using a broad knife.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	That which comes into being at the root of the joint is difficult to treat: hold onto the copper if you can.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In the one born or destined in any rear corner, it is necessary that you first cut down to the roundness until reaching the bone, then cut the bone with a thread suitable for this, and then treat him until he becomes healthy.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The connections that come together at the joints are due to birth, or by the healing of wounds, or by welding with fire, or by similar actions.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	It is necessary that you cut this seam, so that it can be repaired according to its natural forms; then place between two moistened cloths or pieces of fat in rose oil, so they don't join together. Or you place between two delicate pieces of wood, until the fats are joined, just as it should be done.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	When soldering, do it without using your palm, take care to perform the soldering properly as required.
des vils	of villages
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	Vices are thick veins filled with melancholic excesses, which come from various parts of the body. More occurs in legs of those who walk on feet and work, compared to others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	So you should then administer to him one time the cleansing of colic, and then heal him of the basilica.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	The iron treatment follows two ways: one is by squeezing and draining the black blood, and the other way is to open the vein and drain it completely.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	The procedure follows this manner: first heat the leg with boiling water for quite a long time until the large veins become thin. Then squeeze it from above the ankle to just before the knee. Next, cut open one, two or three veins, leaving them large enough, then drain out the black blood using your hand, continuously moving from one end to another until as much of this blood can stand the strength of the medicine; and then close up again and instruct him to eat meat that turns red in the presence of this black. And repeat the evacuation and cleaning whenever veins are full, thus benefiting the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The treatment procedures are as follows: lift the leg from the sore area, if there's hair present, then put it in a hot bath. Then keep raising the leg in hot water until it turns red and inflamed; if you don't have a bathtub, heat it over fire instead. Position the leg on an artery for its entire length from the foot to the knee, or halfway up the leg between ankle and knee; then peel off the skin using vinegar, and burn the artery on each side, until you see blood come out when pressed - it should appear red and black, seeming like a white thread when it enters under the skin. Then burn over this point with fire, as if done before, and do this with another piece of skin; then peel off skin above the artery where visible, and hold up with a string, just as you did previously, and lift again with a small knife, holding for three times; then peel off the skin over the artery until it appears, and lift up with fire, following what was done before. Then burn with another size or sizes if needed, lifting them, pressing at heel to ankle, then moving back up to the second size; then squeeze from size to size, until it's all peeled out completely, then press again. If you can't peel and lift it, insert a strong double thread needle, hold and pull, then burn under this point, turning your hand from side to side till it comes out; make sure it doesn't burn too hot, as if too hot damage would come to the patient; when done thoroughly, place moist wool in wine and oil over the wound site, and keep treating until healed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And if the limb is twisted and turned together in a bundle, and it's not straight, as we have said, it should be that you cut it forcefully but do not twist it; and handle it as we have mentioned before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	The form of the iron used to cut the bone is curved, and does not slice through but cuts instead, so as not to slice open a vein; and it has substantial curvature because if it were fine it would slice open the vessel, but being thick as we have said, and this is the form:
de la voinne civile	from the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	This vein is found in the legs, in warm areas where no plants or trees can grow, and on dry land with no moisture; and it may develop elsewhere than in the legs, which happens due to putrefaction that comes from under the skin, just as serpents and worms cause it inside the body, between skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the signs of this vein's beginning occur in which there is a very great inflammation in the leg, then it changes one's limbs, and the vein begins to emerge outside, like the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	And when the shoulder has been opened, it must be wrapped with a piece of leather about three and a half to four inches around the elbow joint, and then tied, leaving the leather hanging down on the leg. And every time there's any excess coming out, wrap it back under the leather and tie again; if it becomes too long, cut off some part of it while wrapping it again without cutting its root until it is completely done. Because if you cut it, it will get inside the flesh, cause pus and decay in the limb, leading to a bad sickness; for this reason, it should be treated little by little up to about five inches long or ten inches at most and another inch of the elbow's length after which it issues, and when you cut it, cut one rib or two and pierce until the bottom so that everything comes out. And evacuate all the substance inside, and apply medicines for decay on each day, then treat it like abscesses afterwards.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And never at this vein with small cuts, and likewise when it opens in the ankle or knee joint, or indeed where the bone is, much damage comes about, and from such small wounds; thus treat then as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	worms that come out between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	This illness is called in our land "the cow disease", because it often afflicts cows, and it's a small worm that comes out between the skin and flesh, and travels throughout the body going up and down. Its presence can be felt as pain moving from limb to limb, until it reaches the skin where it goes, and then escapes; and it is accompanied by gangrene of some fluids, such as veins and worms and roundworms or in the stomach; doubt arises regarding its malignancy because when it travels through the body, and when it ascends to the head, and arrives at the eye, sometimes it returns and destroys the eye; and this happens many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	When you see it being treated and healed, one must only consider when it will end: thus, it is necessary that you tie the limb above and below with a strong, tight bandage, then cut upwards and start treating, and if the cut is made in proper alignment within the flesh, and you cannot find it, then burn it with fire until it heals; and the biggest nuisances caused by this are when they hurt the eye, as we have stated; and if you see it coming near to the eye, then restrain it from below using a piece of material shaped like a snail, then cut upwards, and start treating; and one should use the remedy of purification through the body's medicines in a dissolved state for the bad humors present, and beware of eating cooked meat that leads to putrefaction.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	The pain that comes from wind.
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	This illness is called in our land 'vakirir', and it is a pain that occurs in any limbs, and then spreads from limb to limb; and I have seen this as I told you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	I was summoned to attend a sick woman, and she revealed my arm to me, showing a small swelling in the vein of her arm. And soon after, I saw it ascend as if a worm were at her shoulder, much faster than anything else, just like hot silver when cut from one place to another; the pain withdrew from that spot and settled into her shoulder, then shortly afterwards spread throughout her entire body, until she reached the other arm; then she told me that it was now moving within her body, as I saw.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I marveled greatly how she moved from member to member in such a way, for I had never seen this disease like this before.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	In every case, I've wanted several times to move the pain from one part of her body to another, but I didn't do it as such, just as I saw in the woman; and I thought that this was due to the woman's wet body, and having exposed veins, and due to that constrainted wind; and they don't seem to understand according to this reason with those who are delicious, and have wet bodies and reclusive veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	And when you see the treatment for this illness, and the patients feel that pain, if it opens up as we have said, quickly seal above and around it, and then apply pressure until the wind's force escapes from the body; cauterize the body; and if you do not see it at your fingertips, treat those with wind disorders, such as stinking pills, pills of serapin, and similar others.
des saiettes	Of arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows are diverse, depending on their appearances and the locations of their impact on the body.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	The variety of them lies in the fact that there are those with large points, and small ones, and barbed, and soldered; and those with two angles, and those with tongues, and those where pieces are found; and those that release in no member but release according to two ways: or within the main body part such as brain, heart, liver, stomach, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	When it dislocates then not at all in the position of these limbs, and the sign of death, which I will tell you later, presents itself: so that you must be prepared for the extraction of this arrow, because death comes after in various arrangements; and when this bad sign does not present itself and the arrow is not fully extracted, then pull it out and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	And the sign of the brain when the arrow dislocates and pierces the bone, and springs the fluid that is under the brain, it's when blindness and numbness and inversion and redness appear in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and convulsions and confusion, and vomiting of bile; and sometimes loss of smell or from nose or ears; and sometimes loss of speech and voice; and a white moist discharge from the wound similar to pus, and also burns like a scorch; and when this sign presents itself, then take action and pull out the arrow if it isn't yet.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	The sign of the arrow when it is deep or in the heart shows that it is near the left nipple, and feels as if it were stuck into something hard, not empty; and by chance the arrow also ceases moving like a pulse, and black blood comes out, and coldness and cold sweat, and fainting: therefore know without doubt that death follows.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of the arrow that never reveals itself is when there's no frothy discharge from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient's face changes color, and they sigh loudly with coldness.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrow exits through the back of the thigh, it's below the small ribs; and there's intense bleeding and pain and sighing; and all limbs from the shoulders downwards move.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if an arrow or stomach contents escape through the wound by chance, there is no matter of undigested meat in that.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if an arrow or stomach contents escape through the wound by chance, and there is nothing passing through the intestines in that jump, then there is no hope for treatment, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if an arrow penetrates into the bladder and urine escapes by jump and leaves, causing great pain to the patient: know that this wound is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other body parts such as the arms and neck and throat and shoulder and elbow and shoulder blade and back spine and ribs and the legs, and seemingly similar limbs are safe according to various arrangements.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in your nerve or artery, and it isn't venomous, as I will tell you what happened to me, because you did something else.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	It happened to one of the people when an arrow hit him under his arm in the root near the nose: I probed it and pulled it out from the other side through the fat of the ear, without much difficulty.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	I pulled out an arrow that had hit him in the fat of one eye under the paper skin, and the arrow was stuck fast, so only its tip could be reached towards the shaft. The player was alright, and no bad incidents occurred to him.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	And one arrow from the throat to a Christian, and it was an Arabic arrow in his ear: I would have shaved him, and made incisions as I pulled the arrow, and he recovered the Christian.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	And pulled out an arrow from the house, that it was stuck in the chest or belly, and I thought he would die; and then when thirty days had passed, it did not change its position. I cut into the arrow, attached a tool to it, and pulled it out, without any bad accident occurring.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	And if you find a house to which an arrow has fallen or struck, and it healed up on the spot; and the arrow remained inside, not changing its natural positions, nor did it find any harm in any of its natural works.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And to another man, who was hit by an arrow in his face, and had the wound stitched closed; and ever since then has suffered great pain; and many others like this.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	And one day an arrow struck in the face of the king, penetrating his nose and was leaning slightly to the right side; and the arrow was completely embedded. I was called for treatment after three days following that incident.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I found the wound very narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	I tried to remove it with all my skill and did not feel it; and he felt pain and discomfort in his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	I thought it might be from the tip of the arrow. I put a drawing plaster and digestive on his face because the ears were not swollen; and I saw the arrow in the ear.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	I applied the plaster for several days, and treated the wound right away, causing the patient's pain to last long periods, until they felt the arrow inside their nose; and he told me this.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	I applied corrosive mercury medicine to the wound for days until it was opened, and tested it; felt the tip of the arrow reaching into his body. Then I adjusted it within the wound opening with that corrosive medicine until I could clearly see the arrow's head. I persisted in treating the wound terminally for four months, then healed the cut so well that my forceps fit properly, applying them from one side and the other; they couldn't be removed. Therefore, I continued to refine and invent various tools ways until I successfully used a pair of well-made forceps on the first day, according to what would be described at the end of this chapter when describing its form, treating it and keeping the wound open until healing took place.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	And they decide that the nasal cartilage cannot be restored: I will restore it then, and the wound was sealed, and fully healed the patient completely.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	Or I told you about the quality of extracting arrows, so place your treatment on what I do not mention, because books cannot encompass everything; but wise masters compare well on quite a few small things, and on that which is present and lacking, they find new work, and new instruments, in the reduction of occurrences that happen in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	I state that arrows enter the body through two manners: either through their length where they penetrate, or from another side; and the one which jumps through or enters through there, it is an arrow going into the flesh, and now no longer shoots.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And if it does not jump now, let her grow until the skin is fully healed inside and she has recovered; similarly, if she's stuck in bone and cannot come out, leave her like that for a few days, and remove each day. And then she will jump, if she doesn't, drill through completely any subtle opening while the limbs are still wide, as long as the body's insides are fully expanded, and then pull it out.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	And if the arrow is stuck in the bone of the head, and reaches up to one of the brains, or if any of the incidents that I have mentioned occur to the patient: do not try to remove it immediately, but let her stay until she recovers after a few days, for when the arrow comes up to the sinus, it is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is only buried in the bone and does not penetrate fully, and stays there for several days without any bad incident, if the device to extract it is used correctly.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it's deeply embedded and can't come out, if you apply thorns internally, as I have told you; then treat the wound until it heals properly.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And if the arrow is reinserted within the body so deeply that it cannot be seen, and one must feel its presence throughout; and if you can sense it when you try to remove it without any suitable tool; and if due to the size of the wound or the depth of the arrow, there are no bones, nerves or veins, then make it as large as possible; and try to pull out the arrow when you can, and if it has holes where it holds on, remove the flesh that is stuck in from both sides until you can, and then break or bend the ears of the arrow, as long as you can pull it out; and be careful not to break the arrow, so you would pull it more harshly.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you can't achieve this in one go, leave it until the arrow shaft is completely rotted, then remove it, as extraction requires agility.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	And if it goes against your blood flow, then apply what we have said about treatment in this chapter; and guard against cutting the nerve and vein, and perform the extraction smoothly without risk or abruptly or harshly or firmly or gently; place the patient according to their position before the arrow hit them. As it is the greatest aid possible for them. If you cannot do so, then leave them as shown by what the sign indicates.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	The arrow that came from the other side, or if there appears anything unusual on it, or if the skin is swollen in some spot which you might see or feel differently: cut up there, as long as your forceps can take hold, and then pull: if it jumps now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is held in the bone, twist your hand round as long as it enters the bone, and widen the bone, then pull it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	And if it cannot come out, let it be still for now, and then resume extraction until the arrow comes out; and if there's an end of the arrow where it is, force that completely. And if it’s just a bit of flesh, and you see proper administration being given, if I provide the tool with a curved edge, so that the point of the arrow enters into the groove of the instrument; and then force it, and if the arrow is inside the instrument, force the tool at its pointed end, to ease the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrow is covered, it is necessary that you cover all the flesh inward or where I come in, if possible, then treat the wound as appropriate.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if the arrow is in the chest or liver or bladder or ribs and it's close to important organs, you should cover above, if possible; but avoid covering the vein or nerves. Then remove what needs to be removed, then suture the wound when necessary; and treat until she heals completely.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the forceps used for arrows resembles a bird's beak, and here is the shape:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And they come in various sizes: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the arrowhead is like the feathers of a bird, for driving into the tip of the arrow, as this is its shape:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The shape of the pliers for pushing and retrieving is like this:
des voinnes dou cors communes	from the veins of common bodies
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	The veins from which bleeding occurs are thirty-one, of which there are sixteen heads: Two tubercles located behind the ears, known as "herb", and two arteries in the two visible temples; and two veins that are within the corners of the eyes, called "aspires"; and the vein that runs through the forehead; and the vein that is at the nose root; and two jugulars which are found on the neck; and two veins above the mouth's lips, these are known as "augerich"; and two veins below the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	The veins that are commonly treated consist of each arm: one is the cephalic vein, and it's on the left side of the body, and people call it the "vein of the head"; and the middle one is called 'fascia', and it's made up of the cephalic and basilic veins, and people call it the "vein of the heart"; and the basilic vein either lies on the left or right side of the body, and people refer to it as the "vein of the belly", and is located under the collarbone, and that's the one we treat, which opens clearly underneath the armpit.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	The veins which are found between the little finger and the ring finger each have two, and in the leg there are three veins: one is near the bend of the wrist on the left side of the body, and the second is superficial and located at the ankle on the right side of the body; and the vein that is called 'the knee', which is found at the ankle on the other side of the body. In the other leg there are three veins under these.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	The treatment of veins that are behind the ears so helps the old catheters and migraine; and the qualities of a surgeon, as I tell you, is that you knead the head of the disease, and rub the area where the veins are on a rough cloth; then pinch the diseased neck with a tool until the two veins appear behind the ears in the two rows under the head: then hold your knife, and at the point where you feel the pulse beneath your thumb, press there; then take the lancet, and make an incision through the vein as far as bone, then lift your hand all along the vein upstream, cut out the skin and the vein well two inches thick, and let blood flow until you see it; then pinch it shut until it's healed; and I have already explained cutting and cautery in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	Surgery on the two arteries located in the temples, it involves ancient embolization and a familiar process of extraction, especially for teary eyes; and the quality of the surgeon is as I describe: the patient's body strains its neck until both vessels are clearly visible. One feels the pulse all over your forehead, then guides to the ear; subsequently lift the head up above the vessel at your index, and hold the lancet underneath, lift the vein upwards, and cut it open, just as you did in other veins, and control the bleeding according to necessity; then release the patient, place your hand on the vein for an hour, then put cotton; thereafter sew it firmly, allow healing until it is healed. And we have discussed about these points and their extraction or commencement of this book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	The treatment of the vein under the forehead is as important as that of the frontal sinus for diseases in this area, and for migraines, and for reddening; and it's known that patients strain their neck by twisting until they can see the vein. Then take the tool which is called 'burr', its form here is described:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	And place the tip on the vein, and press with your hand or another object, allowing blood to flow according to the amount you see; then loosen the neck of the patient, and bind the vein until it is healthy and there's no large, wide operation.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	Every time, it should not be that the flames are too strong; and the healing from the side, because the bone is close, and by chance the flames might break when they are subtle.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	The treatment for the two veins that are in the two eyelids helps with pain, eye issues, reddening, and ear problems near the earlobe, as well as diseases affecting the face; and the quality of their treatment is that patients strain their neck by twisting at some point, just like before. Then you heal it, and make a cut about the length of a small flame but somewhat wide, for there's no meat involved.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flames are subtle and accidentally break, then make correction with blood, as much as you need to, and then bind on cotton, and tie it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	The healing of the neck from coughing involves water and for a while it remains damp, and in diseases of the face, such as migraine and redness that comes into the face, especially when it is old; and the quality of the healing is such that the patient tightens their throat, then squeezes their nose to your left hand, and takes up the subtle flame long, and sticks it inside the lip in the space between the two nostrils, because the neck doesn't open well in question, and the sweat will now start to flow; and don't go too far down, do the correction according to the amount of blood as needed, then let it rest for a night, for she is very quickly restored; and this is the form of the flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	The healing of the lungs assists in the tightening of the heart, and the beginning of mixing (referring to blood circulation), and for many diseases, and tuberculosis, and ulcers, and herpes, and inflammatory swellings; and the quality of the healing is such that the patient tightens their throat from both sides as we have said; and be sure the master is located on top of the body part affected by illness, and the lungs situate at I location, then heal the vein a little more across long widthwise, then take care with blood flow to the extent necessary; then redo in another vein, then untie the string and apply pressure halfway between the veins so that they are not constricted; and leave until morning, for the wound is healed.
de la sainie des leivres	Of the healing of the wounds
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The cleansing of veins in the mouth helps to alleviate issues within the mouth, and leads to tooth decay, and gum infections, and cracks in lips, and dental pain and discomfort.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	And the quality of healing is to have the patient stand in front of you, and hold their neck as I've said; then turn the cheek, and look at the two veins, one being on the right cheek and the other on the left. You can identify them by their blackness and the presence of small black veins inside them: so grasp both, and if you are unsure, grasp the larger one from each part, and do the same for both veins above and below because it is a similar method.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	Of healing on the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	Healing of the veins that are on the tongue is performed after healing the head, and it takes place in tightening the throat, and diseases of the eye, and diseases of the mouth; and the quality of the surgeon is that the patient should sit with their hands between yours facing the sun, and lift their tongue, then look underneath each side there's a black vein: heal both, and don't move them too far forward, because beneath are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	The veins of the hand that are commonly treated are treated according to two methods: or by bringing them into contact with all hot flame moderate in size, or with a finely olive-like substance if the knives are trenchant, and these are called "aneil"; and they are large and fine depending on the width and tightness of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The shape of the fire cautery is greatly renowned, and it is quite wide as you see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And one must open the thick veins full of obvious blood and that contain much blood and disorder; it is in the form of the olive flame:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it is more pointed in subtlety, and used for purifying veins in subtlety, or there is citrine subtle blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The treatment of the basilica vein, which is one of these veins, helps with ailments that occur in the throat and around the neck, as well as in the abdomen; it is necessary for the surgeon to treat carefully and be aware of the artery that is nearby.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And if it is the artery that is affected and bleeding occurs, if one needs to stop the bleeding, as I said; and there must not be touching of the flame, but cutting should be done like before.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And if the basilica does not clearly open, it is necessary to extract it, and change another one; or if you do not want any part of it, or you suture instead of it with a thread under the arm: it opens clearly, and then you operate on the flame like before, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And if you know how to identify the site of the surgery, it is good that you restrain the arm, touching the area as far as you can feel the pulse; then mark the site on the inside, and then tie the arm, and operate on the vein near the flame like before. And beware not to cut into the artery when you see swelling at the site, because this is where the artery lies: listen carefully.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it protruding upwards as much as the urine of a child, and the semen is red and subtle, know that it's from an artery: hurry then, place your finger longly, then remove your finger once the wound stops bleeding, which happens many times; tie up the arm, leave like this, do not move the patient; be prepared for fear, do not move until he is well.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the wound is not bleeding, and it suits you, and the medicine does not reach you, if you need to open an artery, because the head of the blood retreats; stop the bleeding.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	And take a walnut shell, and cut it, and take one of the halves and bind well up to the other end; if the wound stops bleeding, that's good; if not, treat as we said, with powders that stop blood; and for wounds in the small part of the limb, and the strength of the bandage around the arm, use various applications without harming.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	The treatment of vein injury is complex due to the presence of blood in its midst and in the area above and below it because it consists of basilica and cephalic components, as we have explained. It requires that the surgeon be cautious about the nerve which is nearby and if he doesn't pass too high and finds the nerve, and inflames and injures the healthiness, and by chance can't heal; and this nerve opens many times, and if it doesn't open in any humans due to its subtlety, then it's appropriate for you to start healing with the tool of your choice; and feel the nerve with your strength.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is a vein between the two nerves, cut it long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	The treatment for the cephalic vein aids in the extraction of blood from the head and helps with healing. It is advisable to use the olive oil lamp or the mirtin lamp as they are the safest among all veins, because there are no nerves or arteries nearby.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	Always, it is necessary to seek the most gentle manner, and there's no harm in doing it for the first time if it hurts, and one tries again; and it may swell some people's limbs during the first attempt but there's no harm.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of surgery depends on your thought process.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	The first thing you need to know about hygiene is that hygiene isn't practiced just for keeping health but also to avoid future diseases; and the hygiene should be performed in one of the three veins: namely, cephalic, facial, and basilic; and you should practice hygiene at the beginning of prayers on your knees, in autumn and after meals during winter, when the sign of satiety is visible; and you should perform hygiene on the first or third day, after two or three days.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	Hygiene practiced against diseases doesn't have a determined time, but rather when it's needed daily or with food, at any hours and in all situations; and one should not practice hygiene on children until they are 14 years old, nor pregnant women during the first quarter of their pregnancy until seven months.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	And one should not nurse the old who have passed sixty years.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	And when someone seeks to heal himself in any way, it is appropriate for him to cleanse the intestines with a light enema if there's any waste retained from eating, so that veins don't draw unnecessary fluids into the main limbs; or he won't heal well if too full of meat, drunk, whether he has strength or dropsy; and caution about healing after colic, vomiting, abdominal pain, frequent urination, labor pains, staying awake, fasting and sexual activity, along with things that drain bodily humors, by eating meat, drinking, and taking medicines if you have the ability. Then bathe yourself in water, provided nothing prevents this from happening to refine the blood, and heal your side through the third part of the back passage as we've said; and guard against working, piercing pain, excesses, and similar things; and stay with those who are healthy higher than he being healed, and rub his hands twice or three times on that place. Then moisten the healing with a little old olive oil, then place your left hand's palm right below the passage for the one you're healing so the passage doesn't burn when struck by the rod;
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	For there are veins that flow like strings under the surgeon's hand, and some of them are full of vitiation, so when one places them over the flame, they withdraw from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus belong to those. And if it burns the vein, then the wound becomes too narrow, for this reason the surgeons must be informed about these matters.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the veins open on the first try, it's good; but if not, you can still try again right there or at a slight distance from that spot or hastily, as long as the area isn't swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And if the muscles are swollen and the patient feels discomfort, let it rest for one or two days, do not bind the arm: by chance, pus will come out thickly; do not enter water or take a bath, then continue with surgery as you wish; and if the opening is small or the bone beneath is delicate and you doubt that there's no blood flow as you see, instead place the opening directly over the flame straight. Perform the operation somewhat hastily, so that the muscles are swollen; for this happens many times when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If you see the arm is swelling, do not stop the bleeding and place a little olive oil, as it lightens the body of blood, makes it more fluid in this area where the oil is placed; and apply oil essence to every healing you perform on veins, to stop the flow of blood; and do the same with garlic and onions, when they are applied to the area. The pain and dispersement diminishes as soon as it is too large.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if there comes a large abscess that happens many times, even when it is not healed just once or when the opening of the vein is small, hurry up and place on the arm a sponge moistened with hot water and wine for a little while, then remove it for an hour; you should do this after the bleeding from the vein. If it remains in the arm for several days without any blackness or yellowing, it doesn't harm it; and if you see that there is nothing of myrrh or aloes being used as juice from chamomile, mint, or similar things to apply on it.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	Many times pus and appearance would occur at the healing of the basilica: therefore place your hand there, and if you find the head soft upon applying pressure from your hand, then that appearance is bad.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	So then you should not apply anything from what we have said, because by chance within that without the artery; but let it dry for one bandage to harden the place, then treat it with another treatment until it is sound.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And lead each person to some blood according to the amount of its virtue, and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	But if their veins are black, let them bleed until it turns red; and if you see that they are large, let them bleed until they become subtle; and if it is too hot, let them cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And it is suitable for the one who has strength and ability to perform blood extraction, so they should make a wider wound and have broad flames; and for the one who is weak, do the opposite, and suitably care properly frequently, and you must care them by cutting across, not straight; and this way of care saves from bleeding and constriction of nerve damage, and yields better results than long cuts.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And for the one whose body needs care after surgery, it is fitting to give them a broth made from pomegranate juice; if they are flushed, then three or four times let blood out. And if their complexion tends towards coldness, then before surgery consume pain with pomegranate juice in syrup mixed with mucus, or in aromatic honey syrup containing spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, ensuring the syrup has a pleasant aroma.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if it fails in the healing process, after a quantity of blood discharge, it should inhale a broth of mutton, and a subtle fragrant syrup, and use other things that we have said in the section or chapter on syncope for the evacuation of veins.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wants to breathe with his arm and heal again, then when he is weakened by much healing, it should be that he heals little by little, according to the quantity of its strength continuously.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And if he wants to breathe with his arm after the first healing and has strong veins, then heal him 7 hours after the first healing or after the new hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And if someone wishes to heal on another side, then one should heal the second day or the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	For there's much blood within the body that has heated up and causes fever; it should then have large quantities drained out, until the pus reaches his armpit. Then when all the conditions for healing are met, you apply your hand to his pulse as he heals, so the death does not come from his armpit. This happens many times when healers neglect their duties. And it shouldn't be done when you see the arm being released and blood coming out again in the second instance, with the pulse closed; then you press firmly. Or if it's broken, he extends his arm quickly, as this would be badly done; but let him wait until the second healing occurs; or you light to the tip of the flame, until the frozen blood from under the artery starts coming out, and place a damp cloth on the wound, pressing lightly.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the artery has been cut, let it alone and do not compress it until the abscess subsides.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if the need is to drain blood a second time, then place the healthy one in its own location, or in another artery, or on the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein in the arm is made in such a way that it can be replaced by the main artery because of its composition.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the method of healing is that the patient puts their hand in hot water until the veins turn red; then they are held moderately so that the blood can be seen clearly, and now they heal through it, neither wide nor long; and make them as wide as possible, and properly heal close to the hand's joint, and if it cannot come out, then put the hand back in hot water, let the blood drain into the water until you have enough; and if it is still stuck, do not rebathe the hand in hot water because it gets worse in winter than summer; and healing this vein is more safe than all other veins, as there are no arteries or nerves involved.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	The healing of salvation of the right hand is worth all diseases of the liver, and this is how it's done: stretch out your hand, place it in hot water until you can see the veins if they are visible; heal it across, making sure not to cause any harm, but don't go too far either because nerves are everywhere beneath skin, then put the hand back into hot water should the hand be frozen in the wound and cannot come out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated the blood as much as necessary, place an incision where there is a leak to seal it quickly, and then do this for each individual case.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The health of his left hand is against the disease in the mouse [or perhaps 'the mouse organ'], and do everything as I have told you regarding the right side.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The healing of the skin is worth all the diseases that affect the body, such as diseases of the lungs, and congestion of flowers, and diseases of the kidneys, and those of old hands and feet, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	And the qualities of its healing are that the patient soaks their feet in hot water and rubs them until they warm up, then ties them above the ankle joint; and the foot is at the ankle, and above the foot goes down to some kidney area; hence heal it where larger kidneys are, or at the ankle, as long as it moves.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you cure it on the foot, be aware of the nerves that are there, and heal through the middle just as when cutting a log; let the flames go ahead.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if it cannot come out, then place the foot in water and allow well for the vein to drain properly.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	And if the healings are needed for the first time, then start again from slightly above on the second foot because the feet are salty; do not doubt about the nerves as we have said, and thus do this treatment for both feet equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The muscles of the sciatic vein are at the ankle's bone, and its health corresponds to the pain in the buttocks, when it is due to internal bleeding.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And the quality of its health is such that the patient bathes in it and stretches over the ankle four times by twisting, because otherwise the vein will not open; and if it does open, then heal it in all possible ways you can, and especially diagonally; and it's better to have caught it when you handle it since the veins are loose, and they respond well to human hands.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And if you don't find it, heal none of what opens or behind the heel, and move towards the small toe, and guard against the nerves; and adjust as much as possible the bleeding that you see, and then release the bond, and put on cotton and tighten; now it is healed.
des sainies de ventouse	Extraction with suction cups
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Suction cups are made of horns, or spiders, or leeches; and bloodletting can be done in two ways: either by piercing and drawing blood, or without piercing.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And this suction technique which can cause pain is done in two ways: either with fire or without; and the suction that is performed by causing injury and bleeding extraction takes place through fourteen parts of the body, from which one part is completely covered at the head; and another extends around the neck; and two others are located on each side of the neck; and one suction cup below the chin; and the suction cups of the two shoulders; and suction cups on the arms; and suction cups on the legs; and suction cups on the calves; and this suction procedure does not remove blood because there are many small veins scattered throughout the flesh, and due to that it weakens none at all, as with bleeding treatments; and it should never be administered either with or without fire in any illness caused by overeating, until all parts of the body have been emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And if suction is necessary due to diseases or by habit, we should perform it each hour at the start of the month, or at its end, and throughout and in every part; for there are those who, when they must suck, have heavy heads; and for those who find congestion and warmth in their face, and head, and neck, and darkness in them; and those who find a drop of blood in their mouth, and extend their tongue, and cough up blood; and there are those who think and see by night sweat and wounds and such things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and indeed even during the last month, we instruct to fast after three hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	The hygiene of the mouth helps with colds in the head... that comes to their eyes, and it should not be after the expulsion of all over the body; and this suction is instead of the hygiene of cephalic, and it should not be used by those who have a cool disposition or have catarrh, for it causes them much harm; and for these it should not be that he uses cold, nor they who have or head illnesses.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And the one who often uses it becomes forgetful; for this reason, it is necessary to place the suction cup slightly lower by considering the risk of forgetfulness.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	The ventilation in the chest is located beneath the health of the head and the basilica, and because of this it benefits from being compressed at the rib cage, and having a cut along the channel of the heart, and everywhere else, and with fullness; and it's best to just slightly push it, as if she holds too tightly, she could strangle or affect the stomach and heart.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	The ventilation in the second rib of the chest relieves head pain, eye strain and toothache, and in strangulation, and from pain at the roots of teeth, it is located under the health of the basilica; it's important that you instruct the surgeon to press his hand gently when applying pressure, not to squeeze the artery, and ensure there are no continuous flows of blood.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	The ventilation under the chin corresponds to mouth diseases and gum decay, and similar illnesses that occur in the mouth; it is related to the health of the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The ventilation of the shoulders corresponds to sicknesses that come from heat and fullness.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	Ventilation in the ribs is as effective as three veins of the arm because it draws blood from these large veins; instruct the surgeon not to press too hard upon them, for the muscles are naked under flesh and contain nerves and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The suction cup on the back is suitable for bloodletting near the kidneys and internal illnesses. It's necessary that the suction cup be large and made of horn, as it needs to be handled well. By chance, if it were thin, it would break; and making such incisions causes great injuries.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The suction cups on the legs are applied openly because they drain blood from the entire body and are effective for old kidney pains, bladder issues, and uterine problems; they also help to weaken the body over time with prolonged use, leading to weakness in various conditions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The method for applying the suction cup is to put it empty first, and apply a steady suck, then quickly place it, moving evenly, and keep doing this until you see the area turn red and swell. Once you perceive the reddish color of blood, then release, and replace the suction cups; be vigilant about the position of the parts involved, for some have thick flesh and clear pores: only one cut should be made in them, and large cuts with slight depth are to be done; suck lightly.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the area is thick, it may require two cuts: the first one to delicately clear out the large blood vessel path.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the vein is very dense, it may require a third cut; and when we aim to draw out blood gradually and gradually, we only need to make one incision.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if we do not want much blood, we often proceed thus; and if the wound is deep, you treat it generously and finish so that the cuts pierce sharply right away. This applies to those who have thick skin and hardness, and who are prone to abscesses, for one should grease their wounds with suction cups from an open and dissolving oil: if it is in a reddish state, from an oil of pinks or sweet almonds, or from cucumber seed oil; and if it's yeary, using oil from cress, or lilies, or chamomile, or other similar ones.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the excess is large and cold, take oil of myrrh, or of balm, or aniseed oil, and similar substances.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if the wound is in a place that requires tight skin and large pores, it should not have any oil applied, but it should be rinsed after suction with rose water, or cold water, or mare's milk water, or water from cucumber, or porcelain water, or other similar ones.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And for those who have much moisture, if they are lifted with help or with water from wormwood and sumac, and other similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And those who have large excesses may rise from old wine, or water of sulfur, or decoction of angelica or chamomile, or other similar things; and they do not need to be treated by suction before the bath or immediately after it, but one hour or two after taking a bath. And they should not sleep after suction therapy, and they must know when they are due for suction treatment and when they have been subjected to suction.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And take care of those who are recovering and are choleric, and if they lack too much and become inflamed; it is fitting for them to consume cold things, such as cherries, endives and lettuces on the side, and similar items; and eat small fish, and meat from a castrated animal, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And for those with a cold constitution, they should consume honey syrup and half a fragrant old wine mixed between the old vintage and new. They should eat small portions, and eat small fish and small birds and chicks; and on the day of suction therapy, they must drink more than they eat. It is fitting to give some men neither treacle nor muscat before or after suction treatment for the purpose of strengthening their main limbs; and purify his stomach but it would not be fitting if he drinks anything hot.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	The suction devices used for injury are those placed on the liver, and in the mice, and podagre, and on the belly and in the anus and kidneys, and in the hip, because that limb doesn't suffer from being pierced by wounds, and one does not force it with strength only to draw blood from limb to limb, as we do on nipples when suckling; to remove the stickiness which is present in the limb, and similarly place suction devices on the belly and in the anus to lessen the limb; and removes pain when there are swellings or stones, and by its attractive power it may remove them accidentally, or expel the stone from its place; and thus it acts when we place the suckers on the liver and mice where a build-up of stickiness is contained, and these suction devices are administered empty to suck only that much; they are not administered together with heat at any point, and sometimes full of cold water, such as in diseases like pleurisy, and in this manner one fills the sucker with hot water or water in which herbal remedies are boiled for this purpose.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The shape of the suction cup to be used on fire is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	And has two fingers of about half a palm wide each, and at its center near the midpoint one small notch, just like for driving a nail in, whether with an iron or brass tool, such that it does not cause injury when placed on the body; and at the middle place across from iron or steel bar to hold an oil lamp, and they are large or small according to the diseases and age of those taking them; because the suckers of children differ from adults', and for瘦people than for fat.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And thus one should place this suction cup on the body: take the wick or cord of beeswax, and insert it through the bar in the suction cup, ensuring light is at the bottom of the suction cup to avoid burning the patient; then put it on the body, and your fingers at the notch that we described, so when one desires, if steam goes out, remove the suction cup; and take the wick or cord as before, and repeat often, should you need to.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	In the suction cup therefore which is administered in the disease of pleursin, there should be neither excess nor deficiency, and it is only used forcefully when it is full of water, and placed only on the limb; and this is its form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	Without applying suction only to limbs where it's not possible due to their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar body parts; and on the naked areas of flesh, like elbows or knees, and other similar areas. The quality of application is that when you find withoutews in mild water free from dirt, you take them; and place one in mild water until they are comfortable and have nothing inside their stomachs; then cleanse with a bloodletting and suction cup treatment, then rub the limb until it turns red, and place on the withoutews. And once they're full, and start to pull away, if there's a part where you can apply suction, then apply it, because this works well afterwards.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	If not, lift the arm out of water, then cold water quite well, and then rub it. And if it heals too quickly after the removal of the stitches, moisten with linen cloth in cold water and place over it until the skin is dry; and if there are multiple wounds, put on powdered vitriol or gall or similar things until they dry; or you put half a peeled bean under the arm, leave them to dry out under the arm, and will stop bleeding now; and if you need more, take other stitches.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And if the wounds do not heal well, rub the fresh bloodied arm or stick an awl in them so that blood comes out, then place it over it; and soon as they smell the blood, they will dry. And when you see that they are bleeding, sprinkle a little myrrh and ground saffron or ash on it, they will heal now.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	This begins the book of fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is many times necessary in the art of medicine, and in the restoration of fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	Know, dear boy, that in this chapter, the foolish people throw away knowledge they don't see in any old books or read letters about; and because of this reason, the science has been separated from our land. I have never found anyone to be good at it; and I know nothing myself; as I learned through the sciences in old books that I studied thoroughly until I dealt with the science, and through experimentation, and by getting accustomed to my life's routine. And I am describing what is contained here in this chapter to you, summarizing it briefly at the end, clearly showing the forms of tools used during treatment as I did in these two chapters before.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	Therefore, it is necessary for us to outline the contents of this book in our preface and specify the chapters where wisdom places its understanding, and remain faithful to truth. So that those who have experienced it may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	I say that when any fracture or dislocation or twists or swellings occur in any part of the body, it is necessary for you to quickly cleanse the patient from both sides with a hot application. If there's nothing too difficult about this task, like weak constitution or young children or old people; if the treatment area isn't very dry, or too cold; and avoid consuming cold foods such as cold jugs, and liver and fowl meat, and do not drink wine, nor consume any fatty meats, and don't fill up with meat that fills veins with blood until you are unsure of pus formation in an abscess, or spreading of contents to the limb. If the patient's condition improves according to their usual routine after this initial treatment.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary that you nourish the patient with meats that are rich in nutrients, or have viscosity, such as cooked wheat in water, and rice, and peas, and pies, and veal liver, and eggs, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	And with this kind of nourishment, healing occurs more quickly and the break heals better.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And know that when bones of the old and the decrepit cannot be mended or sutured according to their nature due to dryness in limbs, or also those that are too tender such as children's bones; but instead, reset upon the broken bone with the big joints and connect the limb together until it resists as before; and do not end his work suddenly, for this requires nourishing of large meats, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that fractures are various in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the foot or leg, and I will tell you all about fractures in this chapter.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there are fractures going to an arrow wound, and others while sharpening, such as when cutting the tip of a feather for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if it's a fracture with injury, and a break due to a small crack.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	And each way has its own tool and proper instrument in the restoration, according to what memory brings to his mind; and it is known that bone breakage is recognized when the limb is twisted, opens well through the exterior, and presses under the hand; and when there is no twisting or swelling, and the patient does not feel great pain, if there is no breakage; but it can well have twisting, or a crack, or small breakage.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	But it is not appropriate for you to move it with your hand, but apply the following remedies and then gradually constrain it now in a subtle way.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	And know that when the breaking occurs within the body, and it is divided into two parts at the joint, you should now place them at equal points in alignment as though they were an abscess or vein opening. And if the abscesses are left open, you should not allow any delay until the abscesses have healed; then align them so that you can gently and wisely move them. You should know that restoring the body after a break is easier than after injuries with pieces intact. Then restrain it as detailed later on.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And if there are pieces broken in the bone, and it is divided into two parts, whether it's hands or feet, or one of your smaller limbs, or at two cords, or at one cord and with your hand; place the limb according to its natural shape, so that when the parts of the broken member have healed, you gently move all attachments within their limits as best you can, and make sure that through your work no harm or pain befalls the patient; and adjust both ends of the bone joints according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And feel it well with your hand if you think it's not quite right: if the positioning is beautiful, and don't strain it too much, don't press as those who extract by their art do for pus discharge and muscle tension, as we have wanted many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And when the limb is in place, chastise well the patient so they do not move it, neither awake nor asleep, neither turning over, nor in any other way; and see that the limb is securely placed so that no pain is felt.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	For when they do not feel any pain, it is not in its proper place, and you should put them in a suitable position so that no pain is felt; and guard to have been placed straightly, such that no twistiness occurs upon restoring them. And the quality of the broken limb will be according to what I am telling you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that limbs broken are varied in size and extent, and in shape.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	For there are smaller limbs, such as hands and feet and alike: it is required to envelop them with soft and fine linen cloths; and for those that are larger, such as thighs and legs: it is necessary to wrap them in a broad and firm band, because the wide bands embrace the entire large limb and constrain it uniformly from all sides, so there is no twistiness. Then tie around loosely, three or four times according to the limb, and restrain your hand somewhat throughout the band, then go beyond the breakage point and restrict less, allowing the breakage point to move slightly; and soften the band little by little until you cover a large portion of healthy flesh, then take up another band, turn around tightly on the broken part. Then return to the region below the breakage point and slightly restrain it, not too hard nor too soft, as we have said above in the first lesson; then place linen or cloth bands between the tied linings, until they are all uniform, then tie everything over the bandage, and then put your well-made stars on top, if there is pus or inflammation.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	And if there is swelling or an abscess, then put something soothing to the abscess over it and remove the swelling, allowing this for a few days; after that tighten them, they should be half the width of a hand stretched properly, or of the shaft made from pipes, or from palm leaves, and adjust according to this form:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	But it is necessary that the needles placed over the fracture be slightly larger and wider than the others; they should also be as long as needed for the size of the limb or its magnitude. Then tighten them on these needles in the same way you did at the first application, then wrap another lengthwise thread above them as was done before with the splinting; now make it tighter here, and less so there; and it is necessary that the thread be medium-sized, neither too thick nor too thin, and should be made of soft linen. For if the threads are too large, like what artisans who make their linen threads for string use in bandaging wounds with them, this is a big mistake because the application cannot be even if it is too fine, and there must not be less than half a finger's width between each needle.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the muscles are injured by the pressure of the shoulder pins after constriction in their healthy areas, then place them with linen or coarse woolen patches, so that they do not blister.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is under strain and the ribs are broken, I will say the treatment after this.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it is not fitting to forcibly stretch all broken limbs on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	For when the limbs are large, it is not suitable to use these plasters for more than seven days or nine, according to your condition of pus coming out from any abscess; and here is the method of ancient plasters to restore fractures, dislocations, and torsions: take flour that stands on mill walls, mix it with plenty of egg, and make this concoction neither too thin nor too thick, then use it. This is the common method of plastering for restoring fractures in various positions, equally so for men and children as well because it isn't excessively cold or hot.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another method of plastering to restore fractures and dislocations: take 3 egg whites, ladani, anise, asafetida, and gum arabic, each in quantity of .x. Z; myrrh and aloes, also each in quantity of .v. Z; garlic Z viij.; make this into a powder, then mix it with plenty of eggs; if the composition is hot, use this plaster because it has good composition, and quickly restores broken bones, and is beneficial for many people.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another method for using plasters to treat torsions: take mugwort and valerian root, add ten parts of each; add nine parts each of myrrh and aloes; add six parts of opium; and ten parts of Armenian balm. Grind them well together and mix with water or plenty of egg. Administer it as needed.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Another method to treat injuries and fractures of joints and bones in their original position, and alleviate the pain caused, and when sawing uses bone, and bruising: take new wool, and the fat cooked in oil, and place it on the affected area.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	Wound plasters do not heal completely, but they are better for soothing abscesses and properly treating bone pains.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another method for dressing broken bones that heals them: take dried fig leaves and earth-pine leaves, grind them together, and make a dressing.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another method for plastering in the restoration of bone fracture and for alleviating the removal of pus.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Take the root of vismalve, chamomile, violet flowers, flour of cloves, from each one part; and grind it, mix with wine, and if the limbs are heated, mix with moist coriander water, or water, and use it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another method for setting more strongly than the first, when an abscess is starting to heal at the member.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Take roots of vismalve, and sesame seed, balsa wood, marjoram, garlic, and violet flowers and chamomile blossoms, take parts of all; grind and mix with salt water, or sweetened water, or with wine according to the heat of the limb and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	In his book, Ippocrates states that one should apply on the broken member for restoration only a salve made from beeswax and oil, and nothing else, and asserts that it should be neither too soft nor too hard between two.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems Galen suggests that we should place upon the broken limb for restoration, things that are dry but slightly warm, such as myrrh and aloe and incense and similar items, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another way to plaster for injury and pain: take mugwort and ome feathers or bird feathers, and sage, and equal parts of them, grind them together, make a plaster from it, and use it.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then after a little while, take care that the patient does not feel any pain or strain on their bone in its place; do not remove it manually and if there's pain at the site, or itching without rest or swelling, if you notice this, quickly remove it and replace the setting paste. Then use a light bandage and wet sponge, soak them in water, then immerse your limb until the itch subsides and the pain is relieved; then leave your member to rest for an hour, after that place it on a dry skin, moistened with water or oil of roses, bound with a cloth, until you are sure there's no infection; and relieve inflammation at the limb site, and remove any discomfort, then continue the gentle application, and a bit more setting paste, but do not strain so forcefully as before; apply the paste carefully until it is set.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that pus is discharging and turning red with pain and swelling, indicating an infection throughout, then you need to apply plaster and bandaging, so reapply it in the same manner as before.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	And if no part comes from what we have said, or if the dislocation is only released after three days or four or five or seven; and do not leave it for twenty days according to this method, until the healing process finishes, and gets closer to putting back the flesh; then you should keep the restraint more than the first time, allowing its growth of muscle substance as I mentioned earlier; and if you see that the limb dries out more than necessary, know that injuries will not come; wash it with hot water each time you release it, and do this once every three days, clean a little bit at the wound; through this process cut off any injuries on the limb, and hasten the work of those who are ignorant and return the limb wrongly: this is harmful, and such works are foolish, and I see no other than to leave it and operate it correctly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	regarding various methods of breaking up
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	Many ways of fractures exist, and various shapes occur. The causes are distinct; for there are fractures caused by the impact of a sword, and necks break entire bones up to syfac which is below the bone, such as when struck with a halberd or staff; because this manner of fracture is called "halfage" due to this method of breaking.
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	When the sword penetrates through the bone from above without piercing it, this type of fracture is called "complete" fracture; and both large and small wounds result from these two types of fractures.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is sequential impact or a crack or a fracture in the stone, or through a stone, or other similar occurrences.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a fracture present, which comes close to the ligament that surrounds the bone, or above the bone, and this wound can be large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if the wound is healed within the bone as thin as a hair, and the crack small, this manner of fracture is called "hairline" because of it. And if the injury is caused by hitting with stone or falling or by some other means, causing part of the bone to be pushed inwards, making the pieces separated like blacksmiths do when heating inside their furnaces; should the stone penetrate inside the body.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And this happens more often to those who have wet bones, such as in the neck of young children; and occurs in all these ways when small fragments are lost, like in a case of splintering; and I shall explain about it properly.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And let us know all ways of breakages by their diminution upon them, and the investigation in tests, and by the corroded flesh which is upon.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The appearance of hair is known through this: when one has revealed the bone and rubs it all around, if there is an opening of black breakage.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of a breakage, beware of the illnesses associated with hair loss, and if you do not encounter any harmful incidents such as vomiting bile, mental confusion, extension, pallor, fever, and other symptoms appearing in various conditions, there should be no doubt about recovery.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see an alarming incident, yet still hope for recovery, begin your treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the first snow comes to you, and it's winter, you should remove the bone before the fourteenth day after the snow starts.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it's winter, hurry to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that pus forms under the bone and the incidents we've mentioned occur.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And if the breakage of bone reaches the membrane that covers the brain, then it is necessary for you to split the broken part like this and take hold of the bony fragment from the body's side and expose it on the bone in all possible ways as far as you can, and more than that according to the shape of the wound. If blood draining occurs while uncovering the bone or if pus emerges, use what is necessary, then fill the cavity with wet cloth soaked in rose oil; and let the wound rest until the pus drains off and there's no sign of bleeding; then begin working on the bone from inside, this process can be done in two ways: one way consists in cutting precisely forward at the edge and that's the form:
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then use another cut larger than the first one.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second method is that you have several different sizes of cuts, some narrow and others wide, they should be pointed, and made of metal; and apply them lightly to the work so as not to pierce the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is hard and tough, it should be pierced through (from both sides), so that cuts are made with needles, not completely through until they pierce beyond the bone at the tip, and there should be a margin or a circle above the point, which doesn't let the tip pass beyond the bone; and you need more than one, so that each goes to its place in the thickness of the bone, so that you have needles for all sides; and this is the shape of the three methods of needles:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The quality for piercing through the broken bone is that you place one needle on the bone, and turn with your hands until you know that the bone has been pierced. Then put the needle in another spot a bit after, and do this throughout, then carve out the distance of the bone which is between the breaks using incisors, as finely as you can, and gently, just like we said, so long as you are able to remove the bone with your hand or any tool you have such as forceps; and make sure not to touch the brain or the spinal cord.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And when you have pierced and treated the bone, it is fitting that you reset the preparation which remains from the bone to every other instrument similar to an incisor. But it must be firmer and more delicate than the other incisor; and if there is no part of small bones or any scales, gently rub with them on the tools; then cure the wound with bandages and treatments as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And another way of treatment is this which Galien stated, which is safer; and the force is very much, and that's his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first to uncover a part of the bone where the break opens outwards, so that once you have uncovered that part, you will place under the tip of this lens-shaped incision tool, which is its shape:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	And do not cut from one side only, and let the cut extend to both sides of the part, so that the cut faces towards the bone; then strike with a small hammer gently over the whole bone, taking care about the cloth below it. If it is tight against the bone, gently rub against the bone, for you will feel no harm or fear, as long as done properly and carefully.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the bone breaks without piercing through the cloth, and the bone is cut only from above, and there are small pieces left, then after that abrasion, use the subtle scraper to remove scales. You should have various quantities of this tool so you can provide the most suitable treatment for each area according to the workpiece and the shape of the break.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you stand before many rough judges, and then even more subtle ones, and never stop doing this until it's done properly.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each other's haircut trimming and subtle breaking, it is necessary that you adjust according to their orientation; this thing cannot be answered by the one who has devoted his studies to this craft.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	And if the shoulder dislocation is discovered, you should take a linen bandage according to the size of the wound and soak it in rosy oil, then place it on the wound. Then take another double bandage, perhaps two or three layers thick, soaked in wine and rosy oil, and place this on top of the first bandage; do this more gently than you can, so as not to burden the dislocation, then administer a bandage over that without pulling too tightly; only until it touches the wound. Leave it like that for one or two days, until the abscess subsides, then release the dislocation and apply healing medicines such as rosemary roots, bran of wheat, incense powder, aristolochia, and similar things. Make a powder from these things, place it on the wound, then administer normal medicaments without causing irritation; be careful that the wound is clean at all times, do not leave any ointment or allow swelling to occur, for when swelling assembles on the brain tissue, it spreads and causes great harm to the patient; because if you apply something pungent onto the dislocation, it irritates from above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Therefore take care, should any unfortunate events happen to the patient as we have described, if it remains uncertain without doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if fear does not come out only because of the medicine we have applied there, should it have this effect, then you must take a part of honey and three parts of roset oil and one tablespoon of glue, and put them on your forehead; then cure in the manner that is fitting until they are healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Know that neither of the two parts below the nose are ever broken or only one by itself, because these are two bones; and this lower part is cartilaginous, it does not break, nor should you twist or bend it, then heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And if one of the two parts breaks, you should pinch your little finger or pinch beneath your nose, and place that break evenly inside your index finger, and through your hand outwardly until the nose revives according to its natural shape; do this gently and be careful not for the patient to feel pain through your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is in the upper part of the nose, and cannot reach to the nostrils, you should place it level with the tip of a small stick somewhat thick.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	And if the break is two parts, redo this method, and strive to restore it on the first day if possible; if not, after seven or eight days when the abscesses are subdued, then pinch under your nose with linen cloth strips where the break is in one part.
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	When you apply heat from another source on the other side, if breaking occurs; and make the attempts so large that they fill the nostrils.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And they say no restorer dictates to moisten the bandages with butter, and change each day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	I don't think it's quite right, but the bandages should be moistened with a mixture of egg yolk and powder from grinding stones. Then leave the bandage until the bone is hard and the cartilage tough.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And whenever you use goose feathers in lieu of attempts, and if you have one egg broth all around, and the wound stays intact, and blows on the patient from within; do whatever you see fit.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if abscesses come to the nose as you're working on them, then put in a wad of moistened cotton or balsam-soaked cloth, or a pinch of wormwood oil.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you need to drain pus, place a poultice on the surface, made of saffron flour and powdered frankincense, mixed with egg yolk. Then place it on light bandages, don't bind them tightly; and if they break off into small pieces, use tools suitable for this task, then cut the wound open and clean out rotten flesh, suturing afterwards using poultices or ointments that are suitable for this purpose; and if there is no inflammation around the nose, treat the bandage, then place poppy stalks until it heals.
de la routure de la mandibule	Of the rupture of the jaw
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jaw is fractured inside and there's no wound on the surface, and only the breakage is outwardly present, not broken into two pieces just inside, but rather like a fracture within, one can easily detect it.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	It is necessary, if the fracture is in the right part, that you bend your index finger into the mouth towards the patient; and if the fracture is in the left mandible, then bend your right hand's index finger instead, apply gentle pressure to the fracture internally, and move it with the other hand outwardly, ensuring equal force.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if there is dislocation of the jaw bones in two places, it's necessary to provide an extension of both parts until they are equal.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if movements of the teeth occur, or a rupture, then stretch them with a thread of gold, silver, or silk. Then place on the broken mandible wadding, and put on one piece of double cloth; and put on this cloth a large wedge well made, or a piece of leather equal in size, long and wide according to the mandible, and fasten it there as much as you can, and instruct the patient to rest. And have them eat light meats.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	And if you notice that the figure changes, release it on the third day and then readjust what has changed; apply plaster, mix it with powder from the mill along with plenty of egg or almond flour after you have removed the wadding; spread a light woolen fabric over this plaster. If the plaster hardens and the patient's position does not change, leave them as they are until they recover; many times recovery occurs within three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if it comes to incisions or wounds that require dressing, you should carry out what we have instructed many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a breakage and wound together, reward none of the bone piece in has been removed; so delicacy is needed for using tools suitable to this.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, enlarge it with fire according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all these pieces and there remains none, if the wound is large, place one dressing suitable for this on it to encourage growth until it heals.
de la forcele	by force of necessity
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The strength is broken many times in front of the shoulder joint, and breaking occurs in three ways:
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the procedures are as follows when there is a breakage that occurs with injury: you need two assistants, so one can mark where the shoulder joint has broken and feels the broken strength; while the other extends their neck towards the affected area. Then place the breakage evenly on your hands, so it forms correctly and lacks any appearance or movement.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you need to extend further, place a round piece of cloth or wool under the shoulder towards the leg; make its size according to your needs. Stretch and lift up the strength, hold the ball in your hand so that you can evenly place the breakage as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot draw the head of the force by force outside, because it comes forward, it is necessary for the patient to lie on their back with their shoulder, and place a half-sized pillow under the shoulder. Then have someone support the shoulder downwards until the bone of the force is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then apply the crushing to your thumbs, and if you find any debris inside, it is necessary to cut through; and gently pull the pieces apart. If the bone cannot join under any pressure, cut at one of the incisors that you have made. But when using this tool on the force, place it near so as not to miss it:
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	And appears like a spoon, and is not found inside, and is as wide as it should be, according to the size of the bone and the power of the operation; and has two heads, as you see, and is one broad, and the other narrow, as is the incision in the wound that you made when you treated the bones; and when you are certain about extracting debris carefully, if closing the wound, and if the incision is small, or you doubt about extracting debris carefully, if covering the wound with bandages and tents, according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And when pus comes out, if there is moisture, spread oil of roses, and alcohol, and wine, and place them on top.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	The grinding of the bone when it is in wounds and cutting size, involves placing the plaster powder from the mill on the bone and some yolk of egg on top. Put light strips underneath if needed; then take a very long band about a palm wide, then place two layers of cloth over these, and coat with plaster. Take a delicate stick around three finger widths in length and width, and wrap it around that band so that only the tip of the band is hanging down; then place this stick over the injury, and wind the band up to the neck, under the clean part, and under the infected part too; and from each part, when you see that the wound has healed underneath, and clearly that the stick does not move above the broken bone, you should release it every day, and once the stitches are removed, then you keep this wrapped; and let the infection heal on its back side, and after he sleeps place a small pillow under his neck for lifting the shoulder up; so that the force of the injury can be relieved by setting the shoulder straight, or if you bind his arm to the neck, do not release it in case of bad accidents until XX days; then resume coating with plaster if you think it necessary and keep tightening and keeping it like this until he is restored. And she is fully restored after XXVIII days at most, and sooner for some people.
de la brisure de l’espaule	On the breaking of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	It happens that the shoulder is broken or large within it, and not in its middle; if one hits only the shoulder itself. Handle according to the pattern of breaking, and reset following its natural form, using any method possible you can employ. Then apply a powder from a mill with plenty of eggs on top. Lightly press, and put a double layer of cloth above it. Then place a broad but subtle support, slightly wider than the shoulder; ensure this support does not touch any part of the shoulder when placed. Apply linen wadding where the support is touching, so the support fits evenly without gaps. After which you should tightly bind the whole thing into one large firm loop, ensuring that neither movement nor shifting occurs on its own from the shoulder's position. Watch each link daily; and whenever it heals slightly, you should rebind, keeping the support in balance if it has moved back to its original spot. And place the patient on their side with the injury. The broken shoulder will heal fully within 20 days or 25. When these numbers are achieved, remove the support, you should be sure; this is not bone that heals quickly.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a bone fragment moves ahead and does not touch the knee, do this: treat an abscess that bursts outwards, and follow what we have said about treating a dislocated elbow to cleanse the wound.
de la brisure dou pis	Of the breaking of the heel
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	The bones are broken once in the middle, but this happens rarely; they often break at the end.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when they are broken in the middle, if it falls away from there, causing great pain to the patient, with no strength and trembling, and by chance vomiting blood, and exposing the cavities within the broken bones, and the person feels this very well.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And for restoration, if the patient is lying on his back, you should place him on his side, then press down with your shoulders, and join the ribs of both sides using your hands, and carefully put them into equal positions as you can, until the shape of the bone is as it should be; then lay over plaster casts above this delicate salt mold or another light substance, cover it with one cloth, and wrap it around the broken bone so that it does not move; and turn back to his front side, adjust carefully, and every hour apply pressure on the wound, if it heals it will tighten further; and if it needs to be loosened due to corrosion, itchiness, pain or pus coming out of the wound, do it quickly and release him, remove the plaster, treat according to how you would for such conditions; then reapply the plaster until healed.
de la brisure des costes	From the breaking of ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	Know that the breaking of ribs happens only after the back muscles and inside the head, it does not break due to anything else; and one feels this well during examination in the court.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	The repair involves placing the break in line with equal force, as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	Then apply the plaster and hold it steady for an hour, if that's necessary.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the break in the ribs is deep inside, the patient will feel extreme pain and sharpness, like weeping, because the bone touches the lining; they get blisters, and all over and immediately vomit large amounts of blood, it's a painful illness, and the old ones have put great effort into recovery.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if someone says that it is necessary to eat meats which swell the belly, in order to relieve the windiness outside.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not follow this advice, that pus and worms do not arise without having already been there.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it has come about, then heal it.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And let no one amongst us use suction cups on the body to suck out matter, because it seems reasonable; however, there is doubt that the suction cup draws away excess through the weakness of position.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And it is said that when covering the body with moist wool in heated oil, and to place cloths between the ribs for equalizing the warmth inside, then proceed with the treatment of pleurisy, meat, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels intense pain that can't be borne by the bone through which it pierces the skin, causing uncertainty to the patient, then it is necessary to cut at the level of his broken rib and an instrument must be placed inside to hold the cavity; and then one must sever the bone, drain gently, and then suture the two layers of the wound if it's large, and dress with plaster until it heals.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if discharges come about, place wet cloths in oil rosettes and place them on the wound; and treat while the body responds as it should for an abscess, and have consistent monitoring on the side where it must be, until it is healed.
de la brisure dou col	Of the breaking neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	No fracture occurs at the neck's bones, and it does not bend; similarly with the spine in the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to anyone, and you want to know if they will heal or not, be vigilant if you see their hands softened and swollen and dead, and cannot move or extend them, and when you poke them with a needle, if you do not feel.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	You know that death can occur in various conditions, and if they remain responsive and feel well when their limbs are held still and not moved, you know that the bone joint is saved, and the disease has been cured, provided a cure was applied.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And if something similar happens to the spinal column, and you want to know whether it is healthy or not, then watch if his joints are softened, and if there are any accidents that occur with his hands, and upward wind and expulsion without desire on the back; and when you observe it on its belly, it jumps with expulsion without desire.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when he is observed on his back and wants to sit up, if he cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	Know that it is mortal: if they do not work well in its treatment.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if such accidents do not come to him, it is a simpler thing.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the treatment is: if there is an abscess to drain, you do so; if it's inflamed, apply oil or egg yolk on the spine or on the spot; until the inflammation subsides. Then place it with a soothing plaster and let it dry, bind it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; do not sleep on that part where there is pain, until you feel better.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any bone is fractured, it must be covered with a poultice of its own nature; remove the bone, then join together the two edges of the wound if they are large, using stitches if necessary, then treat with an ointment that binds and heals until you feel better; and if there's a fragment from the bone, which is called 'the chip of the knee', hold your left hand pouch against it and place it evenly on your right hand at your power, then apply the plaster and elevating it as needed. Then compress it; and if any broken bone needs to be done so, do it upwards, remove the bone, and treat the wound until it heals completely.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	From the breaking of the bone in the hip
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	Sometimes the hip bone breaks, and when it does, if there is a little pain in the head; and it stretches long, and declines to the kidneys, and comes with pain in the limb, and bruising, and swells up what is broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is that you extend your hand upwards as long as you are at the breakage; and know where the breakage and its shape are; and if the breakage is only in the head, place an equal break there until it reaches its natural shape.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the breakage extends along or declines inwardly, guide the patient towards their abdomen until your restoration of that break becomes apparent.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have made it even, place it on a splint, then put onto an iron or copper rod stand, and hold the wound still so it doesn't move; and fill the back with the material, until the wound is even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on their side, or on their back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if the abscesses burst out, do not touch them until the abscesses are soothed, and place them as we have instructed previously. And then return to the restoration process, and tighten them according to how they should be tightened, if there is no bad incident; and this is how it should be done.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	from breaking the splint
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The aids are those between the arm and shoulder's head, if it is broken, you must restore it according to one of these two ways: where one way involves taking a single medium-sized stick, in this manner:
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And tie as two sticks together, and place them upwards, and bind the wound on one spot; then lay your broken arm onto the stick until it reaches the elbow, holding halfway with the stick's curvature. Then position anything or have assistants hold it from below; next, place the torn skin evenly between their hands as long as the torn skin returns to its original shape as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other method is that one binds the wound on their shoulder blade, and ties the hand to the neck, then instructs two assistants for each side that one shaves where the torn skin is at their hands, and the other shaves around completely up to the middle of both sticks, extending each person to their part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is more forceful, hold the stitches away from the irritation, and over the irritation, and extend each of the assistants to their part.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the irritation is close to the head of the shoulder, it should be that you place one stitch halfway towards the back and the other towards the knife, near the irritation; and similarly, if the irritation is facing the knife, it should be that stitches are placed lightly, without effort, until the irritation is equal on the left and the right, and then the wound should be equalized as it should, and then tightened. If abscesses come when they shouldn't.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if pus starts coming out, do not tighten it for up to seven days, and place it on greased linen or in oil, as long as the pus coming out is calmed; then tighten, and use this method of tightening: when you put plaster on the incision, then assemble the arm over the shoulder, and place your hand on the shoulder or chest; apply the bandage, and tighten it on the shoulder, and on the arm, so that the arm stays in its usual position, without anything preventing it, or if the bone is not broken.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone does not move, use braces, and place a larger and stronger brace over the incision than the others, with one inch of space between each brace. Make sure each brace is large enough to pass the wound by about three inches on either side; then tighten them according to how I explained at the start of this chapter regarding wounds, more firmly but not by pulling away.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	And if you see the base of the arrows and the constriction, as we have said, in the hour that you restore the broken limb, and you doubt about removing an abscess there, if it is allowed to be tied until the seventh day, as we have said; then look at each three days the bond, so that itching does not spread on him or ulcers do not come to the limb because it is too tight.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If the artery, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And if no such events occur, or if the dislocation is not released until three days later or more, and that the patient lies with his back in bed, having his hands on his stomach; place under the shoulder one cushion filled uniformly with equal wool, and look every hour during the day or night, whether the figure of the broken limb does not move or becomes softened by the bandages; if the artery is healed due to the virtue of medicine, and he gives him the meat we have just placed, in such a way that the meat is at first subtle; and when it begins to heal, let it be large.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	And according to custom, the shoulder and leg must be reinserted for 40 days without fail; then one should dislocate it again, administer baths and remedies of ointments for healing.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the dislocation is ugly or stuck, it should be held for 1 day or 2 months to dislocate again.
de la brisure du bras	of the break of the arm
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is made up of two bones which are called the pair of 'fosciles', from which one is small, it is the bone that supports the pit; and the other is large, and it is the bone located underneath, towards the little elbow; suppose only the larger foscile breaks or perhaps the smaller one, and suppose they come together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When the small fractures are broken, the restoration is easy, and the healing; and when the large ones are broken, the healing is poorly done, and more painful than when they were broken together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If only the small bone is broken, if it's appropriate to gently stretch and make it even.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	And if it's the large bone that is broken, if it's appropriate to pull more strongly; and extend on his buttocks, elevate the palm of the hand higher than the others, and place the smaller fingers lower than the other fingers, and have the patient cross her bones against herself, with her buttock in front higher so she doesn't suffer any strain; then extend your assistants' arms to the side near their hand, or at their elbow, and another assistant at the other side above.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then place the mirrors evenly, according to their best shape.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if in the break into pieces, you place each in its location; and if there's none that sticks to one of them when you grab it by the heel, then you can't restore it to its place. So do surgery on it, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if in the case of injury that leads to a wound, I've mentioned this specifically in another chapter; take the treatment for it.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	And if during the beginning of restoration abscesses occur, then apply a bandage made from rose oil and white beeswax, such that it is neither too hard nor too soft; and place the bandage gently, so that once the abscesses have subsided.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	And then place the wax, and apply the plaster made from powder mixed with plenty of egg whites, until you insert the splints. Make sure that the splint (bone dressing) is somewhat more pronounced in areas where it hurts the most, being slightly wider than others; know that there should be six or seven splints arranged differently: either in one bone, or two; supporting more on the painful area compared to other places, as explained at the start of this chapter. And ensure the bandages covering the pain are soft and moist, neither too hard nor abrasive. Use threads made of linen for tying them, not too thick or too thin, as previously mentioned.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And reward the limb and the member after some days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And if any bad events come to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, it is necessary for you to dip the limb in hot water until that itch subsides; and let the limb not be left to rest.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then resume the traction, and if the ligaments have been severed and the bones exposed, do it as seems appropriate.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if one takes care that no injuries can occur to the limb because it is too constrained, it's necessary to soften it with a poultice, and leave thus for some days, until the pains subside, and then retighten.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things we have said come to the patient, or up to 20 days after releasing them.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	Otherwise, or around this time, then place your hands on his neck, and make sure the neck is even, and be careful of movement and stretching, and sleep on his back; and know that this healing occurs in 30 days or 35 days, and sometimes in 20 days, depending on the compositions and temperaments of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	Of the breaking of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that on the back of the hand and in its knuckles there are few injuries, and they only bend many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	And when the heel of the hand is broken or bent, it is necessary for the patient to keep their fingers together and straight in front of them equally; then place their hand on an extended surface, and extend the fingers of the broken bone, placing them evenly side by side until they are well aligned. And put a plaster and bandages, if no abscess forms, then place an elastic band according to the size of the hand; and wrap it in one linen fold.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the break is in the inner part near the belly of the hand's sole, make a ring out of linen and tell the patient to place it on their broken heel; and then stretch it with a long piece of linen, and have the band wrap around as well as can be, just like how big the hand's sole is, and stretch it, according to what fits.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the breakage is at the front, it is necessary that you place one support above and another below on the heel, so that the hand is open and straight, then tie everything together throughout the hand, and seal the connection between the fingers.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the breakage occurs on any of the fingers, it's essential that you treat them equally, just as is proper; and restrain with the heel, and should you see if placing a small upright support helps to lift the breakage, and doesn't move; and if the breakage is in another finger, like in the index or one of the others, do the same, and tie it using the healthy one that follows; or tie them all together with a single band, until you can properly treat it, or place a support similarly, as we hold them. Pay attention to the restoration and arrangement of each wound separately, and take care of those who come before you, just as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	Of the broken foot
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	The bone of the thigh is often broken, and one can see this when it turns in front and behind; and its restoration thus consists: i. the joining above the breakage, and ii. another below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And in the patient's abdomen, then extend each minister his link to its equal part; and this is when the break has entered into the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the breaking occurs close to the root of the heel, then it should be one of the ligaments towards the knife and the other ligaments under the break.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And if it is close to the knee, then you should have the ligaments within the knee, and the posterior extension; then place the sights on the flat bone at both of his hands until it is according to its natural shape, and then apply plaster and the bandage. If any pus comes out, let it go.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is an abscess to be treated with cautery, let it heal before you return to your work and treatment; the incision is made in such manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is necessary that you wrap around the break with a bandage made of two or three layers, and retain any excess. Then turn the leg until the heels reach the root of the thigh, and insert the thread longitudinally between the heel and the leg, under the knee, and attach the head of the thread to the top; then proceed wrapping on the leg and the heel, then place a plaster over the break, and a piece of bone from the leg; then fill in between the leg and the heel with strips of gauze so as to evenly apply pressure. Then start tying forming three or four turns around the break; and when you go further above the break, tie less tightly; then check two ends of the thread that you have inserted between the leg and the heel, and tie them into three plaques placed at the top, then return under the head of the thread until you reach below the foot; and apply pressure to prevent it from moving in its place. Then leave him like this, and if no pus, swelling or similar symptoms appear.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if it happens, loosen the binding and address what has occurred, just as we have said many times. And if there are pieces of bone that are being gripped, if it is possible to cut them off, do so; and if you can't, it's appropriate to cut through the cloth and drain out force (hemorrhage); and treat it in the way we've described, until it heals.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And not once is the flesh broken like when we insert needles, such as in the shoulder and arm; nevertheless, no complaint comes from the patient during this kind of restoration.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the flesh is restored in one week, or somewhat less, or somewhat more, according to the diversity of constitutions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	from the knee joint
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	You know that within the knee joint there is some cracking noise, but it bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, even if it's just a crack, or it loses connection and occurs in every wound, and feels like a wound, and this is felt very well.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is this: you should put in equal what was removed from its place until it can move freely again when assembled. Then apply plaster and add a round splint if necessary, then adjust as needed. Proceed with all the preparations we have described for other fractures, such as abscesses or similar occurrences. For each situation, apply what suits that particular case while maintaining soundness.
de la brisure de la jambe	Of the breaking of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	You know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is named "mustelz" by the right and the other is called "foscile"; and any injury or fracture occurs just like it does with an arm. And this restoration procedure is similar to that for the arm, and all operations are the same. And if both of these bones break together, then the leg turns in every direction.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the delicate bones are broken, then turn towards the front.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	And if the large bone is broken, one feels great pain and can see it clearly; and then it turns around.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	So apply the procedure of extension and make it even, then evenly connect the nodes; but still, if the fracture is ugly or there are multiple fragments, that the extension should be lesser and more gentle. And adjust it according to your skill.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed your task, take two furs of horse hair that strengthen the leg on both sides, and they should be as long as the length of the leg from the knee to here. Then wrap them in two strips each over and under it, and tie them in the middle, so the leg cannot bend either right or left, and thus it is well; and no one administers a bandage that is as long as the leg, made of fur, and they place the leg to ward off movement, and this must be done precisely where there was injury; and move the leg every day to see if there are any signs of an abscess or other accident; treat it until it is healed.
de la brisure des os dou piet	Of the breaking of bones due to injury
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	Ankle injuries do not come from breaking, but in bones due to injury there is a break sometimes and the bones themselves, only distress occurs in various positions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if there occurs a break in the bones due to injury, and you see these bones mount over one another, place such wounds on the ground like they would want to go, also as it were. Then put your foot on his foot at that point where the bones are raised, press them so much that their life returns; then put the plastering materials in the middle, cover them up, and place a small table under the belly of the foot with two shoulder-width planks, then bind them to the foot's inner side. Finally, wrap cloths around them or other things you need.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three days or four have passed, if you release the bandage, because you will find the bones even, whether broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if any of the ribs are broken, mend them, as we have said for the ribs of the hand; then place upon the broken rib an elyptical piece according to the length of the rib, and slightly larger, then put under it the table I mentioned, and tighten the attachment; and if there are two or three, or more, break them, if on each rib you place an elyptical piece according to its size, wrapped in one linen sheet, and tighten the table under this piece; and stay positioned on the top of the table facing down towards the belly beneath it, so that it cuts well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And you should not forget the other things I've said about other injuries, once we have discussed them; and treat each case according to how it should be.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the breaking of the bone in the hand
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bone of nature breaks in a woman, if she lets it swell, then inclines her to the back part and is held from behind; fill the cavity that nature intended for the wound with cotton, and put also as much as there is. Then stand the woman upright, lift up her back slowly, and then let the cotton go until it reaches the entrance of nature, and carry along the bone with your hand; and when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and upon doing so, have her return to normal, like this for seven days or more: the break will be healed. If you see fit, take a bladder of goatskin and tie it to one end of a stick, and fill the whole bladder into nature; then blow into the stick until the bladder is inflated inside: nature will heal the break itself. Fill it with cotton, and leave like this for a few days, till it's healed properly.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	And when the bone of the hand is broken, or in the case of a woman if it is fixed so as we have said in the hip bone; and these nearby breaks should not be hidden by someone who devotes their study and practice to it, and heed my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	For the break signifies in many positions the correct way to restore: therefore, understand this.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the case of a broken penis, take an oxtail and fill it with the penis; then wrap it in bandages all around, and leave it for three days or as long thereafter, and it will heal quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	Of breaking with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for the one who has a break with a wound, even if it's large, such as the bone of the rib or shoulder or resembling others, that it should be now cauterized, so that the cauterizations which we have mentioned testify to this.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is healthy, you should still apply vinegar to it, even if you don't have anything else. Proceed then to restore the break in the same hour or day, or at least wait for the pus from an abscess not to come out.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if pus from an abscess has come out, allow the restoration to continue for another day or two, until the pus subsides. Don't touch it at all on the third day or fourth day, as you might provoke a bad setback.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if you see the bone broken appearing on the part uncovered by the cut, it is necessary that you place your hands gently on it, in a small extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extensions do not appear for you to place evenly with your hands, then take this tool made of iron, which is about seven inches or six inches long, and its width should be according to the size of the wound; and it's necessary for the surgeon that he uses three or four of them, depending on what he needs for each cure of broken bones; and may be round and a little thick so that they do not bend under compression on your limb during surgery, and may be smooth in front, and thick at the center advancing, like this:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And it is called "palainche" because it means that the curved bones should be placed on the tip of the apparent bone; and it should be struck once, until it heals, and be equal to each other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the break is subtle and the tools cannot properly take hold of the bone, it means that you should copy the tip of the bone as long as the tools have the ability.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot return the bone, as we have said, using an appropriate tool for this purpose, such as an incisor or saw, with your power; then cut that which is remaining in the hard and small scratches of the bone.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is brought back, and the organs feel intense pain afterwards, know that it has not been placed in its natural position.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	If you manage to place it in its natural position, then soak the bandage in a black and stoptic wine, and properly do this especially if it's external; don't put any paste or other substance on the wound that might cause oiliness, which could lead to pus formation and decay. Then administer herbs after you have restored the bone, and leave the wound open, covering only the entire area according to the size of the wound. Be sure to watch carefully not to compress the wound with pressure; many times people have done this incorrectly, causing injury or even death at the wound site on subsequent occasions; and so the constraints should be softer and more soothing compared to other injuries.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	And if the wound is deep or large, and you doubt that some accident might have occurred there, as we said earlier, and you find pain in your arm, then it doesn't suit to apply ointments; but wrap around, instead of ointments, hard cloths, and bind them tightly.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one or two days that the wound is healing and the swelling has gone down, remove what you have applied with all the wine, and then apply a healing ointment for wounds, such as a tetraroma ointment and similar ones.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary for you to dislocate the limb twice a day, in the morning and at vespers, until it is healed and sound.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary that the limb be braced in such a way that the joint moves slightly backwards.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if the days pass and it cannot be joined back but allows movement of the joint, you should know that there are small bone fragments causing this pain, so it is necessary for you to treat the wound with traction, and remove all these worn-out pieces that cause this pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula comes to the wound or any other manner of corruption, it is necessary that you treat it according to what he instructed in his previous chapter.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And when the bone is broken and exposed in the body, such as in the case of the skull or shoulder blade, or other large bones, do not attempt to remove them because many die from it. Leave it until it heals naturally; perhaps it will heal within twenty days or thirty. Then treat the wound if you can. If you cannot, leave it alone.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	The blows that come from sweat
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	The blows come often after the healing of injuries, even especially when close to joints. It's a thing to see how the member's shape changes; and by chance can't perform its natural tasks on the member.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Take care therefore when it comes to swellings: if you administer any stictching medicines such as aloes, incense, myrrh, sarsaparilla, senna, and the likes; or whatever among these things you choose, or all together, mix them with stictching wine or with enough egg or with garlic; and apply them on the swellings in poultices, bind them well, do not remove them by hand for days; then remove them, and start again another one until all the swellings are gone. Or you can bind it to a properly made piece of plaster; for the property of plaster is that it removes all swellings from the limbs. And if the swelling has turned hard like stone, as needing removal, if it is covered, cut away the excess and make its excess visible; or remove it with any barber until it's gone, then treat until healed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	The member which becomes weak after confinement or imprisonment
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the breakage of the bone is restored, and after that the limbs are weak and subtle, this happens due to various reasons: because it was bound too tightly and wasn't bound as it should have been; or because there were too many bindings, and couldn't come into alignment with the limb; or because of excessive swelling; or because of too large movements, not in their proper time; or because they have little blood in their body, so it's weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure involves having you eat the herbs, and make the body tender, until the healing spreads within him; then he should take baths and have fun and rest. After that, apply grease to the limb, so that the grease draws towards the major swelling, and washes it with cold water repeatedly, until the swelling aligns with the limb; and restore his natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	If the member is twisted after recovery
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limbs are twisted after restoration, and if you break them open, even though the shape of the limb is distorted, it does not lose its natural function: do not believe those who say one should break the limb completely anew; many have done this in our land, and these methods are criticized, leading to great harms, perhaps even death. Nonetheless, when fractures and injuries are fresh, it's fitting that they be immersed in hot water or that medicinal plants like the leaves of basil, roots, and meadowsweet are cooked, such as with dyaquilon well made, and you use a musk paste from basil, mixed with fat from gelatine or oil of sassafras, and make a plaster out of it. Or you take greased figs, grind them with charcoal ash, and similar medications that reduce inflammation.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And no time is the node removed by constantly rubbing it for a long period with wet hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And let there be a gentle movement of the limb each hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the twisting is hardened and stiff, like bone, and needs to be treated with iron, should it come to that point where the iron has to be applied up to the bone, gently incise through the thin opening; and apply cautery and careful study in the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	This begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation occurs to any, if it happens now to be properly returned without injury.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	And if you delay, the limbs will swell, and by chance you might put them in peril; for it is not right to move them when they are swollen: many times pus and other pains come about. Nonetheless, whenever this happens, have a surgeon look over the patient, then leave him alone until the abscess subsides; then immerse the limb in hot water and oil, then gently reset it, and treat each limb as the treatment calls for in its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have organized the chapters concerning shoulder dislocations up to this point.
des mandibules	of the jaw
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	It happens that the jaws are dislocated downwards, and the dislocations of both occur in two ways: either they are somewhat osseous at their joints and slightly softened; or they are completely dislocated and hang towards the bottom, causing saliva from the mouth to leak out, unable to hold it, nor can they close their mouth, and wrap their tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When dislocations are small, they can return through several positions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And when it is whole and completed, you should reset it quickly, without hesitation; and do this while the ministers are cutting off the head of the sick person, and support one of her/his fingers under the dislocation of the jawbone inside the mouth, if the dislocation is from two parts; and the other hand should be out, to make them equal. Command the patient to soften their jaws, and move them in every direction.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And he should gently place the bone until it returns to its place when it wakes up.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if returning it is difficult, indeed if they are the two jaws together, so immerse them in hot water and oil, as long as you gently move them back; do not apply force during the return, just like we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And when they are brought back evenly, and the mouth of the patient closes well after being mollified, then place wet cloths as wads in a paste made from olive oil and beeswax, then bind it loosely with moist linen; let the patient lie on their back, and their limbs be between two cushions, so that they do not move nor to the right nor to the left, nor strain themselves at all, but should only eat light food until the pains are relieved, and the jaws are set; and then serve them what they wish lightly, and do not allow them to open their mouth for eating or drinking until the jaw is well set and healed.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two mandibles cannot be returned to their place within an hour, and are not naturally converted to their usual state, it leads to fevers that settle in, as well as abdominal distention, and sometimes vomiting of undigested food.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	And when you see this, then know that it is a loss; and many times, death befalls the one who encounters this within eight days.
de la forcelle	from the strength
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The forces cannot dislocate from within the continuous structure of it and from its bottom, and is dislocated only outside once, and one feels this well.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And the restoration is that the patient lies supine on their back, and extends their arms; and then press the body into your palm shape, and it will return. Then apply a plaster and bind it, and tighten; and the thigh which faces the leg cannot dislocate; if not, should they dislocate once, you reset them to their place, as we have said; then apply the plaster and bind it, and tighten, and command the patient to rest until they are healed; and thus similarly is brought back the shoulder blades when they are out of place due to their dislocation.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	from the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	You should know that the shoulder is dislocated in three ways: first, it slips down to the armpit region; second, at the back part of the buttocks; and occasionally, above, which happens rarely; and it doesn't slip behind the shoulder blade or within due to nerves; and it gets repeatedly dislocated downwards towards the axilla area, even with those who have little flesh. For those who have a bit of muscle, it jumps out through its points and comes back in through its points.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And by chance happens to some men due to impact or fracture, and inflames the shoulder in an abscess-like manner, and they think that it is dislocated because of this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	So then you must verify it, until you are certain of it; and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And you are aware of the dislocations when it moves downward towards the axilla. You'll notice differences between the diseased shoulder and the healthy one, finding a clear manifestation among them; in particular, there's a hollow at the top of the shoulder, from the armpit up to the collarbone, just like if it were an oes. The patient cannot bring his hand back under his nose or move it with any motion; similarly, if the dislocation occurs high up, it isn't hidden either, as you find it clearly at the collarbone; this method of dislocation can only be rectified when new, or when the child is ill.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the method is that the minister raises his hand from the malady up, then places his fingers on the joint and lifts the joint upwards with force at the place; and the minister raises his hand and extends it upwards, placing him there; if he goes too quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	And if it doesn't come so as we have said in a few days after, then the patient should be bathed in hot water; and he should be treated with soothing and calming methods, such as decoctions of parsley and fenugreek and meadowsweet in water, and given to him; then wrap the patient on his back, and place a blanket of equal thickness under his buttocks, neither too soft nor too hard, then place the shoe on his heel, and firmly raise the head of the shoulder, pulling the hand towards it; and another helper should trim the head of the shoulder so that it doesn't move downwards; this shoulder returns immediately now, and if you see that you have successfully performed this method: then there must be someone present in your home who is larger than the patient; and stand upright facing the side, pushing the shoulder under the blanket with the patient's back, lift the blanket up so that the patient hangs at an angle; and another helper should pull the hand towards it downwards near the belly.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too weak, unable to lift anything heavy, and the dislocation returns right away.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And to reset it you can do it in other ways as well: and what you do is stick the long rod into the ground, so that the shoulder is also positioned like a dart, and not too large or too slippery; then place this over the patient but ensure there's grease underneath, and make sure the patient stays stationary for a long time with the rod; then extend their hand downwards from the other side in position, and the joint will return to its place quickly; and if it doesn't return through all these things that we've said, do this cure: take a torch of two arms wide and four inches thick, which has the head hollowed out so as to fit into the socket when inserted from below, according to this shape:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	Then bind the trunk with a cloth underneath to prevent it from rubbing against the affected area; place it on its back under the affected area; and extend your arms along the trunk up to its full length, bind the shoulder in place on the trunk, and position your hand's arm at its base; then place your arm on one thick stick of about the same width, and keep your hands down, leaving your body hanging from the other side: the joint will now return immediately.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is set, however manner, that you must place a thread equal on the joint, then apply plaster covered in powder from the mill, along with incense and yolk of egg, over the entire shoulder and around it, then remove the plaster once the process is done, and re-tie the bandage on top of the plaster, and hold the hand near its neck, and let your hands stay like this.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	It is necessary for him to eat a little, until the limbs are strengthened, because he will heal faster; and then increase his meals after five days or seven, and move them; and if it is firm and not softened, he will be healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joints have moved due to moisture or for some other reason that has caused this issue, it is necessary that you apply three cauteries to them, as was described earlier in our treatise on the use of cauteries.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this, and it dislocates after seven days, and the joint doesn't stay in place, and cannot lift your arm up, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is either cut or stretched or weakened; and know that the joint would never settle back into its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation that occurs near the buttocks and breasts, or behind, is caused by pushing and stretching of hands, and it's administered elsewhere; treatment should be given as long as one remains healthy.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after healing there comes stiffness in the limb, and gradual movements later on, then they should use warm baths repeatedly until this stiffness disappears, and returns to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	From the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	Know that the shoulder joint is dislocated at its peaks and returns there; it has been dislocated from all sides, both in front and behind, and the dislocation cannot be remedied because you can see it clearly and feel it well; and it is dislocated according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the sick to the healthy side with your hand, if you can see it clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the connection is uneven, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch his shoulder to any extent.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it should be that you reset it in this manner as for pus wounds, because if pus wounds came about, there would be trouble in bringing them back; and by chance they cannot be brought back entirely, even when it is at the rear; it is worse than other dislocations, and causes more pain, and by chance death comes from it.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is as follows: when it is such that one can return it to its position, you extend your hand of his two hands; and his arms are spread out, and his hands are turned towards the center according to the circumference of the elbow from inside, outside and underneath, and force the joint back into its place together or at the base of his palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And when there is a dislocation of the head, it returns whenever he doubles his hand over his own hand, and brings back the elbow that has been dislocated to the base of the palm.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And if it doesn't return to its original position, administer strong extension; and when you do so, extend the arm with both hands and stretch them outwards as far as possible, making sure not to move during this process. Then bend the arm in opposite directions, once having wrapped a double length of long and wide cloth around him. When you aim to connect the joint back onto your hand, anoint it with oil to soften the connection, then forcefully bring together the joint again until it begins to heal. Once healed, place it on a dry plaster bed covered with egg yolk, stretch it out carefully, and allow the arm to remain against the sick side for some days before removing the bandage.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firmly in place, remove the bandage and leave it as is; and if you notice that the joint does not settle well, redo the plaster and the bandage, then let it be like this for a few days until it is firmly set; then remove the bandage.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And if they feel the joint is twisted after returning it to its place, and it moves again, then bathe and scrub well afterwards, pressing until it is numb. Or you should apply butter on the joint for one day and one night, then wash with water; and when it sweats, gently rub the joint, then put the butter back on, and then enter into the bath; repeat this process twice or three times until they are healed. And if you see fit, place moistened calf's fat heated with butter over it, and press it down; if it returns to its position again.
li dislocation de la main	the dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The hand's joint has dislocated, and the return is slighter than with other joints. Whenever it dislocates, you should bring it back to its place immediately while it remains dislocated or when a heat abscess forms.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	And for returning the limb to its place, you should put your hand on a board and extend the limbs of the patient. Look at where they set their palm against the appearance of the joint, and hold it until the pain subsides completely. You must observe if it is properly in its place; then have the patient put the back of their hand on the board during extension and return to check its position.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, you should have the patient place the back of their hand on the table, and you should position their hand in accordance with the location of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If it returns now, then indeed it is well. If not, if the strain of plaster poultices for abscesses has relieved them, and leaves him so without needing to begin again.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	And if he cannot bear it, and you can't leave him in place after some days, if the joint remains bent; and it does not harm him as long as his hands are immobilized, and cannot strain anything at all: then know that a nerve is cut, or an artery; if there's no other way to strain by cautery in this case, and by chance there's no other means.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is in position, place it on the plaster as we have said, then apply pressure and leave it for five days, then remove it and let it be like that.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it cannot be moved well, and there is no break, with hot water grease, and rub it until it becomes clean.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	Of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	No instance is mentioned of removing the shoulder blade from one side only, or at the back of the palm or stomach; hence the shoulder blade stays. And it is essential to keep the dislocation in place until recovery starts, then support the head of the shoulder, and bend it towards the part where it was dislocated; let this condition last for two days, then make it equal on that day; bind it as we have said, and perform the unbinding on that day, make it move again and rebind it after that; repeat this process until confined, just like what has been described, if it is dislocated in the stomach of the hand, do exactly as done previously, until it gets well; similarly do when it's dislocated from another part.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	In the reduction of the heel, in the back.
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When it is dislocated at the back of the heel or neck, or multiple are dislocated, if there's no treatment, because time quickens the disease.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	And the signs for this are that the eliminations go against one's will, not being able to hold them back, and many times they soften parts of the body, either both thighs or both arms or two. Many times it becomes limp in three quarters; when it becomes limp at the back, it is called "paralysis": the treatment for this is that you reward whoever experiences paralysis if it came from childhood: there should be no cure or healing until then.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	And those who have just given birth or been struck by objects or similar things, according to the old methods of treatment as described in lengthy texts, did not always derive great benefit from them; but I have summarized these instructions based on my intention and devised various tools for their application.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	I state that when the foetus comes before the nipples, nothing is to be found; similarly, the one coming straight down to both sides, it can only be treated with what directly affects the back, as I say; and if the mother's body is extended over her belly evenly up to the first rib, and there is pressure from within her body against it, preventing any bruising; then stick a stake into the head in the ground forming soil, and another at the sides, and tie two strings under these stakes among the ribs near the muscles, and another at the hips, knees, and ankles; and two attendants should hold these strings, one by the head and the other by the sides, between the two stakes; they must be held tightly together, as we have said for the stake, and the mother should place her palms on the spine forming soil until she revives.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And if it doesn't recover from this treatment, take a board of three lengths long, and place it over the body. If the patient is on their side, put the patient under the board with their body against it, then position one end of the board so that the board touches the backside of the spine; set the middle of the board above the spine. Place their feet at either other end of the board and press firmly until they return to consciousness; if you see an improvement, do this on the elbow which turns towards the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And if you stick two thongs to the head of a patient's arm as long as your hand, and in front of their feet two others, with each thong having about three handbreadths between them; and place at each end a piece that has the elbow joint or turns correctly, firmly burying the ends of the thongs into the ground so they don't move; and between each pair of these two thongs, stick one turning thong, whose joints turn towards it; and in the two turning ones, insert little sticks about three handbreadths long to turn the elbows; then tie a link among them at the elbow towards the head, and another link towards the feet at the other elbow, and each of servants turns their elbow along its whole length, and masters make the spine even as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	And when it's even, if you place desiccating plaster with plenty of egg whites, then apply ointment, and use an ash from a tablet of three inches long, that purifies the site of the cyst and the healthy part of the spine, then bind it with a bandage as we have said, and instruct the patient in subtle nourishing techniques, until they are well; and if any sign appears during recovery, then you should administer softening medicines and soothing treatments, using the technique that we have discussed previously; and each time something is administered of powdered bread, and each time there's an appearance at the lower spine behind the back, suspect it might be dislocation; and it's the bone that's opening, so one must not presume: by chance it could cause death.
des dislocations de la hainche	of hip dislocations
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	You should know that the joints of the hip and the shoulder can only experience dislocations alone, unlike other joints; and the hip joint is dislocated according to four parts: within and outward, and in front and behind; it dislocates more inwardly and less forward and backward.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And the knowledge of its dislocation within is this: when you join the diseased leg with the healthy one, it's longer, and opens wider than the healthy leg at the knee joint; and the diseased knee cannot bend as far as the healthy one does; and there are abscesses bulging under those limbs because the heel of the leg has come to rest against them.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign for him who approaches fire, it is that such accidents are contrary to these before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs for him who encounters ahead, it is that his leg must be well according to accomplishment; however, neither double its ankle without pain, and if one wants to make him move, he cannot beforehand, and he holds back his urine, and swells his foot, and when he walks, he does so on the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs for him who encounters behind, it is that he cannot spread his ankle or double it, and this leg is more twisted than the other, and his foot becomes relaxed, and the head of the shoulder is in its place under the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The restoration of this illusion of dislocation is that you must understand that when dislocation has occurred and it remains according to its position, without any treatment, and there should not be any assumption made about it.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And for those where the dislocation is recent, and there are four ways of dislocation, if you hurry you should return the joint, stretch it inside and outside, and move it to the right and left; by chance if it returns, no other treatment will be necessary.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And if it doesn't return in this manner, then you should give strong assistance and hold the leg firmly with two hands or tie it tightly above the knee; and another assistant extends their hand over like this, so their palms are touching each other under the buttocks. Then they thrust their arms back up and down using a firm pull on the rope at the ankle; and another grabs the loop of the rope at the calf; and extend both upwards and downwards simultaneously until that point when the diseased limb is lifted off the ground all at once, and remains hanging for a time.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of extension is common among four similar situations, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is well.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	If not, then you should apply treatment according to its appearance. When the dislocation is in the pelvis, it's necessary that you treat the malady on the healthy side of his body, then tie something around the root of his leg, and the upper part over the groin, then tie it above the inguinal ligament, and towards the front; then you should guide another person to hold his arms, wrap your hand around the thick part of his leg malady, and extend it forward in a form: if it returns to its position now; and this way of dislocation is lighter than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	And if you cannot tie it in this way as we have said, then it's necessary that you tie both legs of the malady together with a strong band around their heels and knees, and make the leg on the malady extend more than two feet compared to the others; then hang him from his head with a pole, and raise his arms long above the ground; then command another person to hold the end of his leg, while other assistants hold onto him together, gripping in front of his leg, because it's returning to its position quickly now.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And when the dislocation is at the front, if one lies the ill, as we have said about those with gilbositis, and stretches the cord properly on the sick's leg and also on the side; then insert two points, one on the head and another at the foot, then stick a point between the thighs of the ill in their dislocated form; and plant moist cloths around to prevent the skin from getting burned, then stretch each physician towards themself, and place the view equally with their hand for the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, that's good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If it's not the case, place on a table and press there as we explained about gilbositis, let the ill person lie on their healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is in front, it must be extended as soon as possible, and according to what I said; and make the patient feel their pain on the wrong side, then press with the other hand, and extend downwards towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And if the dislocation is at the back, then it does not allow extending the patient backward or lifting them off the ground. Instead, they should lie as though their hip was dislocated at the back, just like we explained about lying on both hips; and be on their chest with the leg extended as we said earlier, and they should press towards the joint to the table; it is done correctly when the ill person extends their legs and they are even. Then adjust the thighs, apply a plaster, and stretch with a bandage so that the hip does not move; and rest for three or four days, then release them, apply the plaster again; and if you see that they are even, stretch them as before, and leave it for three more days; then release them and let them move gently until their limbs are strengthened.
de la dislocation dou genoil	Of the dislocation of the shoulder joint
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The shoulder joint is dislocated in three ways: this means, inside and outside, and behind; and it does not dislocate forward.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And the signs for this are to command the patient to bend their leg at their knee, and if they cannot straighten it at their knee, you know they have been dislocated; and the restoration is that you make them stand upright, extend their leg if possible, and place your back against their buttocks, then their foot against yours. Then take hold of their kneecap with your palms, pull it between your fingers, then bend both sides of the knee gently; and another assistant extends their foot until the knees return to its position, and the signs are that they comfortably bend their leg at their knee lightly; place the bandage, make the leg rest against the knee, have them together strongly for III days or IV days, then release it; and do not move the patient's legs yet until the limbs are strengthened.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limb is not in place, apply strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the thigh, until it stabilizes.
de la dislocation dou talon	From the dislocation of the heel
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heels are never fully set and always partially dislocated, both inside and outside.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And the signs are that the ankle is swollen and tries to move before it dislocates: the reset should be quick, and one must gently extend it with their hands when it is only slightly moved.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	And when it is dislocated completely, one must have the patient lie straight and hold the leg up by lifting their ankle; then pull the foot towards your right hand, and then to your left twice, then lift it high, and firmly bend the leg upwards; repeat this two times as we have said, while pulling and moving the leg. If it returns, it is well; if not, restart the process, for it will return; and if it cannot return like this, one must remove the patient on their back to the ground, firmly plant the leg between their thighs in the earth, and tie strips tightly around them so as not to pinch the ankle. Then, have the helpers cut away their thighs, and with another helper extend the foot towards their hands or a stake, which they bind to the neck of the leg; then equally stretch each helper and place the stake firmly between the thighs for holding the leg when it is extended; finally, make the dislocation equal on both hands, and have another helper cut the healthy leg right after the knee, and the dislocation will return quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And when it reaches the point, apply the plaster and bandage over it, hold it firm, tie the leg to the joint, and guard the nerves that are behind the ankle, ensuring the bandage is not too tight; then leave it for two or three days. If the bandage loosens, loosen it; then remove the bandages on the third day or the fourth, and guide the patient for three more days; and if it progresses beyond this stage, there is no guarantee that it will not dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the abscesses come out, then it is necessary that you soothe them, as we have said elsewhere, until they are clean.
des dois	do not specify
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When both shoulders are dislocated, if they fit beautifully to extend with work, and this is a minor matter.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the dislocation is in no bone of the back or leg joint, you should make the patient lie on their full length or flat on a table completely straight, and place your foot where it opens from these joints, then press with your foot firmly until they recover. And when it's even and there is nothing opening, put under the heel of the foot a board for two shoulders, then hold them firmly in place, and let them rest for three days, then release; and make them rest until they are well again.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	regarding wounds and dislocations together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	When injury accompanies dislocation, and you wish to restore it, many times the patient dies: if you are not presumptuous in your treatment, if you are skilled in the art and have used it for a long time, and if you are kind and merciful but not hasty; then do not be bold; start by treating with calming abscess removal methods, leave the patient to God's mercy if you do not see hope of recovery; and when you do see hope, immediately reset the limb in place, as if removing the abscesses is complete; and when the limb is in place, apply calming abscess removal techniques, treat the wound appropriately with dried ointments; and if due to dislocation there are fractures, and small bone fragments are exposed, set them, and do what we have said about simple diseases; and refrain from entering paths of fear as I instructed, because this is your Creator's will, and for the wisdom you arm yourself and your body with.
Amen	Amen
