O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	To you, dear sons, I have completed this book which is the latter part of the science of medicine combined with its completeness. And I have done the end through its demonstrations and by its statements.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to my mind that I should complete this book with this treatise, which is a part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the art of hands is practiced in our region and is unknown everywhere, it has been lost and discarded, and nothing remains from it except for small descriptions in books by the ancients that have been performed by hand.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And because of this, errors and vanity have come about, and minds are closed, and knowledge has become distant.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation;	It seems I might revive this treatise altogether, according to the path of exposition, declaration and abbreviation;
et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	And will come together the forms of the metal cauteries and other tools of the operation with the adjustment of exposition and preparation of them, as it is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because no good masters are found in our time, the art of medicine has been extended.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary for the one who intervenes to master in the art of anatomy, as Galen says, as long as he knows the measurement of the limbs, and their forms and connections and separations, and have knowledge of bones and nerves and tendons, and the number of bones, and their movement and mobile and stationary veins, and the location of their exit.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc;	And according to this says Hippocrates that without the tool we are little and with the work is less;
et meismement en l’art de main.	And similarly in the art of manual skills.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes;	We tell you at the introduction of this book that if someone doesn't know the things already mentioned, they might make mistakes and deceive people;
ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	So often, many have entered this science and then abandoned their knowledge and experimentation.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col;	For I saw a madman looking at an abscess or neck of a woman, and cutting the arteries from her neck;
por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	because so much blood flowed out that the woman died in her hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans;	And I saw another madman treating a stone in an old man, and the stone was large;
si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	so he took with him a piece of the bladder from it, and the man died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I have already been summoned to extract, and saw the location of the disease and the size of the stone, and if they were well cut it would kill him.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie;	And I saw another madman treating the Duke of our land who had his leg broken, and with the breakage he got an injury;
et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine;	and the surgeons full of ignorance caused the breakage on the wound in accordance with strong luck, and did not allow any medicine to reach the wound, and left it like that until the end.
et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie;	And he commands that she not loosen it at all;
et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And wait like that until the leg is completely healed and the feet came to ruin.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe;	I was summoned to come to him, and I hurried to come to release the leg;
et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	And when I heard it dislocated so smoothly that he felt no pain at all.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner;	But the entire corruption was already confirmed in his body or limb, and it could not be cured;
et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	And the corruption continued to spread through the body until the limbs were completely lost.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And as for another instance where one abscess weakened another intertwined abscess, and then it inflamed due to the wickedness of its lordship.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For the ulcer, when it is pure of melancholic humours, does not allow one to touch it with iron if it isn't in its entirety within what can be removed all that which has been corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions:	And for this reason, dear children, you need to know that the art of healing is divided into two parts:
c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions;	This means, "it refers to," or "this is known as," where there's danger in multiple positions.
et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And I will show in each part of this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	Because it's necessary that you keep them in mind, so that the ignorant may not speak ill of you.
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez;	If you take your tools in hand and treat your patients with both gentleness and firmness, and use the best method so that through the grace of God, you come to heal them and remain just;
et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit;	and leave the unbearable diseases without cure;
et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	And remove from those who make you doubt, and have faith in your skills so that you may come from this world to the other with glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens:	Galiens states in some of his admonishments:
«Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Never apply an inappropriate remedy for illness, lest you be called mad instead.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have composed this treatise according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez;	The first chapters are about fire cauteries and medicine-based cauteries, and they order the chapters from the head down to the stones;
et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	and descriptions of instruments, and the tools for cauterization, and everything else that is necessary for this task.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses;	The second chapters are about cutting and piercing, and suction cups and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar matters.
et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	And these chapters are arranged and describe the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses;	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar matters;
et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	And it is arranged concerning the position of the head up to the neck, and regarding the shapes of the instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Just as we recall our work, it is fitting that I explain the quality of each aid and the harm of each constitution.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus;	I say that the qualities of help, and harm, are the longest word and subtlest science, and the secrets of response;
et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu;	And many wise men spoke about this, and they agreed on it;
et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	And their words satisfy me, for I fear the length of them.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions:	I say that the cautery helps universally in any complexion where it has matter, for there are two complexions:
c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	This means to know hot complexion with substance, and dry complexion with substance.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide;	In the hot and dry complexion together having substance, they devised nothing and said that the cautery is a great help;
et li autre dirent le contraire:	And others said the opposite:
que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	that the cautery is only beneficial for diseases that come from heat and drying.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour;	For the nature of fire is so hot and should not be used to treat diseases that are caused by heat or drying;
et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	And it is those who say the opposite, that the cautery provides great assistance to hot and drying diseases that manifest in people's bodies.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the body of the person and their moisture to the constitution of fire, you find that the body is cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this word.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it true on every occasion through experimentation.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens;	And in every case, do not intervene except for those who have tried it and know the chapter of cauteries by long usage, and understand the variety of people's complexions, and their conditions and causes of diseases, and the occurrences and span of treatment;
des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	For other complexions we have none, just as in cold and wet illnesses.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all these matched and agreed with the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, children, that when assembled in fire, a cautery has secrets of healing arts, and it offers more benefit than a hot medical treatment.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and does not come out except at the body part that is heated, and does not harm other parts if you do not name it.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation;	Medicines originating from one body part to another through circulation generate illnesses within the body.
et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	And by chance, it affects the patient.
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	The fire, due to its height and the goodness of its quality, does not do this thing if there is no excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses;	And this I have found through experimentation and the length of my service and study in the art, and it aligns with the truth of things;
et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant;	And for this reason I apologize for the length of my speech, because it does not please me to reveal the secret that lies with fire and the quality of the work, how it relieves diseases from bodies, as the philosopher demonstrates in his demonstration;
or le recevez en vos pensees.	Receive it in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that they decided on what times the cauterizations should be performed, and prescribed them carefully.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere;	And I say that the cautery is suitable in all circumstances, because the injuries caused come off easily with the help of the cautery;
et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And indeed, if the cautery is for necessary pains that cannot wait until greater mischief befalls the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire;	And never think like, silly child, as fools do;
car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue;	for the disease that is cured by cautery has no return;
et il le dient ensi;	and he says so;
mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	but it is not as they think, for cautery is only a medicine that changes the complexion, dries the fluids which are the cause of pain, and is worth more than medicine because of its speed in increasing its power, and because of the virtue of its work and its authority.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut;	And it is possible that a disease may occur at any time depending on the constitution of the patient and the location of the illness and its nature;
et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie;	And in him they assemble the excesses through acquisition of meats and similar things; if one does not administer cauterizations at this point or where there is little excess and moisture, such as with dense cauterization for pain, then that particular kind of pain does not return.
mais ce avient poc.	But this happens slightly.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir;	And few people understand why cauterizations are called the ends of medicine; it is to be seen; and that's how it is.
mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	But they don't believe that cauterizations come after medicine; rather their understanding is false. Instead, in the realm of medicine, it is cauterizations which are considered as a final resort because whenever our treatments for any disease fail to produce results, then we administer cauterization and it becomes effective.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore, it is true that cauteries are at the end of medicine, not according to the understanding of those who misunderstand.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance;	The old ones said that gold instruments' cauterizing tools are more effective than iron ones, and they mentioned this because of the quality of gold and the purity of its substance;
et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes;	and they say that the blades of the cauterizing tool do not cause rotting, but this is not visible because I have tested it and found that it does become visible in some people;
et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	And gold cauterizing tools are better than iron ones, as they said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez;	And even so, when you heat gold tools, you may not know if they are hot by the color of the gold, and it cools off quite quickly;
et s’on le chaufe trop;	and if they are heated too much;
si font au feu;	if it is put to the fire;
et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And thus there is enough prevention.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this reason, we use our fire cautery that has been prepared for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	So I have ordered this chapter on how to find the shoulder joint until this point, because it makes the search for it lighter.
dou cautere olivaire	with the olive cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	The use of cautery is appropriate in cases of moisture and cold within the brain. There are two kinds done by reason of an illness called 'soda', and due to various humors descending from head to eyes, and ears, as well as from numerous dreams and toothache, and throat pain, and especially for all diseases coming from cold such as paralysis, soda (a type of stroke), apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir;	The form of this cautery is such that the patient should be cleansed by a dissolving medicine altering the third or fourth part of the body, depending on what the properties and heat and habituation of the patient can bear;
et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	Then resume the original function of the organ in the patient.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis;	And then make him sit crossed between your hands, and place his hands on the back of his head;
aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz;	after place the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his second eyes;
et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	and leave where your thumbs arrive; if it bleeds from the cheek, heat the cautery called "olive" which has this form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant;	And mark its position on the body with ink, and guide your hand down and steady it little by little as you readjust.
puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit;	Then ease your hand slightly, and check the joint if you can see the bone has settled somewhat;
et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit;	And if you don't see it, start using the cautery again until you see the bone as I have instructed;
aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors;	After taking a small amount of salt, and put wet and soft cotton inside, place it on the joint, and let him rest for three days;
aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre;	After place moist butter on the cotton.
et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	And leave it until the charred part is removed;
aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treat the wound with the ointment known as 'tetrafarmacition', until it heals properly.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge;	And if one spoke of the old, saying that when more remains open the wound, more purges out;
et por ce si aide mues.	and because it moves with this assistance.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And it was said that one should leave the cauterization for so long that part of the bone gets burned, and then remove that which is burned from the bone, and treat it.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors;	And they say that one should apply the cautery until it heals, and press so hard on it as to make the opening as wide as a woman's pubic area when she gives birth; because this allows the body fluids to flow out.
et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte;	And should we leave the wound open for a long time;
aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	After that, one must clean and heal it.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor;	And these two methods of using the cautery do not seem to be good for everything, except in cases where there is a way of fear;
et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier;	And it seems to me that I should leave it as it is;
car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres;	For the head of the shoulder is weakened by continuous exposure to nature, as we witness with other limbs;
et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And even when the shoulder blade is weak by nature, and the first sign of a cautery is more healing and harsh for me, and with this I work together gathering health.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	from the old pain in the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres;	When there is chronic pain in the head and it lasts long, one should use remedies like herbs and pills that are called "cochines", and treatments for cleansing the head and ears and bandages;
et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	and if one performs the cautery as we have described before, and it is effective.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit;	Take care that the head of the sick person is of strong constitution, and do not let it become too cold;
adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Therefore, apply the cautery to that fire weapon a little as we have said above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»;	After you have made the cautery on each hoof up to the bone, just like we explained before, and apply the cautery where the term 'knees' is called;
et est I leus en coi on met ventouses;	and place them in the area where suction cups are used.
et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os:	And move your hand gently, so you do not see up to the bone:
li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors;	Patients feel much more intense pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak about it elsewhere;
et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	And it is necessary that the cauterizations of the horns be more subtle than that which cauterizes the middle part of the head, and this is how:
dou cautere dou chief	For the fire cautery,
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie:	When pain comes suddenly in part of the head, and extends the illness up to the eye, and the joints are treated with purging medicines, and other treatments that I have described for disease divisions, and nothing benefits from all this.
adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	So you do cauteries using two methods, namely with medicinal sweat and through fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir;	The medicine-based cauteries involve taking a spoonful of oil and applying it to the skin and covering it with I or II pieces of cloth; then heat it so that you can place the hot oil over the skin where the pain is located, allowing the oil to permeate through.
et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres;	And when it has been placed there, if you hold and press well and leave it thus for twelve hours;
et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III;	And then the dislocation and treatment were removed after the use of garlic oil for twelve days or three;
puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	Then place a butter poultice on it until pus begins to drain out.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	After the ointment treatment as long as it remains clean;
et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	And if you see fit to use any of the burning medicines that I have written about, or the tenth treatise on burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The iron cautery operates in this manner.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cautery which is as follows:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance;	And it is called "closed" because the head has the shape of a bell or it has one small curve, and in the middle there appears a little outline;
et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse;	And place it at the painful head, and hold your hand and twist it a little gently, until half of the mustard seed is burned;
et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And lift your hand so the artery doesn't burn, which has been exposed, and there is an abundance of blood.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors;	After placing cotton in the wound site, and let it sit for three days;
puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then put moistened cotton in oil, and then treat the wound with ointment as long as it remains clean;
et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	And if you wish to cauterize this inflamed area with the fire cautery, which is called 'cultellare', all at once, and be careful not to cover the artery in this inflammation which isn't old.
de emigraine	Regarding the use of a fire cautery, instruct the patient to allow their hair to grow long and evenly; if they are pricking at their base, hold them steady so they don't move until they fully grow.
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans;	When you treat inflammation as we have previously described in divisions of diseases, and if it doesn't improve, and you see that the cauterizations mentioned earlier in medicine and iron don't affect it, then it's necessary that you heat up the cautery which is called 'cultellare' until it becomes white;
et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os;	And so when on the limb a line half the length of one's arm is drawn out, and you take hold with your hand once, and steady it so as not to cut the artery and do not ascend up to the bone.
et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez;	And beware that the jaw remains quiet when one chews, and the tongue should only focus on remaining silent and avoid spasms occurring in the body, and beware of bleeding from the artery if it is cut, or if cutting has caused significant fear even to those who are unaware and inexperienced.
et laisse l’uevre em mi voie;	And let the work be done according to my path;
mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	but I will tell you how to properly stop bleeding when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it occurs in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	And if you notice that these cauteries do not help with the illness, and the patient is suffering, apply them to the back as we have said, and treat the wound until it heals;
et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz;	And if you observe, administer the cautery as we have said or in the chapter of artery extraction, with the cautery that has two blades;
et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And indeed, these cauteries are better and more effective than others.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	The pain of the ear from both cold and heat
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When pain comes from cold in the ear, and we have applied solutive medicines and other treatments that we mentioned under division, and if the pains do not subside, then heat this cautery called "points", according to its form.
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche;	After marking the entire area around the patient's ear or in both sides where pain is felt, and move away a little from the base of the ear after you have indicated its position.
et ait X poins entor chescune oreille;	and mark ten points around each ear;
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treatment until it becomes healthy.
de la torture de la bouche	Of the torment of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie;	Tortures that should be treated by cautery can only include those that move with the blood, as we have mentioned in our discussions of diseases.
et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	And do not use cautery on symptoms that come from scarring and infection in the flesh.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres:	When you treat this symptom of blood-moving torture and the discharge of bodily fluids and purge from the head and gargling, if it doesn't work, then it should be that you apply three applications of cautery to the skin.
l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres;	One at the root of the ear, and another slightly beyond the temple, and the third at the adjustment of the two lips;
et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce;	And place the cautery on the healthy part that opens, and apply it to the area above the ear's top until slightly over the corner of the head, and another on the temple as long as a finger.
et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse;	And let the cautery burn until half of the thickness of the flesh is consumed;
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	and this is the shape of the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros;	And it resembles the appearance of the scalpel that we showed before, but it is a bit more subtle. It is necessary for the knives to be a bit larger;
aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	after treating the wound as I have described previously, until it heals properly.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres:	When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, and if it does not benefit, and the patient has a fever, then make four cauterizations:
II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac;	Two on the two horns of the head, and one under the head, and one where the neck is called "vessel" as we have said before, and the last cauterization on the mouth of the stomach;
et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	And make the treatment as we have said before.
de litargie	Of Liturgy
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil;	For this illness, one must give the patient large grains and pill-like things to alleviate the head;
aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres;	After removing the head's pain, place it on the back of the head with the tallow plaster that is written or treated for plasters;
et c’est li maniere dou cautere:	and this is the way to apply the cautery:
si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	Do it as I have said if you do so.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est;	If it is done like this, well done;
et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros;	And if it isn't, you should apply three cautery treatments descending from the head to the neck, and leave two inches of space between each treatment.
et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu;	And treat it similarly to other cases, and if you find it properly setted, and the patient is suffering, then apply a fire cautery in the middle;
et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if it's needed, do so on the two horns as well, and treat until it becomes healthy;
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	and may be that which is called 'olive fire' by the cauterization, as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	from the cold of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit;	It is necessary that the head be cleaned of years and what we have mentioned previously;
aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col;	After cleansing the head of the patient, then apply the fire on the head and on each horn, and later on three places near the neck spine;
et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos;	And if you need more, and the horns are moist and the patient is suffering, and the disease is persistent, then apply four fire cauterizations on the spine of the back.
et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main;	And let him go until the most gentle wound is healed, and lift your hand;
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	after the cure until it becomes clean, and use the cautery which is called "olivare" as we have already discussed.
de l’epilempsie	Regarding the application of a cautery with fire, instruct the afflicted to allow hair growth until it is long and even; and if they poke at their origins, restrain the eyes so that they do not move until they grow.
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	The epileptics should only use fire cautery if they are of the phlegmatic type, and it is necessary to first modify their diet with years' worth and other treatments that we have mentioned in the division where the diseases are large and suffer from medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes;	And if it's a child who cannot endure the pain, make them gargle and chew frequently, often mixing their brain with good meats;
aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne;	After the king's head is in the middle, and I apply the cautery as we have explained before, and apply the cautery on the vessel, and on each horn;
et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if the patient is in pain and it's external, apply cauterization as I have instructed for those with paralysis and softening of the flesh, on the spine both at the back and neck, and use the olive cautery according to the method I have explained.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is young, make him a fine fire cautery according to this method:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When it is due to melancholy that the excesses or moisture are corrupted and blood is thickened, then apply the cautery of partial cauteries as we have said for the one who has paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if it is due to the cause of melancholy that the excesses decline towards melancholy, and there are symptoms in the body of moist maladies, then let them drink something that purifies the brain according to what was stated previously in this section.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide;	After obtaining the head of the animal;
aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief;	after making a linen thread well done, like a circle, if you place it around the head;
et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars;	and the patient should lie in bed, and make sure they are well restrained from all sides;
aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien;	after applying the ointment, and using old burberry butter to spread it;
et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir;	and heat it on fire moderately, so that the patient can bear it or it can be handled;
aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier;	after removing the circle from within through the head, and let it cool down;
et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and do this to the patient once a week each time with another effective method, until they recover completely.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	Or, if you see that it has been burned by making marks on almost the entire cautery.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument;	This method of cautery moistens the brain more so;
et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	and then place damp cotton in butter and fat from gelatine.
de l’awe des eulz	regarding the wisdom of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the eyes first come by means of the signs that I have described in division, then you should start and continue to provide the patient with things that cleanse the head, and protect it from all moisture. Make them sweat or take several baths fasting.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I;	After instructing to hold their head again, and have them cauterized while holding the head, and perform two cauterizations on the two temples when the pulse is descending in the head or at both eyes together, where one eye's pulse is descending into one;
et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple;	and apply all the cauterization to every vein and artery that is around the head, and have them cauterized long according to the width of the temples;
et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	and beware of blood clotting, and if you see too much blood coming out, stop it by pressing with part of your hand as you did.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras;	And I will teach you about the extraction of arteries and incisions with cautery on how to apply it.
et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	And whenever one applies the cautery or heated iron between the two bones at the back.
dou cors des larmes	of the tears' boughs
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors;	When the tears of the eyes have become old and accustomed, and are located over veins or arteries that are in the outward appearance beneath the head.
et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz:	And you can see that they are cold, wet excesses, so I apply the cautery as I have said at the beginning of this treatment when descending to the eyes:
I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os;	I apply the cautery at the top of the head, and two applications of the cautery on each temple, and two applications of heated iron between the two bones;
et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	And if there is need for more, sear it carefully above the eyebrow with every small cautery.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	of the tears' paths within the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies;	When you administer the remedies as we have discussed in the division, and if they do not benefit, then give to the patient three raw fowl soups;
aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire;	After the reign of the head, and I have it cauterized or in the middle of the cauterization with olive oil;
et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous;	And perform two cauterizations using the 'clavil' cauterization on the two eyebrows, a little above the hair.
et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	and be careful not to cover the artery as you do this.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the shape of the cautery which is called "claw":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the paper of the oil is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize with this cautery which is called "olive".
de coi ci est li forme:	Of which the form is:
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont;	And if you see that two cauterizations on the two eyebrows as long as the eyebrows are;
et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And do not let your hand rest until the third part of the paper is burned away, according to the method I have explained.
dou poil qui point l’oil	of the hair which points the ear
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres:	Never has it happened that the hair of the nose turns into the nostril and reaches the inside; one does cauteries according to two methods:
c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	This means that either fire or burning medicine is used.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals;	With the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hair grow long and even;
et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	And if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain;	When they grow and become even, then put the patient in their healthy state;
aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz;	After drawing on the page about eyes, make a figure that is as such as the leaf of myrtle, and let it begin with the sign at the start of the hairs;
puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Then I put moistened cotton with the yolk of egg and camphor of garlic on the eye, then warm up the cautery as shown here.
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit;	After that, apply the cautery to the figure you have drawn gradually and very little times, so that the heat is evenly distributed across it.
et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil;	And the signs of health in this operation are that you see the paper retreat, and the hairs stand at the angle of the eye;
adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	Then lift your hand and let it be thus for three days, then put moistened cotton in butter until the scab is removed;
aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the oil cure until it has become clean.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers;	And when this comes to the hairs and the parchment has become soft, then resume the fire on that same place, just like you did at first;
et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And when the hairs have departed, apply the cautery until the parchment rises to its natural place and remains even, not prickling the hairs with the eye.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte;	The burning medical cauterizers instruct the patient to let the hairs grow until they are large and even, then make parchment take on the shape of a bay leaf;
puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien;	Then take French soap and fresh ashes, one of each, and grind them together well;
et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz;	And make haste, so that it does not cool, then stretch upwards towards the shape you are made like a leaf of myrtle, and place the eyes on paper;
et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi;	And if the illness lasts in this oil only, one must open in this way, and if it exists in both similarly;
et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef;	And put over the oil cotton saturated with moisture, like an egg;
et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	And the flesh of the disease be in your healthy part and place your hand on the medicine, and press on the spot several times whenever the disease feels the medicine's bite, because it feels the bite just like fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, if the medicine prescribed to you is needed.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision;	And when the bite has passed, lift up the limb from under, and reward if you see the paper lifted in the same way as it would be lifted by constraint of fire or by incision;
et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And if this is the case, then do so well.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point;	And if it's not this way, then reapply the medicine to its place or let the medicine take effect until your actions are equal and your eyes are focused;
puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then place wet cotton with butter until the oil burns out, after which cleanse the area of the ointment known as "dyafenis" and others, until it is clean.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if it's your business that you must guard well to your operation by great care so that no medicine leaks out from the eyes.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant;	And if the paper becomes oily and the hair catches in it, then apply the medicine to that part of the skin which is softened by the clean paper, just as you did before.
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	After cleansing until it is clean.
et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	and this is the form of the leaf of myrtle:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens;	And know that the eyes of men are diverse in size and smallness, and according to this be your restrictions;
et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	and do not let the right path be rejected by him who studies this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	Of treating fistulas by cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have explained in the sections on diseases and your treatments are not beneficial, then it is necessary for you to apply a cautery treatment according to this manner.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain;	Instruct the patient to place their head in your healthy direction;
et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief;	and guide the guards of their head between your hands in such a manner that it does not move or let go of their head;
aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil;	after that, place cotton moistened like an egg or garlic juice on the eye;
aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz:	afterwards heat the cautery which is prepared:
et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere;	and place it on the head as if it were the tip of a goose feather, ensuring that there is contact with the cautery;
se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente;	If you see it, if it points from one end to another, and if you see it, if it is also like a tent;
mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	However, this is what happens due to your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche;	After pressing the fistula opens, and one treats the putrefaction, and dries it;
et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe;	And if it is closed, let it heal, and remove from the belly;
aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie;	After placing the fire cautery above it, hold your hand on the cautery near the part that is sensitive beneath the eye, so that your hands do not cause mischief;
et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	And place the cautery in the fat of the eye, and corrupt it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the start of the cautery up to the bone, it would be well.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors;	If this doesn't work, then apply the fire cautery once more, and repeat if necessary, letting it sit for three days.
aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers;	After placing moist cotton and grease on it, continue the application of the ointment until it heals. If it does not heal within forty days, then apply an aqueous corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed.
et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	And observe the king according to what would come in his chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a way of cauterizing a fistula that none of the old ones mentioned.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu;	Understand about fistula, and do as described;
aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	After placing in the incision a slender camel hair of this form:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc;	and it is done to the amount of three parts of a spoon;
et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil;	hold your hand or the camel hair firmly, and do not move the patient at all, so that the heat does not escape to their ear;
et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe:	And it is necessary to place on the eye of the patient cotton soaked with moisture or under wax:
li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	The plucking is done in the manner of the disease at its origin, and the healthy one through wondrous health maintenance.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healed by the cautery as we have said, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	But if not, it is necessary to administer pertussis to the child and return the fistula to its proper place under the child's neck according to what is suitable in our own way.
des crevaices en levres	cuts in lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Rarely, there appear tears in lips which are called 'hair', and similarly in infants' lips.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these tears as we have discussed in sections, and if the treatment doesn't help, then apply this: take a small surgical instrument for cauterization according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font;	And put him quickly into those openings as long as he lives until it grows.
aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment of the waxiness, while it is still healthy.
de l’aposteme de la goule	from the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule;	When it comes to the root of the throat or in the ovary, or on the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, after rotting and swelling and becoming inflamed, it turns into a fistula;
et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie:	And you treat it as we have said in divisions, and it yields nothing:
adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule;	So, it is necessary for you to have the cautery according to the size of the fistula;
aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu;	after the mouth or the end of the fistula, and keep your hand until the metal reaches the bottom, and on the other side.
et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do this once or twice, after the treatment as we have discussed in treatments, as long as it is clean;
et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin;	and if it has been treated like this, it is good.
et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	and if it is not treated like this, you should expose the bone and remove the infected bone according to what you find in your chapter.
dou movement des dens	The shifting of teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain;	When the gums have softened due to moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicine and if that does not work, then put the head of the bone back into its healthy position;
aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent;	After the heating of the cautery, its shape will come later in this manner that you place a stick under the tooth;
et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent;	And place inside the cautery until it heats up quickly, and hold your hand so that the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth;
aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit;	After ease your hand and continue the cautery according to your will;
aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	After fill the patient's mouth with salt water, and keep it there for an hour and then remove it.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this way, the teeth that were moving are stabilized, and the gums that were soft are made firm, and the moisture that was corrupt is dried.
de la dolor des dens	Of toothache
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres:	When toothache comes from cold or if there is cold or fever, and the treatments of medicine don't help, then you need to use cautery according to two methods:
et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	And butter cautery and fire cautery.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain;	The wax cautery is such that you take tallow from a cow, and the tip in a spoon made of iron or spider.
aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez;	Take cotton and envelop it at the tip of a tent; in this place, moisten the wax with butter until it melts, then apply to the aching tooth as quickly as possible and hold until it cools down.
et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	And thus perform it often until the virtue reaches to the root of the tooth, and if you see wet wool and cotton cooled in the wax, apply it to the aching tooth, and place it on the heated iron until the fire reaches the warmth of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide;	The fire cautery is such that you take an iron or spider tail; make it large so that the flame does not reach to the base of the skin.
aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez;	After heating the cautery, from which its shape will come afterward, place it on the skin and hold your hand until the cautery has cooled down.
fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	Do this often, because the pain will be tolerable either that day or the next.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer;	And it's necessary that the patient fills their mouth with good butter in anticipation of the cautery, and then press it firmly.
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	and this is the shape of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir;	And apply the cautery according to how you desire and in accordance with what you can do;
et c’est li forme de la caine:	and this is the shape of the needle:
des scrophules	Of scrofula
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie;	When the scrophules are due to cold wet and don't respond to digestion by medicines, then heat the cautery as its shape will come afterward, and keep it open for two openings so that the vapors can exit from the other side of the cautery;
et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume;	And place the hot cautery on the abscess once, or twice if necessary, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess;
et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors;	And if the abscess is small, apply the cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it like that for three days;
et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee;	And place moistened cotton with butter until the arrow is extracted;
aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treating and bandaging the wound until it heals.
Li forme de la cainne:	The form of sugar:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives;	When the moisters prevail in the channels of the heart, and especially when this comes from a cold constitution, then it is necessary that the body be cleansed by diuretic medicines first;
aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	After applying the cautery at the root of the throat, and make sure not to go all the way up to the throat, but only a little bit beyond the chest.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant;	After this, another cautery is made at the junction of the neck with the head of the spine, and it should be the kind of cautery called "clavicle" about which we have a depiction in front.
et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat the joint as we have described until it is sound.
de la toust	It seems like this text might be incomplete or perhaps contains a typo. The translation would depend on the correct content. If 'de la toust' refers to something specific in context, such as 'treatment of the eye', here's an assumption for its English translation:
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai .II cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis;	When all and diseases of the womb are due to cold moisture, and patients do not have fever or chills, and it's an old disease, then one should perform two cauterizations on their strength in their veins;
et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles;	and apply another cautery under the buttocks between the breasts;
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	let it be the kind of cautery called "clavicle" according to the description given above.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles;	And if you see fit, apply a cautery where it touches the entire "point" cautery which is called "point" according to this description in ear diseases;
et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And let the points go up to XXX, or beyond this point.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After treating it according to what was said earlier, perform the cauterization in three rounds according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And for these, make the fire cautery lighter, because you do it three times in each area.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	On the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit;	After that, bandage the wounds on their back and sides;
aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre;	afterward gently lift the lump inside the testicle with your left hand;
et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	and if the joint is dislocated inside, apply the fire cautery which has two nails just like this:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres;	and apply the cautery to the testicle until it penetrates up to the sides, and bring together four applications of the cautery figure.
et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres;	and for this, use the cautery with three nails, because there are four applications of the cautery figure;
et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	and they follow the subtlety like a tent and this is the form of the cautery with three nails:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And always attach this one on this first nerve because there are seven cauterizations needed.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil;	After placing the cautery on, prick with a needle;
aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After making the patient lie down, do not let his limbs move long enough until he is well comfortable.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it has dislocated upwards, where little happens afterwards, then apply the cauterization on the thick part of the 'clavicle' cautery, or do a small number of cauterizations.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joint is closed, and the moisture is drained out of it, and blood returns to the patient.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	For when colds and moisture in the stomach cause it to be strained according to its nature, they multiply his discharge, and he doesn't benefit from usual treatments. Therefore, it is necessary for the patient's back to be enclosed with cloths, and their legs and arms extended.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture;	From that on, I apply three cauterizations on the belly of the thigh per the amount of two, for each cautery along the clavicle, and two cauterizations further out on both sides until the pattern of cauterizations forms at three angles, and there is a space between them so they do not join together when they develop gangrene;
et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	And let the cauterization extend to both sides of the knee, and have the pattern of cauterizations follow this form without adjustment:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme;	And if you see cauterized by a large cauterization in the stomach according to this form;
et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche;	And he who has fear from this cautery, apply it by pressing and governing at the stomach I. spot according to the amount that you observe of its application;
puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	then cauterize over the entire cautery which is called 'points'.
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment we have undergone, as long as it remains clean.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez;	As for the liver, it experiences pain due to cold and moisture and excessive wind; until its natural condition is relieved through excesses.
et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil;	And the patients should be treated as we have instructed in sections; if they do not benefit from this, it is necessary that the patients are surgically treated close to their spleen.
et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient;	And apply three points of cautery according to this form and figure, and this quantity on the liver; release them under the ribs, where the stomach's pain is felt;
et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi;	And let there be space between each cauterizer the size of two;
et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere;	And make the cauterizers as long as your arm length, and do not push all of your hand onto the cauterizer;
et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez;	And let only half of the tip be heated, and have the patient lie straight on their bed;
et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais;	And if they cannot, let them sit up, and extend their legs, and lift their arms;
et c’est li forme:	And this is the method:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors;	And if you wish to do so, cauterize these cauteries with a surgical knife, should you be skilled and prudent in this art; and beware that you don't burn all of the tip completely, for you would dry up the whole body.
et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	And until it boils there, for the kidneys are very delicate in that area, and you need to know how to see.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile:	When it has migrated towards the liver, and you must know whether it is in the liver flesh or on the membrane:
s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort;	If it's within the flesh, the patient feels moderate pain;
et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	And if it's on the membrane, they feel an intense pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste;	And when this treatment thins out the blood, it is necessary that the patient be on their feet;
et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	and then guide yourself to where the abscess is, and then heat the cautery which resembles a rod, according to this shape:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers;	And apply the cautery until the kidneys become red, and go up to the thigh, until all pus is out;
aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez;	After the treatment according to the treatment of the roots until they are healed;
et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	And it should not be that anyone uses this cautery except the one who has studied for a long time in the art of medicine, and by whose hands these diseases have never been corrected.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Then he can boldly operate, and always I think it better to let them move.
dou cautere de pleuresin	of the weeping cautery
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere:	The old ones said that one should do full and frequent cauteries with the roots of aristologe, and in this manner:
pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois;	Take a long root of aristologe, the longest you can find, let it be dry, and also make it as thick and as long as your fingers;
et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe;	And make it hot in oil, and hold it to the fire, and apply the heat between the nose and the neck of the cautery, and do two small cauteries a little downwards on the part which is below the beard;
et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc;	And among the fifth rib and the sixth, two cauterizations between them, declining a bit behind.
et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules;	And one cauterization near the buttocks, and another on the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and two among the ribs further from the cauterization that is between the two shoulders.
et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	And don't squeeze your hand, instead do it openly as when you're smelling something.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme;	And it was said by some old ones that no man uses a fire cautery at the navel area, they heat it and place it between the ribs, until it reaches that abscess.
et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And when the pain jumps out from where the pain is, as we have said about the abscess near the liver.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this chapter there is fear or the patient has died now, or a fistula comes which cannot be cured.
de la mice	Of mice
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the mouse in those that we have said about divisions of treatments, and it does not benefit at all, then they apply three methods of cautery which are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant;	There is a way for this that you make three or four cauterizations, along the length of the mouse, according to the shape of the liver cautery as we have said before.
et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	And do not hurry your hand with all the cautery, and let the patient remain long on their back;
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule;	And another method of cautery is that you heat the cautery which has two ends, as we have shown it in the dislocation of the shoulder;
et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	And lift the ear that is at the mouse's mouth, where the pain of the patient comes from the left side, and make the elevations by which you lift the ear according to the ear, according to the length of the body, and let the cautery be according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII.	After burn the two ends until both ears are pierced, and then remove the cautery, and in this way there will be four.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	And if you see fit, burn with all the cautery at three points.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the treatment when it has developed gangrene over a long period, and this warrants that you change to the other methods of treatment as previously mentioned.
de ydropisie	Of cautery with fire, command the patient to let the hair grow long and even; and if they prick at their root, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	The cautery is not suitable for erysipelas, except in the way it is called "asclepiate".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis;	When you treat according to the methods we've discussed in our divisions and your treatment doesn't work, then it is necessary that you perform four cautery burns on the buttocks, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the kidneys, and two behind the back on the spine, and one at the place of the anus.
et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	and have the cautery burns very close to the kidney's edge.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere;	After that, allow the cautery to remain for curing a long time, and do not cease the treatment of the disease after the cautery;
et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	And healing would hasten, and both intentions together with God's help will be united.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit;	The shape of the cautery for the abdomen is like the illustration we showed before;
et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	And if it concerns the back being olive-shaped, according to what was stated before.
de l’enfleure des piez	Regarding swelling of the joints
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire;	When the joints swell in someone who is prone to dropsy and are filled with yellow bile, it is necessary for you to apply a cautery on the back of the foot between the little toe and the ring finger;
et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	And lightly use your hand with the cautery without turning.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And don't enter too much in the yellow bile, so you wouldn't go outside of it, operate with the cautery according to this shape:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire;	After that, perform two cauterizations on each leg at the tip of the cutting edge;
et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe;	And make the cauterizations long, one over the knee in front and the other behind, midway down the leg;
et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse;	Let the cauterizations burn for a while without curing them, so that bile emerges;
aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After performing other treatments we have discussed.
de la menoison	from memory
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures;	For the remedy of belly ache due to cold and moisture, as long as the restorative and digesting virtues are active in the stomach and within the intestines, it cannot be cured by conventional treatments;
et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule;	And you see the patient suffering greatly and with strong virtue, if you apply the large cautery to the stomach according to what has been discussed before or to the gastric cautery, within the circulating cautery;
et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	And apply four small cauteries on the inner thighs under the small anus; and two cauteries on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see the moisture abundant and the patient suffering, make a cautery on the elbow, and one on each knee, and two small cauteries on the stomach beneath the large one. Because the treatment is advantageous when there's good help present.
de la cure des emorroydes	of the treatment of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres:	When the empyema is either at its base or elsewhere and contains old, large cold and moist pus, if this is not alleviated as we have said in the sections, then apply cauterization:
III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois;	In the area of the spine at the back, where it is completely removed from under the skin little by little in a triangular pattern, and on the fire cautery around the anus;
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile;	And if you think that the stomach has cooled down and the meat is not cooking, and you see the mesentery swell up, then to the mesentery apply a large fire cautery on the stomach as previously mentioned, and do it again on the liver, and apply it once more on the spleen with all the fire applications.
et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	And let the cautery remain in place for as long as necessary.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treatment until it becomes well.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the flesh ailment which is named 'theul'
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit;	When you reach the end of the bone sawing, if the fire cautery appears to be in good condition, then place it entirely ablaze on the bone that was cut;
et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort;	And let your hand and the fire reach to the opening of the vein from which the blood flows;
fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit;	Perform this once or twice, and if there is much almond oil, apply fire to each as we have said.
aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez;	after the curative remedies for abscesses while they are still intact;
et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	and if you apply large cautery to almond oil, it will provide more aid.
de plaie mal curee	of poorly treated wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot bear surgery or opening [a wound], as we will describe in its proper place, if such illness arises that can only be cured through cauterization.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When there is no hole coming from it and it becomes infected with rotting pus and corrupted moisture, if you need to thoroughly test for a subtle opening, and ensure that you know the size of the opening when it's completely formed.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing;	After heating the cauterizing tool to resemble a rasp, and applying it inside the fistula according to how much the patient's obstruction has entered, continue with the cauterization until all the diseased tissue is charred. Do this once, or twice, or three times, depending on your need for quantity;
et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	and you will experience burning in the nerves that are irritated, and large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans;	If the tube went to the bladder and to the intestine, then beware of these errors, and do not perform this outside its natural place, and remember that it is not a human action;
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement;	After the treatment as long as it is clean, and if the lesion is sauny (possibly a typo for 'sanguineous'), and the materials are hard over a long time, then you will know that the wound has fully healed;
et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font;	And if the materials are not hard, know that the wound is three days old, and the bone has been corrupted at its root;
et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	And like one of those we will tell you in its natural place.
de la maladie des reins	Of kidney disease
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit;	When abdominal pain comes from the kidneys and strong windiness, and affects no woman so much, then it is fitting that you apply a cautery to both sides of the kidneys and to the clavile where we have previously mentioned;
et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	And if we cauterize it halfway, there will be three cauterizations in line, and they will make more help.
de la vessie	From the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce;	When the bladder is swollen and weak from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then we should cauterize in the lower part of the bladder, where the hair begins on the penis, on both the right and left sides. Each cauterization should be as long as one inch as indicated by us.
et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing;	And have me cauterize behind the back, or do it twice if you need to;
et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	And let the cauterizations be in the form of a 'claw' as was described before.
de la marris	Regarding the marriage
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde;	When the uterus is cold and moist, and leaves none to conceive, and the flowers are rotten and their ends are delayed;
et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor:	And when they come, one feels great pain:
adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos;	And when they come, you should perform three cauterizations in the mouth area; or as we have said, cauterize the bladder, and two cauterizations behind the back.
et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	And let the cauterizations be for the knee, as we have said.
de la hainche	From the hip
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble;	When the viscous fluids descend to the socket of the hip, and because of this reason it moves out of its place, and the signs are that the thigh is longer than the other when one measures them together;
et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle;	And find the parts of departure visually, and it is necessary that you cauterize the hair on the hip socket at one cauterization resembling a circle, and mark in front of the parts inside the socket where it turns, so that the socket remains within the circle;
et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	And if such cauteries are like those used for stomach cauterization.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs;	And if you do not have these cauteries at hand, make three olive oil cauteries, and ensure that all the others are similarly well-made;
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Continue with the cure until it is effective.
de la dolor de la hainche	关于髋部的疼痛
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene:	When pain comes in the thigh area, it is due to cold and moisture, and the treatment prescribed earlier for this, if it doesn't work, indicates that the disease is old:
adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	Therefore, it is necessary for you to cleanse the body of the large fluids using bad-scented pills or other similar good-smelling pills.
Aprés li fai cautere;	After this, perform the cautery;
et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres:	And the method of the cautery is according to two methods:
c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	This means "and it consists in assembling hot medicines, and fire cautery.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz:	Fire cautery can be done in several ways, among which one is like this:
que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire;	You should apply the fire in an oblong area of the buttock, using three triangular cautery tools according to this shape, ensure they have good depth and size, place each tool with space equivalent to that of a coin between them, and use olive oil for these procedures;
aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Never apply the cautery in the middle of the buttock because there are four places according to this form:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche;	And if you see fit, apply the circular fire tool that we have mentioned in front regarding the dislocation of the buttock;
mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	But do it with care so that the circles contain all the hip, and all the points of the wound are cleaned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is the way it's done in sciatica, when pain stays in the hip and doesn't reach up to the thigh or down to the leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc;	And if it goes up to the thigh and leg, then apply two cauterizations there or where the patient says the pain is held, and one above the ankle three times, on the left side a little.
et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur;	And either use surgical cauterization or burn the wound's thickness;
et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if the patient feels that the pain extends down to two or three inches below the knee or near there, then apply cauterization where they feel the pain for three points or four at the cauterization called "points".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus;	And if this requires it, do more;
et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if the pain is near the knee towards the thigh, you should use a cutaneous or circular cautery on him. Make sure to take great care in all your cauterizations that you do not leave any remainder of the cautery and burn nerves and large arteries when you are using it. And don't cause the patient more harm and constriction with your actions.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I have seen several who applied the cautery on the ankle bone, and it was effective until their legs swelled completely and likewise their feet were pierced and corrupted in all of them.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After an abdominal treatment that led to death.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pains are together in two parts, make a cautery on each one according to this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce;	And the wise said about the cautery of the hip, as follows: make it a piece of iron that is as thick as a small finger or perhaps a bit thinner, and ensure there are rows along its length with each row being spaced just enough to cover the area roughly equivalent to one inch.
et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait;	And let the rows be two-thirds in length, and let them also resemble knots, and have a well-made iron hook.
et c’est li forme:	And this is its form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit;	And when heated, keep it until it is thoroughly red and steaming, then place it over the buttock of the ailment, and twist it towards the healthy side;
et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors;	and once burned after the fire has been applied and it is left for three days;
et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens;	then apply a plaster of butter, and leave the wound open as long as necessary;
aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	after the ointment cure until it is healthy.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent;	Albucus says that we use little of this cautery for the fear of his judgement, and few see fit to use it;
et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	yet this is one of the better cauteries, which can be tolerated, and where it becomes necessary.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi;	The burning medical instruments for use are such that you make an implement with intertwining parts into which the edge of the door descends. It may be made of bone or iron having one long surface, and in its height it has two notches, and between each there is the size increase of a thumb;
et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	and let them extend forward and upwards, and join together in this form:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche;	After placing the thigh bone on the lying patient's healthy side at the hip joint, and press your hand very near to the thigh bone;
aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After placing it between the two circles of the hot fire which is heated by flame for one point, and leaves it to an hour of warmth, and allows the patient to feel heat and burn from it.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu;	For he finds a bite also as from fire;
et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit;	And when the bite has passed, lift your hand with the tool and raise the buttock gently, and leave it like this for three days, and put on butter until what is black from the scorching is whitened;
et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait;	And let it be for three days as decay sets in;
et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	And this would be the final aid after the treatment of ointments until it is sound.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument;	And if the pain has extended to the thigh or to the leg, you apply the same tool that marks the buttocks according to what you did on the hip equally.
et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And this is how one handles the hot application, and I have written it out as part of my treatise on correcting medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take quicklime and fresh chalk in equal parts, grind them together, and put the mixture into a new jar.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir;	If there is a small opening so that the tip of a razor may enter;
et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main;	And place another pot well filled with water, and put it on an oven and some heat sources under it, until there are two layers of powders above your hand when you have properly taken it in your hand;
et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	And let it stay like this until all the essence, dung or grease has drained out or water boils, then take all that essence, and pour it onto heat sources such as charcoal and alkali in the same manner before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres.	And then it will become water and be administered in the form of preparations for medicine and in cauterizations for other parts of the body.
Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	For it achieves the same effect as fire, and is used with other medicines such as when cauterizing well in the hip like turpentine and almond oil with soap, all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galen tells us of a remedy that was used for the pain in the hip and sciatic vein, and to a great extent. He says that no other treatment was done, and it worked miraculously on its first use when this cure was applied, and he took baths as is instructed below.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie;	And instructs in this manner that you take dry and fresh verdigris, and grind it finely with a little fat, and spread it on the hip and on the thigh and on the leg where the pain resides, and bind it;
et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And leave it for three hours, ensuring that the patient does not feel any burning from the remedy.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then make them enter into a warm bath until their body is slightly revived, and make them rest on a bed, and the pain will leave them completely and they will feel well.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And know that no one should use such medicines as the cautery, unless after the removal of the body.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout;	And Dioscorides states that when the sciatic vein is treated with donkey's milk, it helps a lot;
et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And the application of the cautery should be done in this manner.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take wool and soak it in old oil, and place it on the depression that is between the first toe of the foot and the other one called the foscile.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains;	After obtaining dry donkey's milk, apply it over the fire until it becomes charcoal, and place it on the cloth, leaving it until it turns black;
et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee;	And repeat this again, and never stop doing so until you think by sense it will come up to the waist, and that the pain should cease.
et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	And this method of cautery is called "goat cautery".
de la dolor dou dos	of the pain of the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether by falling or impact or from too much evacuation, or due to exposure to cold matter, none of these conditions warrant cauterization, for it is akin to what arises from the infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir;	After which, when the body is void of fetid pills or other similar things, one should apply them on the back, where the pain resides, three lines marked in a cross pattern, and in each line perform V cauterizations or more according to the virtue and quantity that the body can endure;
et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»;	And let the cauterizations be done according to the cautery which is called "points";
et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	And if you see fit, perform three or four cauterizations halfway along the median line of the cautery in this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor;	This illness often befalls young children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have pale cheeks when they sit up, and fear;
et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	and you find in the last spinal vertebra of the back and within us the appearance that comes over the other vertebrae.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and observe its cure, if you apply it with a hot iron in this manner on the body.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	If the cautery burns each part of the spine equally.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see it, apply the cautery to the spine along the line where the cauterization burns for two or three lines, and have the points close together.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After the cure as long as it is clean according to what we have said, and beware that you do not apply the cautery in a state of excitement near nerves.
de la dolor des jointes	of the pain in joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere:	When joint pain is due to moist substances that spread throughout each limb of the body, and when pain comes into bones, which they call "gout" properly, and when it's caused by cold and cannot be cured by medicines alone, if it needs treatment with cauteries in this manner:
fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	Make the mouth of the cautery inside the joint of the foot, and apply the olive oil cautery according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if there is need that you touch on the thigh by the foot, if it is cauterized with the entire cautery saying 'point'.
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire;	And if the pains extend up to the knees and other joints, which happens many times, have it apply the cautery on each knee three or four of each part, for all the olive oil cautery;
et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you need to do more, do it more, but don't keep your hand out of the way until the wound is well healed.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend as far as the thighs and back, then it is administered to them the cautery that we have said in our chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes;	And if the pains are in the hands, make points inside the wrist region;
et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main;	And if there remains any pain in the arms, make points on each joint and on the back of the hand;
et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	And if the pains come up to the elbows or to the shoulders, cauterize each part, and give good care to the patient and administer remedies.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	And if you give them good governance and cleanse the humor, they will be helped by God to recover their health.
de la routure dou syfac	from the rupture of the uterus
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor;	When an injury affects the lungs and the bowels descend into the womb, if this is a new occurrence, it's important that when you see the wounds being treated, you do not eat on that day;
et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre;	And when one consumes things which relax the stomach, so that his innards descend from his belly;
aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors;	After you have made them sit on their back between your hands, and instruct them to shave their armpits until the hair is neatly trimmed, and remove it with your fingers, and pay attention to feeling under the cut at the bone, and at all times make sure it appears as half a circle above the chest;
puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Then heat up the cautery tool described here:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	Until it is white and emits serents.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu;	Then remove the bowels to their proper place;
et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier;	and have the assistants shave his hands so they don't twist around backwards;
et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains;	work well on the thighs with the patient, and place a servant and a sergeant by his legs, and another at his feet who will shave his hands;
puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os;	Then place the cautery at the mark on your hand, and hold it straight until you touch the bone, and if you do not touch it in the first try, keep trying again as long as you reach to the bone.
et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere;	and know that the boil should not overflow when you apply the cautery;
que tu ne le brulasses;	so as to not burn it;
et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	and so that the patient does not die or suffer any other harm from this treatment.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And know that when you do not come all the way to the bone with the cautery, your operations are worthless.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure;	And it is necessary that the cauterizations for children be subtle according to their size, and also large enough for adults according to theirs.
aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	after three days, apply the butter cautery until the scab is removed;
aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee;	After the treatment with other ointments until it is healed, and let the patient lie on his back for forty days so that the wound heals well.
et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And it is necessary that these remedies be given for a long time so that the urine does not overflow when they want to go to the chamber.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors;	And after forty days, if he wants to stand up, have him supported by a well-made belt, and wear it for another forty days;
et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire;	And have him get proper rest, so that he doesn't overwork himself and avoids too much drinking and eating, as well as shouting too loudly.
et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	And when he follows this instruction, he will be completely healed.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will say after this chapter's treatment of tailoring.
de la routure dou ventre	regarding the rupture of the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur;	When ulcers occur in other bellies and are noticeable, and you see that they no longer grow, then treat them with a fire cautery according to their quantity, and heat it three parts of the pot.
aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit;	Following the treatment as we have explained;
et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	And none of the old ones said that one should be cauterized with a three-cornered cautery according to this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	The first sign is the beginning of healing; draw a line across the width above the wound and another below it, and hold your hand with the fire tool all along.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	The first cauterizations are lighter and heal more easily.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	from old pain in no limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes to any limb, whether from falling or being hit, and the pain lasts for a long time, and medicine cure doesn't help it, then it should be cauterized with what is called "points" cautery, and the cauterizations must match the length of the member and its smallness and weakness and its function and location of twisting and its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien;	If it responds well to the first cautery, that's good;
se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If it bears this name, start another cautery on that spot, for such injuries typically require the affected limb to respond, so you must perform the cauteries until the patient shows improvement.
de meselerie	Regarding cautery from fire, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The healings take place once every cautery with considerable assistance, and similarly the disease comes from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief:	Can't you see her being cauterized? Take care that the disease is in its beginning stages, and if it's treated according to what we've said in this section, without getting worse or staying stagnant, and you're unsure whether the infection will spread throughout the body, then perform five cauterizations on the head:
I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous;	I lead the head towards nine, and the other towards the forehead at the end of the hair.
et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel;	and above the two horns, and one behind on the back.
et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir;	and hold your hand so that the cautery reaches up to the bone, and until the scabs come out sufficiently that the fumes of the large humors can escape.
et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	and cauterize on the mouse according to what is in front.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse;	And if the mixture spreads everywhere;
et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules;	And if it becomes clear that it is lost, then you should cauterize with these cauteries as we have described: on the head with one, and over the nose with another, and two over the spine of the neck, and six over the spine of the back, and one large on the ribcage and another beneath it, and two over the two shoulders;
et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains;	And on the cuts, and on the tendons at the heel, and once on each joint of hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands;
et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler;	And beware of the nerves that are behind the heel, do not burn them;
et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	And never apply a cautery to the bone of the thumb, and once on the bone of the stomach, and once on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite;	And know that the more I apply the cautery, the more aid I give, and it benefits him;
et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And know that the sick do not feel pain from the cautery as the healthy would, for their body is already completely corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is necessary that the cauterizing fires be large and small according to the limbs and joints, as you will find in the methods of metalworking.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After the treatment, use flour mixed with honey and other treatments until it becomes healthy again.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre;	When swelling occurs in any limb and is treated with medications, oils, and bandages, but it remains uncured, then I will apply cauterizations to the limb according to its size and dimensions;
et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur;	And let the cauterizations touch slightly within the thigh's depth;
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then apply the ointment cure until it becomes healthy.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure;	And then perform cauterization to the arm and foot and back, at the end of the nerve that makes the limb move, and thus it is healed.
et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And yet, no one should interfere unless they are knowledgeable about the limbs and the exits of the moving nerves in the body.
de albaras	Of cauteries, instruct the patient to let their hair grow long and evenly; if they prick at their roots when young, hold them steady so they don't move until grown out.
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color;	When the disease called "albaras" has progressed and medicine treatment is ineffective, then apply a small cauterization using a cautery, according to the depth of the thigh, until the boil is drained and its color changes.
puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie;	Then mix with flour of almonds and lentils and rose oil and leaves of plantain, and blood of colostrum and blood of quail, from each a part;
et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And mix everything together, and bind it with a cloth, and expose it to the air until it heals.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The treatment of a sore by cautery
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When gangrene begins, and you see it start to halt, if you notice it at the outset, apply a cautery instrument that appears like a circle, all around the circumference of the gangrene.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre;	And still, some surgeons advised that one should apply the cautery also in the middle of the ulcer;
et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois;	And still, I don't think that's good either, for fear it might get infected and rot, and I've already decided not to do it that way ever again;
et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And the more effective thing is to apply the cautery internally, with the one called "circular" cautery, as we have mentioned in terms of various types of cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of swelling that cannot die
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens;	When someone has an illness which is called "adubelati", and it prolongs death or because of the excess she does or due to age in the weakening of the malady when it becomes old (meaning too old) and they have little blood, or due to tension;
et tu la vues haster de meurer:	and you see it hastening towards death:
adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant;	therefore, apply the cautery around with several small applications;
aprés le laisse ensi.	afterwards leave it thus.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For it will hasten to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it pierced through with all the cautery, heat the cautery as shown here:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And place your hand in the middle of this illness which is called "adubelati" as long as the fire points through its heart, and make such cauterizations that the patient feels it beyond in such a way that the course of corruption becomes easier.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the cure until it is completely healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	The fire cure by iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another form of illness exists which is called 'corrodens', and this is nothing else but a member affection, as it burns the limbs just like you would dry wood.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est;	If you see this disease in them that can bear a complete fire cautery, then apply small and large iron cauterizing tools, according to what is suitable for the place or where the illness is;
aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	Afterwards apply the cautery from all sides until you remove all the corruption, and leave nothing behind, making sure that every corrupted part is removed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	And leave it for three days, and apply burning with oil on the burnt areas until the burned scabs have healed, and all the corruption has disappeared.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the treatment of ointments that generate pus.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin;	And if after three days you see that a clean one does not emerge, it is good;
et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if not, then restart the application of the cautery on what remains stuck beneath the corrupted shoulder.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu;	And this method was once treated with herbal medicines instead of applying heat to the cautery;
mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division:	However, the heat cautery is still greatly beneficial, and I have already explained the treatment with herbal medicines in this section.
pren la quant tu en as mestier.	Take what you need when you need it.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	Of the roots coming to stones
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Sometimes it happens that a disease arises through cracks in the skin which we call "cyst," according to our understanding, and it is a large lump that irritates the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cauterizations for this disease do so in two ways.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	This means fire cautery and hot water cautery.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges;	The fire cautery should be prepared as if you were sharpening a piece of iron like a feather, and it should be made from good quality metal in such a way that it can accommodate nails in all directions, and it should have thin edges;
aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou;	After setting everything on fire under the nail, and turn your hand fully around the nail until it reaches the tip of the nail;
et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture;	and leave him like this for three days until signs of gangrene begin to appear;
puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Then make him a poultice of wild marjoram ground with vinegar, and leave the poultice overnight, and he will pull out his nails cleanly from their roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the wound by cleaning it thoroughly until it is clean.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude;	And if they have turned outside the nails, and this happens many times in hands and feet, then you should bring them to a hot water cautery;
et est en teil maniere:	and is done like this:
pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues;	take an arrow shaft or iron rod, or a feather from a goose, and place it on the nail and the thorn, that is to say, for warts;
et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine;	And place the coal on it until it burns all around, then add a little warm ash, and keep your hand firmly. Squeeze your hand as you turn so that the edge of the coal reaches to the base of the nail, and then find the deep hot water source down to the base;
et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre;	And allow the patient to endure for a bit, the application of the hot water for an hour.
puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	Then leave it like this, and all its roots will be eradicated completely.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Start one after another, until you have treated all those inside the body, then treat the sores that produce pus.
li cure dou trembler	The treatment for shaking
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee;	When there are tremors due to cold or nerves, or a quartan fever or any other ailment, it is necessary that you apply four fire cauteries or four on the spine of the back, one fire cautery between each vertebra.
et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire;	And for the fire cautery, place it on the stomach with an olive oil cautery.
si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	If it causes trembling, and hasten the recovery of the cold illness's health.
des pustules puans	puant sores
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	When any sign of disease becomes visible through the skin, or pus-filled ulcers appear, these come from large decayed materials.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule:	It is necessary at the beginning when they appear that one makes a cautery on each head of the boil:
un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	A fine firebrand from the wood of myrtle, whose points are taken by the flame, or from the long root of aristolochia, or with a lentiscus cautery.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez;	And each time they cauterize them at the beginning when they are visible, according to this method, and they cannot grow any pus further in front, but it discharges all the excess that causes them, and they become healthy;
mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	But it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	When the artery has been cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses;	Many times there were great flows of blood from the artery that is tied at the wound, which comes outwards, or during an incision near the abscess, or with the cautery on the member, and similar things.
et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	And it's very unpleasant to stink.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus;	And yet, when this happens to none of them, if you rush to place your index finger on the wound of the vein, and hold tightly until the pulse subsides under your finger, and no more drops come out.
puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge;	Then place several small and large olive oil cauteries on fire until they are all red.
puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	Then take me, large or small depending on the wound and its location where the artery runs, place the cautery near that vein where you hold your finger, and keep the cautery there until the pulse is completely stopped.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it jumps out when you remove your finger from the vein, and the cauteries are extinguished, take quickly another one of the cauteries that are at the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez;	And keep doing this one after another until the wound is healed;
et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide;	and be sure not to burn the nerve that lies within, and let no other harm come upon the patient;
et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit:	know that when you cut off the artery, one cannot properly set it without damage even if the artery is large; this can be managed through any of the four methods we have discussed:
ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc;	or by cautery, or by extraction if it hasn't been treated yet, or by strong threading of the wound with a thread, or by medicines applied which have the power to heal blood;
et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	and bind and restrain it properly.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Who will administer the reattachment, by tightly binding with cloths or placing hot things on, or other similar actions, if it doesn't benefit them.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne;	And if this happens to anyone and they have no means or medicine at hand, should place their finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and stretch it well until it is healed above the wound and above the vein;
et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez;	And it must not be moved; but it should be moistened with cold water often until it is very cold, as long as the ice remains frozen and thickened and stays put.
et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And prepare for those who need cauterization and medications.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	This begins the second book of treatments for amputations
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres;	We have told you in the first chapter about all diseases for which fire cautery or hot medicines are needed, and we discussed their uses, causes, instruments, and forms of application.
et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	And I have placed this chapter about the shoulder joint until the elbow, and I will proceed with this chapter in a similar manner for those who find it easier to understand these concepts.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And as I start this, it must be known that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first chapter of using the fire cauterizations, and for this reason, more caution is needed.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses;	For in the treatment of this chapter, there are often blood evacuations when opening veins and making incisions on abscesses, as well as treatments for wounds, extraction of arrows, and incisions into stones, among other similar things;
ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For there is doubt and fear, and many die as a result.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I advise you that you do not engage in foolishness.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For none of the ways of people come to remedies.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice;	If they come from those who suffered so much with their illness that they died lightly due to the panic they found in their disease, and the severity of their suffering;
et de ces doit on avoir paor.	And out of this, one should have fear.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit:	And concerning these, I am given the sense to say:
«atendez, je sui garis»;	Wait, I am afraid";
et li maladie est despitouse.	And the disease is malicious.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los;	It is not right for you to consent to those who come to you in this manner. Instead, place more emphasis on your dignity than on your greed and do not rashly but wisely open up about what you are sure of and where you can take control;
et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie;	And use prognosis and guidance in your treatments for ailments where health is converted.
et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	And this will help you to gain good reputation, fame, and lasting memory.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Dear son, Our Lords give you good understanding and righteousness, and if you wish to inspire by the holy inspiration of their hand, Amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or I have instructed you this chapter by considering it in parts, according to what is before or the section about cauteries that I have discussed up until the foot, so you will find it easier to understand for those who need it.
dou chief plein d’aigue	the head filled with water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant;	Know that this disease often comes from when the baby is born, and when the mother holds the baby's head too tightly;
et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	And it never comes about due to any fault that we know of.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors;	And I never saw this disease occur except in children, and among all those whom I have seen, it hastened their deaths;
et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And because of this, it seems to me that I should divide the work into parts for treatments.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir;	And I saw the child of whom the shoulder was full of water, and the head swelled each day to the point that it couldn't withstand it anymore;
et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os;	And he suffered so much from moisture that he died, and this moisture is assembled around the bone at the elbow, between the flesh and the bone;
et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large;	And the operations are like this: when moisture is between the flesh and bone, and the abscesses are small that you cut through with a large incision in the head;
et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre;	and as long as II thumbs, provided the moisture is contained.
et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	and here is the shape of the sputum:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is more abundant, and the abscess is larger, then make two cuts in a cross-shaped manner, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut:	And if the moisture is around the bone, and you see the signs that I'm talking about - when the corners of each part of the head are open, and when pressing it with your hand internally causes a sharp pain, and this does not respond to touch:
si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	It is necessary for you to make three cuts within the head, following this method:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, remove all moisture completely outside.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor;	After holding the cuts with lint and powders, and I put wine and oil, then leave like this until the fifth day;
puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	Then release it, and treat the wound with bandages and dressings, and allow the head to heal evenly, and afterwards give the patient dry meat from a small animal while the limb is reinforced and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue;	And another method of incision is to look at where the opening of the abscess is large, and gather together the water;
car aucune fois est elle devant;	because it is not always in front;
aucune fois derrier;	nor always behind;
aucune fois en destre;	No once in the right;
et aucune fois en senestre.	and no once in the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir;	So cut or incise the wound open, and fill with water, and let the process follow according to your capability;
et warde que tu ne coper l’artere;	and be careful not to clip the artery;
et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	and observe for blood flow, so that the patient dies from the circulation of blood and evacuation of moisture.
de reume	In reference to cautery using fire, command the patient to allow hair growth until it becomes long and uniform; if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they fully grow.
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When it comes to any illness that is called 'catarrh' in the eyes or at the bottom of the nose and such diseases are old, and the cure from medicine doesn't bring benefit, then the final treatment includes cauterization along with cutting off the two main arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief;	So, when you see them clip, make sure the patient has moved past their head;
aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel;	After rubbing the wound with a rough cloth until the arteries are visible, then pull the patient's head back with all the cloth;
puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues;	Then look where the vein is placed, and the ears of each are after them, and the back is properly recovered;
puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	Then mark the ears of each, then cut both with a sharp scalpel for two parts, until you see the vein up to the bone, and this must be done by cutting across the main artery.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see it, pinch off the sperm on both sides of the artery and vein above, cut them also as two inches through.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the veins are incised, let the blood flow out continuously from up high.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os;	And if the artery does not open upon being pressed, it is necessary to measure three digits of space there, then cut into the ear until you reach the bone;
et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere;	And what needs to be removed of the blood is six cubic centimeters, and by chance either a little more or less, depending on how the patient can tolerate it, and the filling of the artery;
puis regarde la plaie:	Then look at the wound:
s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	If it stays at the spot where the spur touches, then cut off the abscess and if there's no residue, then clean the wound and bind it, and apply ointment treatment until it heals.
de emigrainne	This line seems to be incomplete in the provided text, so there isn't a clear translation for "de emigrainne". It might need more context from following sentences to properly understand its meaning or purpose within the medical treatise. However, considering "emigrainne" could refer to something related to grain (as medieval texts often covered agriculture and farming techniques alongside medicine), it might be suggesting instructions on managing grain storage, planting, harvesting, etc., but without more context this is speculative.
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When old age arrives, and severe coughing comes along, due to moisture from tears and heat in the temples and elsewhere throughout one's aging body, as well as similar things. The treatment is done through ways of medicine cure techniques and all such methods do not benefit it fully; we would extract the arteries in the temples and cauterize them, just like what we have recounted.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit;	And the way of their extraction is that the physician makes incisions behind the temples of his patient, and listens to the artery which appears in the temple, because it opens well through its beating, and is only responsive in some very cold men;
et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement;	And if it responds, then hold the neck of some cloths under the artery, then rub its back with some rough cloth, and immerse its body in hot water until the artery appears clearly.
puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	Then take the spatula of which this is the shape:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie;	Then lightly remove the skin until you reach the artery, then pull it upwards with forceps, and carefully remove all the webs that are in between each part.
et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	And if the artery is delicate, twist it with the tip of the hook, then cut that part according to the size of two fingers.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it isn't cut, neither does it spring forth without pain completely.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III;	And drain one sixth of the blood, up until three.
et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc;	And if the artery is large, it's necessary that you tie it with two threads of a strong silk thread, to prevent gangrene from occurring before the healing of the wound, and continuously bleeding;
puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez;	Then cut off the excess that is between the two threads at this moment. And if you see, then cauterize with a cutaneous cautery up to the bone as long as the shoulder heads are cut;
et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And it is the healing work, if the sick person does not have fever and has a warm disposition.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors:	For the cautery helps to complete the drying:
por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	because it is of greater assistance for drying.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites;	It is necessary for the extraction of arteries that we fill the space with old cotton and place properly made meshes;
et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when they are released, if you apply dried medicinal substances that create pus and meshes, until there is healing;
et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez;	And if you don't have a cut to the artery as much as you work, then hurry with the cauterization, or you fill the space with vitriol and hold it in your hand so that the wound becomes dry.
et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient;	And if you don't have this tool with you, then place it in the water until the ice forms, and lift the object from cold water as long as the ice continues to form, and hold it so that it is necessary.
et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	And the one that is softer and more easily extracted in removing a vessel, you should apply this cautery to cut the vein with two parts, but make sure those cuts are well spaced to retain heat for longer periods.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instruments are too tight, they hold less of their heat.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus;	It should have a large space between the two knives about one inch wide. Then, when you have indicated where to cut both lines, place the hot iron until it reaches the bone and cut the vein into two places;
et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout;	And make sure the two heads are far apart because there is no joint of this cautery from end to end;
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And this is the form of the cautery:
des larmes	Of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis;	When tears from the eyes are draining through the veins above the head's backside, and no medicine treatment yields benefit, then you see the face of the patient turn red, and feel or perceive the forehead as if it were trembling;
et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	And in those places that are damp and moist so that the paper's hair falls, and the papers heat up, being scorched by the fire of tears, there is need for this treatment.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front;	And they called the old "treatment for scalds", and you do this again to the patient with this illness who has hair or a forehead, then make three cuts evenly across the forehead according to the length of the forehead;
et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres;	And let one of the cuts also like two do in swallowing down till near the nose, and the others two through the ribs above the papers, and be careful about cutting into the arteries that are above the papers.
et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins;	And move your hand away from the continuance of the two jaws, and let each wound have the size of three thumbs crossing joints.
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	And have ready a piece of sponge and some linen cloths for it to wipe the blood, then use the sharp part of two parts where this is formed:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision;	From the incision that is below the temple up to the second incision;
et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	And burn all the flesh that is between the two cuts up to the line of bone, then cut further from the middle incision up to the other second one, and then remove this pus.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	If you insert a tool in the first crack that is called "cultellaire", and it has sharpness on one side, and on the other side it is hard, not sharp, and this is its form:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And make the cut towards the soft flesh on the knee, and the cut meets the bone in the middle, and hold the blade until it feels the smallest crack.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer;	And cut all the hairs that descend from the head as eyes until the incision is continuous up to where it opens on the wound, and then further make cuts in the middle crack up to the other exit.
et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris;	And then extract blood evenly, and empty the wound for the blood taken;
puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne;	Then place a tent of old cotton in each crack, and put wet cloths soaked in vinegar and oil and basil over them. Make sure no pus escapes;
et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And on the third day, release the bandage, and give them a large dose of tepid water, then apply basil salve with oil and other treatments for wounds as long as they are healing.
dou reume des eulz	from the pus of the bones
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees;	When there's no usual cough coming from the lungs, and you see that the eyes are tired and small, and weaken sight, and burned papers;
et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue;	And the hair grows, and one feels fullness up to the bone with pain, and the patient coughs;
adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	Therefore, know through these events that this matter and this cathartic comes only from many veins, and the moist cure that is present, if it is such.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And you must instruct the patient to look behind their forehead, then create a large cut above the forehead, and another one somewhat below it.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os;	And begin from the crease of the left temple to the right temple, and make the incision up to the bone;
et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier;	and keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move when eating;
et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin;	And when the bone is revealed, let all the blood drain onto a sponge, and then soak it between the two lips of the incision and place old cotton and linen;
puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut;	Then drape it with wet cloths in wine and oil, and beware of pus forming;
quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	When it is extracted, you should rub the bone until cartilage begins to grow, then treat with excising substances that encourage cartilage growth.
En teil maniere:	In this manner:
pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre;	Take two parts of the flower of wheat and four parts of the flower of comfrey, and make it into a paste;
et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	and apply it to these wounds to encourage the growth of cartilage throughout.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Regarding ear piercing
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses:	Everything that drops in your ears is one of the four things:
ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer;	it could be grains, or an animal, or stone from earth, or anything similar like iron;
ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois;	or seeds, such as beans, peas;
ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	or anything that flows out like water and oil and similar substances.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When it comes to piercing the ear or any other way of doing things that do not fit with the ear or does not grow in the ear, place the ear under the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction;	If you see a stone, if it discharges any drop of purple oil or nut oil, then proceed with extraction;
et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine;	and you make him sneeze with consin, and stop his nostrils when the sneezing comes on, and place pieces of cloth or wool inside the ear;
et estent l’oreille au desus.	and keep the ear above.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure;	Many times, strength comes through this cure;
et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	and if it does not come about, then one proceeds with the extraction using fine forceps, which is done in this manner:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin;	If it jumps out through the forceps, that's good;
se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure;	if not, then proceed with the extraction using a small slender scalpel;
et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne;	And if it doesn't leap from this, make an armpit needle and pinch the tip of the needle or the stem of the ear strongly, and immerse whatever is inside the candle wax so that the wick cannot enter with the needle;
puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit;	Then let the treatment continue, because many times it goes like what we have said;
et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor;	And if it doesn't come forth in that manner, take some glue and mix with it its oils, and insert with each an instrument that suits for this task, and put a little cotton inside;
puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	Then press the glue onto the stone or anything else, and continue with force.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme;	And if it doesn't leap with all these things that we have said, then you must hasten to pierce the ear in such a way that pus and bad things may come out, and do so without delay.
et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant;	And the method of making the incision is that you first make the patient bleed from the cephalic vein and drain out blood according to its size, then place the patient under your hands and turn their head upwards, and create a small cut at the base of the ear where the fat hangs down.
et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche;	And make the incision as wide as a crescent moon until you reach the bone. Then remove the bone according to your ability and suck it quickly into your mouth;
et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And treat until the patient is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction;	And if it's grains that have formed and they're swollen, then perform an extraction;
et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it can't come out, then administer the thin paste below according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and make an incision on that seed.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces;	But do not do this when you think that the beans are wet due to ear moisture, until you have done many pieces of work;
puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	Then extract the delicate pinpricks and from the sweat gland, just like we said before, so that the extractions are smooth.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In water then, when a person vomits in the ear, it is required that the patient uses spitting of cold liquids first, and fully fills the ear with old cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And let it rest on the same ear or where the water is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If she jumps for heaven, that's good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu;	If not, take many stones according to the length of your finger tips and gently, and warm them slightly on fire;
et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille;	And place the patient's ear in or slightly to the side of their own ear, and take another step away from it on one foot, and cut open with another stone inside the stone that is in the ear;
et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer;	And do not stop changing stones from one to another until the heat comes out completely, and thus it will come out all its strength;
et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars;	And if you see it, take hold of the branch, and push one end into the ear, and the other end with fire until the most tender part is charred;
puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	Then repeat this process for other branches, until the sharp tip comes out completely, as we have said about stones.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division;	In the extraction of a small beast, like a flea and similar things, treat it as we have said in the case of dissection;
mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures;	but if it's large and could be felt, undertake the extraction using forceps;
et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	And this is the easier thing to remove that is in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil:	In the extraction of worm-like things from the ears, when you have tried as we have said in dissection and with steam treatments, if the treatment is not beneficial, then you should observe the ear under sunlight:
s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	If there are no gaps, then use fine needles to pierce, and if not seen, take the thread from which this shape is found:
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And may be narrow below and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine;	And apply the finest tip in the ear according to the amount of suffering from the patient's complaint, then fully shape all the vein;
fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	Do this often until all the blood flows out.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere;	And if they do not flow out, then immerse the cotton thread in the vein as I said for cutting into the stone;
et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations;	And if they do not protrude as we have said, administer distillations that the old have proven effective in removing worms, and you will find guidance on distillations;
et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if you apply your oils and medications to the ear using this tool, as depicted here for you to see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller;	And whether it be made of silver or of a prickly weed, place it under the small openings and use it to distill;
et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton;	And to press inside the distillation with a well-made arnica tool for this purpose; and if you see that you are grasping and enveloping around the cotton appendage at the tip.
puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille;	Then pour your oil or juice, and what you see of your medicine in the cane, let the cane be inside the ear;
puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille;	Then place all the cotton inside the grasp, and press your hand in rhythm until the oil is distilled or the ear has enough exposure;
et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille;	And within it you feel the sensation of the patient, and if there is a distillation that is heated in the fire thus it's distilled into the ear;
et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And remember that it should not be too cold, because the medicine would not be as good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Regarding ear piercing
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles;	No child is born without any perforations in their ears;
et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir;	The same thing happens with adults due to wounds or birth in the ear of a fetus, and these injuries often enter the ear from behind, unless one can see them;
et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	And it never happens that the hole disappears from the perforation, and you will see this well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil;	That which comes from behind, if you cannot see it, is usually a sign of improper healing in various conditions. And it appears that you should place the ear near the patient's face towards the sun;
et regarde dedens:	And look inside:
se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	and if you see the superficial pustule, if it is of this form from what has been mentioned:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille;	And may they be equally deep in front and behind, without touching the ear;
se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	if the pustule is of new flesh or part of the ear, use delicate pricking and gently scrape it, until that flesh is entirely removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the wicks go into the ear canal, take a fine, light wax and melt it with fire for a little bit, then put it inside the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille;	If you feel the pustule that causes pain in the ear from the patient, prick gently, and make sure not to damage the nerves of the ear;
puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	Then place in the ear a tent according to the width of the pustule, and smear with the Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet;	Continue this treatment every day until the wound is healed. Or take an emetic and mix it with pink water, then powder the vitriol ground.
et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	And if you see the ear swelling up, it's necessary to take the emetic and stir another wet emetic made of rose oil and beeswax, until the swelling is removed.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then continue to treat it as long as it remains sound.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if bleeding occurs, immerse an sponge and soak it in cold water, then place it on the ear, and perform other treatments that stop bleeding which include remedies for distillations.
de la char des papieres	From the substance of the papers
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines;	By the end of the month that comes written on the papers about the eyes when they are wet and dry, it's necessary to spread them with tongs and forceps, and use a poultice from its roots;
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	Then place sulfur on the area of vitriol ground.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues;	And if it cannot be stripped off, then use a fine lens cautery to cauterize it, and the cauterizer should do so after making an incision.
et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines;	And many times they return, yet nothing remains of their roots;
et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And when they are cauterized by fire, their roots are burned and do not return.
de la gresle	Regarding ice or cold treatments
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz;	Many times come in papers some things that seem to have a crust by their shape and hardness, and for this reason it is called "hail disease", and it's an accumulation of moisture within the paper above and below.
li ovraiges est telz:	The work proceeds as follows:
pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir;	Take care that the hail does not move from one side to another, and it is a light matter to know;
fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Begin with a wide cut, then lightly sear each part of the body, afterwards grip it with forceps, and hold.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide;	if you can't hold it without piercing a bit of the paper, so long as you don't harm the patient;
et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	and if it splits widely, then stitch it up with a seam, and treat until it's healed;
et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	and if it's small, do not exert much force, for the ointments will heal it quickly and nourish flesh.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre;	And if the stone descends into the ear towards the upper part, then turn it upside down, and get the stone to one of the forceps, hold it, press from both sides;
et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien;	And if paper is removed by incision, this causes no harm;
et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And when the ice is removed, wash out the salt water and cleanse the wound as long as the patient's health improves.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat of the lumps
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz;	Exinach is a grease that accumulates on the sheets of papers above it, and this happens more often in children than adults, causing much trouble for their eyes. It causes them to urinate early in the morning, and they cannot look at the sun's light because tears rush to their eyes;
et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	And because of this, they lie down in their own feces and sleep there, and have wet papers under their buttocks that smell like excrement and give them an appearance covered with the grease which opens in the eye.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press on your hand with your fingers and feel exinach between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain;	And the method of treatment is such that the patient puts their head back to its healthy position;
et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li;	and then take flax cloth, and set up a tent in manner of a circle according to the quantity that flows out from each part, then place it on them;
et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle;	and press with your thumbs on both sides, so that the discharge is collected within the circle;
puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne;	then in the middle of the moisture at the skin, cut a slit diagonally, and make it neither too wide nor larger than the wound we do for vein opening surgery;
et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach;	and stretch the skin around until you see the discharge;
et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	and in various positions, discharge comes out of the slit, resembling a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars;	Pull out then take one whole strip of surgical cloth between your fingers at the front end, and turn your hand to the right and left until it is spread out;
et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	and make sure not to adjust in the cut, that you do not bleed all the way up to the eye, that you do not blister it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere;	And if the cut does not open at the beginning of the cut, so enlarge a bit gently the cut until it opens;
puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	then pull it as we have said, then moisten with water and vinegar and place on the wound, and bind with bandages.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if there are such people who grind salt and put it on to corrupt that moisture which has remained.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the treatment should continue as long as it is effective.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it comes to the point of an abscess, then the treatment with plaster remedies until it is healed.
des poilz des papieres	of the paper hairs
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz;	When hair begins to grow out of place instead of naturally and are aging, if they harm the eyes, and lead to conditions like accustomed tears and paper moistening and albuginea, as long as this is the cause of eye damage;
et est li cure selonc IIII manieres:	And treatment takes place according to four methods:
ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	And treatment can be carried out by means of a cautery and fire together, or through the use of remedies and potions as was discussed in the previous chapter on cautery, and this is done whether by incision and stitches, or by sutures, according to what I will explain.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre;	It is necessary that you place the head of the patient in your healthy side, then turn the paper from your eye to your left hand;
s’elle est convertie, c’est boin;	If it has been turned, that's good;
se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus;	If not, then insert one needle with all the thread above;
et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur;	And either from the margin of the paper or where the hair grows beneath these hairs, and draw the thread above across the entire paper, and then turn it with the razor;
puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit;	Then place over the area on the paper, above the neatly arranged hairs, all across the broad chest to the small one.
puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	Then draw a line, and place on the paper a small cotton gauze tent and a piece of cloth, then draw a shape on the paper like an ivy leaf, as if it were a laurel tree, and always ensure that the shape corresponds to the height you see when lifting the paper which is marked for you.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie;	And if it's necessary to cover a large area of the paper according to how flexible the paper is;
puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit;	Then start from across the entire chest over the two lines you have marked, and begin at the broadest part of the chest down to the smallest.
et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute;	And make a cut near the natural hair openings in growth of a root, then place the onion in one of the two angles close to the ear, then burn completely.
puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce;	Then join the two lips with a stitch using a needle and all one strand of fine wool thread, and cleanse of blood, and burn off excess threads on the two ears for any sticky substances you see. If you do this properly;
et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII;	And if this does not work, then take no concern, let the stitch and threads until three or four days;
puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	Then treat the wound with dry and binding things, because paper gets wet from the heat of the wound and its joining, but stitches are damp (as the old ones said), and it's work without fear;
et si a une autre maniere:	And if there's another way:
et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	And it is that you seal the paper with a figure as round as an holly leaf, just like we have described, three inches square according to this shape:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	Then, cut those that are above evenly according to the shape shown here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure;	And if you don't have the ability to hold the forceps, and if it's not equal, then take a needle or wherever there is thread, and stick it through the figure;
et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment;	and thread another piece of wool through the large loop, and the second piece through the small one, and join the threads evenly between your thumbs;
puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then lift your hand evenly, and lift all the skin over which you have marked, just like we have described, then join the two edges of the wound by sewing, and treat until it heals.
et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	And if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with tallow and similar restorative balm;
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit:	And sometimes happens that the paper's hair gets converted:
si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision;	It is necessary for you to use what we have instructed about incisions;
mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	but the stitches in one and the other are more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme:	The treatment for scabies follows this form:
et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est;	and you must convert the paper and cut it internally according to what I have said. Then make two incisions with an art, and also make two fine threads as long as the paper is wide, taking into account its thickness;
et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz;	and place two heads of each part where you hold the threads;
puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment;	Then gather both together on what stands above the paper of the eye, and hold the two strings of each side firmly;
et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	And leave it like that for some days, and the skin which is being held will weaken, dry up, and peel off, until it falls out by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	If it lasts longer, if the wound takes time to heal, then treat it as long as it remains healthy;
et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil;	And when the wound has healed, and if you lift off the paper, and no longer will grow hair;
et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	And this is the form of the two strings that you will make according to this shape, and according to this length and width:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil;	The operations are as follows: you take a fine needle and thread it with silk string that is strong and fine;
puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc;	Then gather together the shoulders and do not mix one with another subtly, and let the length of the threads be a palm in length;
puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil;	Then instruct in hunting another fine silk thread briefly, and tie the ends of the hair with this thread;
puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain;	Then place the patient's head on your sound part;
et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil;	And let the sunlight reach to all parts so that you can see clearly; because this is a delicate and small operation. Then thread the needle through all the hunting grounds at the base of the adjusted hair, and pierce it in the paper swiftly while you pull it above the natural hair.
puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors;	Then remove the hair up to the hunting ground, and thread that hair in the hunting ground, if there is one or two or three or more.
puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	Then remove your hand until the hairs grow out all around on paper with natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil;	And when the chase is treated and the hair does not grow out with it, then remove the chase at the end to all the thread that you have ordered, until the chase grows out smoothly from almost above and you see this through the eye's vision;
adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus;	Then remove the chase and the thread, and close the eye and leave it closed for two or three days, until the hair thickens in its place and grows the flesh out;
et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the hairs are small, accompany them with one hair as long as a cow's hair, and lift it up alongside that or where you leave it, until it is fully grown out, then lift it.
de la porriture de l’oil	Regarding eye infection
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres:	When this illness, called "aleacrati" or gangrene comes to the eye, if there are two ways:
l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	One naturally, and the other unnaturally.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And occurs suddenly from injury, or due to surgeons, or by means of cauterization, and through similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	And the way of treatment in this is that you cut open this seam and expose the eyelid, and place linen wicks inside, and keep it until it has healed;
et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And it is not right to use in the treatment of this any things that dry and restrict.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere;	For if you do this, the illness will return worse than the first one;
mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic;	but work with things that soften, such as fennel;
et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	and wash it with hot water or vinegar and linseed oil, and apply onion juice in none of the oils, and cover it with a linen cloth, and treat it with this.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant;	And remember when healing, you must guard against the wound not mending according to its original form;
et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And these remedies that we have discussed apply only to this disease, so that it does not return according to its original form.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	The flow that comes to the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease which truly is called 'axacrati', and it occurs naturally due to accidents.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans;	The accidents come from wounds and tears, from cauterization, and similar things;
et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char;	And the method of performing this operation involves inserting an awl with a doubled thread into the skin, threading it through and piercing just to the left of the right eyelid as far as you can reach inwards, so that the thread goes through two layers of tissue;
puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	Then the skin is held above all along the awl, and it's cut wide over the spur.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin;	And if the figure of the paper returns according to what is proper, it is good;
se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere;	If not, then seize it with care and place it in the groove, and turn the paper, and make two cuts where they would have been inside the paper;
et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»;	Make the two corners of the two cuts corresponding to the two angles of the incision you made, and make the angles such that when they are assembled together, the figure will be like the figure of a letter that is "Greek";
puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne;	Then set the bone according to the quantity that its thicknesses require, following the size of the paper hole, then adjust the two required parts and sew them with a thread line's length.
puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then apply the cure as we have said about softening medicines and treatments, until it is healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant;	And if the disease comes from a wound or seam or cautery, then it is necessary that you cut an opening filled with hair on the paper, and according to what was mentioned before;
puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit;	Then dig between the two rows of a tent, as I have said;
et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil;	And one must do the work according to the shape of the disease, for it is very diverse in its form, and the wise surgeons arrange themselves with all their skills to show how they can return the shape to its natural form;
et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And even the patients themselves, according to what needs to be done and with various instruments in many arrangements.
dou soudement de la papiere	immediately from the paper
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut;	When this sewing occurs with people's hands in such a manner that the paper above is glued with the white of the oil and cannot move or perform its natural tasks, then it is necessary to poke the tip of a scraper under the paper and lift it up;
et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil;	And the length should be as pins, until you find the one that is inserted into the subtle sphenoid bone, which should not be too large or too sharp, so that the patient does not suffer from a needle that is too large and stings the eye;
et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil;	And make your incision, by which you excise the assembled tissue lightly, so that the paper heals according to its natural form;
et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere;	And heal all the assembled tissue, and perform no piercing in the sharp eyesight, but lift with mild water and from a basin;
puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef;	Then place between the paper and the eye a linen tent, and put damp wool on top of the eye from an egg's content;
et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	And after three days, use mild water and other bland substances until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	Of the edge of the eye
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres:	Know that the nail occurs in two manners:
elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om;	It occurs in two ways: one is nervous and seems like hard bone, and another that isn't nerve-filled but appears like white moist lump frozen over, such that when iron is touched to it and cared for with the use of prongs, it won't move.
et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	Both kinds start near the large tear duct and grow gradually until they cover all of the eye and all light and vision.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz;	And the method of incision is such that the patient positions their head over your hand, then they pull out the eyes.
et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus;	and hold the paper in your hand, then pinch the nail with small prongs, and stretch it upwards.
puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort;	Then take a needle, and attach a horse hair, or a calf hair, or a cow hair, and strong thread;
et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement;	and double the needle point and insert it into the nail bed, then pierce through the entire needle, and bind the nail with a thread and extend it above, and burn all the hair on the nail bed that surrounds the artery and the fine hairs until the root of the cuticle in the fleshy part under the nail bed. Then cut out the remaining parts along the groove up to the sensitive subcutaneous tissue and small muscles, and leave the natural tear, so that no liquid comes out like usual through the incision.
et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit;	And each time, the nail is extended only to the edge and with thread, as we have said;
puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	Then for the scorched one, remove all the burnt flesh from which this is made:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie;	And see to it that no more of the burnt flesh touches the fatty tissue and doesn't tear it, and that the wound does not become punctured;
et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	After making the incision, pour a little of the broiled fat into it, and create a ring from stearine, and let it heal until tomorrow;
puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat those who require it as long as they are sound.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines;	And if the nail is not nerve-filled, and you cannot push the needle through it, and the cuticles cannot enter, this kind of nail-like condition is treated many times with medicinal remedies;
et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And it happens just as I described in the division, and if you see that it is coped, let the eye work with the help of the diseased flesh, take out a small amount of burnt flesh gently according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor;	And raise the nail slightly, and if you see that it is not diminishing at all and your reason presses on, then from your mouth, pour into the eye ring made of stannous oxide and red necklace and yellow fluid onto the eye until the next day.
puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	Then repeat the other operation according to this same work, until it is completely removed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing obstructs your view, such as pus-filled sores, then proceed, and first treat the pus-filled sores until they are clean. Then resume the work procedure just described, until they are clean.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne;	And if the cheek of the eye, by great discomfort, appears in the eye at night, then suspend it under a gurney, and take out a part of it, not all at once, so that no tears come from it;
puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	Then pour into the red eye ring which is made of stannous oxide.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	Of the flesh that grows near the pupil
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste;	There are some men who never pass urine red, and covers the pupil and remains on the papers, and turns outside, appearing as a candle flame;
et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force;	And the operations are such that the patient places their head in your hand, then guide their eyes, and all that flesh up to the bone is brought down to sizes suitable for this, and you hold it with strength;
puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige;	Then cut the first layer of flesh, and saw everything down to the bone until the end, and be sure not to hurt the eye in the operation.
et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	And let the cut be like what we described in cutting nails and using small force of your hands, just like the figure shown after this chapter regarding bone separation;
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut;	And when the cut is done and all flesh has been separated, use oil of sulfur or distill it with red colander-like medicine, and place a cotton ball soaked in such substance on top of the wound to prevent infection;
et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut;	And if it remains unchanged, and the person with no shoes surmounts you, and you doubt over an abscess in such a case, then let the eye and treat the abscess using remedies that soothe such an abscess.
puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	Then return to your work until it is healed, and thus make as many characters as are attached by this resemblance in the eye.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil;	However, nevertheless, it is necessary that you adapt the treatment of each natural weakness in the eye;
et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer;	and from the accidental path, in the work of iron;
et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	And do not let your hand stay in any of these works until you see that this limb endures the pain of this operation.
des voines des eulz	of veins and eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	When the veins are red and covered above the eye, and affect vision, causing weakeness in sight for several days.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel;	Therefore, the first skill is to observe where the eye is, and from which side, and apart from that, there is no other disease except for the boil;
adonques le coil en teil maniere:	Therefore treat him in this way:
comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	Instruct the patient to place his head in a healthy position, then suspend all vessels throughout the entire body according to their wisdom, and let the arteries be twofold subtly as this form:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And let there be two inches by degree in one side according to this shape:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil;	Then treat that way forcefully suspending those subtle vessels, and let blood flow for an hour after another, until you see the vessels leaving the eye;
et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes;	And ensure that you don't pierce the eye at the tips of the spathamides, and perform this operation at midday in front of the sun, and be very zealous in your work so that you do not cause injury only to those vessels.
et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	And when you have done this, if you distill in the eye a collar of green and red to corrupt what remains stubborn against the blow.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if you do not have the power to do all this at once, make a poultice on the eye with things that calm the pain of the eyes and leave it for several days until the pain is soothed and sure there's no pus in it, then restart according to this method as described until they are healed;
et c’est li forme des forces:	And it is the shape of strength:
de la fistule de l’oil	of the tear duct of the eye
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule:	The method for something called "arissati" is a fistula:
quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	When you cure it with a cautery and with hot medicinal fluids as I have said before, and if it's not yet healed, then it remains within the place where you incise on the pus, near where it should die. Drain all the moisture that is there, until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme;	And when you see the bone has been exposed, and you will notice the decay and darkness, if you retrieve with all the instrument which was previously described;
et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	and is called 'hard head', and made of iron, directed towards the head region, and should be sharpened like a file as it appears in its current form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese;	And place on it the part of the decaying bone, then turn it with your fingers, and press your hand a little until you know that this corruption has stopped;
et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	and do this once, then restore the head to its state of medicinal desiccation.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez;	if the bones are joined, and flesh has begun to grow, and the skin of the wound is joined, and remains like this for forty days, and does not heal or become an abscess, and no bad incidents occur, know that it is healed.
se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme:	If not this, so other means must be used to bring back the fistula to its proper place at the tip of the nail according to this form:
et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	And if you uncover the bone for the second time with iron and medicines, and when it is uncovered, take the wood according to this form, and have the iron rod of three angles, and the staff should be thinned out until its tip as you see here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif;	Then place the wood over the bone inside the eye socket, and keep your hand away from the nose slightly. Then hold the stick firmly until it pierces the bone and you feel the pain in the patient as if the wind is entering them while holding your hand on their nose;
et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif;	Then restore the joint with dry medicinal substances as I have taught you, and when the flesh begins to grow and harden, let it heal at the nose;
si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	If it's something lighter for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	from the exit of the eye
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide;	When the eyes open fully in all respects, and there's no disturbance to the heart or diminution of strength, it's necessary for you to bind the patient.
puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz;	Then when he's well, apply suction cups or plaster without piercing to help heal, then place on the eye a bandage made of cataplasms containing aloes and incense and waxed gutta percha, and then allow the eye to heal, and cover it with strips and cloths.
et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier;	And the way to cover them involves taking soft cloths and doubling each one, then layering them one on top of another according to how many that the eye needs.
puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir;	Then place on top with a hard bandage, and then reapply the suction cups without piercing.
puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout;	Then apply the suction cups and let the eye be held day and night, and if you bind it loosely, it should be held tightly.
puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin;	Then apply the bandage after day and night, and if you see the eye heal, it's good;
se ce non;	If not so;
si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	if you have to redo the plastering and bandages, as well as the eye wrap and suction cups until it heals.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	of the breaking of a woollen bandage
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir;	When tears come in the vitreous membrane, then open it, and bring out pieces like gum resin, and it is astonishing to see;
adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier;	Then if you see it coated, the operations are like piercing at the root of what's above the part under your vision up to there, then pierce another point with double thread coming from the area where tears occur;
et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition;	And make a puncture, and leave the first needle according to its placement;
puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef;	then tie the eye with a double thread and wrap some of its exterior with it, then firmly tighten it, then remove the needle and put a wet piece of linen on the wound, generously soaked in egg.
et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee;	and leave it as long as the thread sticks to the eye, then dress the wound with things soothing until the injury heals.
et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and every time the wound is kept in place by each half of an eye circle of cloth, until it heals.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost;	And if the eye does become too prominent, then pierce it at the delicate sinus that passes under the eye, and drain the watery humor out of it, and lower the eye fluid, and do this immediately.
puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then extract as long as it is clean.
de la bowe de l’oil	By the power of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue;	This disease which is called "alcunnati" can only be found where bile is present in the gallbladder, resembling falling drops of water, and it is not real water;
et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz;	And the way it appears in operation is that you make the patient sit upright and straight on their apparatus, then take the head between your hands from both sides, and move them as you see bile come up to your eyes;
puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit;	Then continue until it's thoroughly drained and doesn't descend further, ensuring that the light sees all the bile contents as they used to.
et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	And if it doesn't descend at all, know that it is bile, and if the descent of the bile is not as we've described.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse;	If you make the patient sit between your hands, then take the fine spatula and proceed on the corneous sheet by making cuts from the corner of the conjunctiva with the corneal sheet and crown, until the bow comes out;
et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when it is out, if you pour in the warm water mixed with honey, or boiling water and fenugreek then honey, or water boiled with fenugreek and honey. After that, apply other remedies until she is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	From the drops of the eye
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier;	We have the indications for water in division, and what needs to be pierced;
si en oevre selonc la santeit.	if done according to health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort;	It is necessary that you make the patient sit between your crossed hands, away from sunlight, and attach the healthy eye very tightly;
puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres;	Place the paper of the eye on your left hand where the eyes are on the left, or on your right hand where the eyes are on the right;
puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre;	Then take in your right hand, if the eyes are on the left, the tool known as 'almagda', or in your left hand, if the eyes are on the right;
puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide;	Then place the tip of the tool underneath the cornea through the thickness of one finger in that corner of the eye to the part near the minor tear duct, then push the 'almagda' tool vigorously and rotate your hand until it penetrates the corner of the eye, and feel that almagda reaches the empty thing;
et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour;	And it is necessary that the size of the almagda channel be equal to the size of the space which exists from the pupil to the end of the darkness;
et c’est li corone de l’oil;	And this is the crown of the eye;
si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	If you see the bone within that paper by the transparency of the corneal fabric, and then place the tool until it reaches where the sharpness is, then express across one way after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	Let the patient feel now as he sees his wounds before him and the instrument in his eye.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc;	After laying him down, and if the edge ascends on the second passage, apply force with the tool, and when it is firmly in place and no longer rises, gently remove the splint little by little while turning your hand.
et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	And then add a little bit of oil stone to the sharpness again, and remove the eye from this.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then place at the front of the eye an ointment or wet wool in oil of roses and plenty of egg yolk, and bind it with healthy oil.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	Yes, and those which are our own, let us place on common bread with plenty of egg.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if 'almagda' can't enter the eye due to its hardness, for there are people with very rigid eyes, then you should take the tool called 'alberit', which has this form:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit;	And then pierce only the conjunctiva, do not go too far inwards, but make it subtle; then take off the splint as we have said.
et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous;	And upon completion of the task, the patient is prepared for the doctor's intervention, where he sleeps on his back in the dark room.
et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor;	And be of no movements, and pray for light meals, and do not move your head either to the right or to the left, and tie him according to his position until after three days;
puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor;	Then release him in the same dark house, and test his sight, and make him see nothing, and then again tie him until after seven days;
et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And it is not suitable for you to do this during the time of treatment or after incision now, but it is appropriate for you to wait, because the wound has swollen rapidly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme;	When abscesses rupture, that you release the eye before the seventh day, and prepare for the one who heals abscesses.
et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	And when it is calmed, release the eye and place an eyepatch over its face with an edge of one inch to cover for a few days, and stay in that gloomy house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas;	And then leaves the house little by little, and turns into its nest;
et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	Know that no disciple should intervene in this situation.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens;	And one came to us who was from the Earth, who told us that in their region, everyone was making alcohol out of apples, with which they used water, but still I never saw any such thing in our land, nor did I ever hear about it in old books;
et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And perhaps it's a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie;	These are the appearances of alcohol forms, because those who do not know them see them;
et soient d’arain proprement:	And let them be of iron properly:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And their head is from this same subtlety, and the tail at three angles on each side.
de la char sor le neis	of the flesh near the nose
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez;	No birth or offspring comes from mixed animal figures, some of which resemble scorpions with the feet of birds;
et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	And if there are such cases or if the animal has a colored coat, and if it has a good-colored beast.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil;	In this case with the animal that is yellow and not colored, you should place the patient between your hands facing the sun;
et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers;	And breathe through his nostrils, and pour vinegar onto those animals, and pull them out;
pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	Hold onto that which you can bear under the subtle sharp point of a needle until you know that this animal is completely bone.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien;	And if there remains anything that we cannot accommodate, should you open it all with fine delicate instruments, ensuring nothing is left behind.
et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient;	And if it doesn't swell up, or if pus accumulates, then you should assist by applying it as seems necessary;
et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if it's malicious pus, you should act quickly and apply the cautery until the wound is clean and all tissues are seared, then pour or wash with cold water or use wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez;	If it fails to heal, and moisture causes issues until the throat, know that it is infected;
et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier:	And if moisture doesn't pass as it should, know that there is dead tissue within the bone above, for none of your instruments can reach to cut it:
adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins;	Therefore, it is necessary that you insert a linen thread a bit thick, and tie with your hands, and leave an allowance between each knot of about one or less inch.
et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche;	And place the patient's head with the thread in its neck towards your power, and pull it outwards as long as it comes through the neck inside the mouth.
et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire;	And many times do this with the child at school, and it is a simple task for whoever wishes to perform it;
puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	Then hold the head that comes through the neck with one hand, and the other head that comes out of the mouth with the other hand, and distinguish them one after another according to what we are or thread.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant;	Do this until you know that the thread has corroded that flesh, then pull out the threads, bleed it, moisten the thread with Egyptian ointment, and put it back in place at the neck as before.
fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char;	Do this for three days or more, as long as the ointment eats away all that remains of flesh;
et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use;	Then apply or inhale some opium for several days as long as it relieves the pain, and if you need dried medicinal substances, then use them;
et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	This is the form of the instrument for purging the liver, which one distills with oils and medicinal substances or fumes:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi;	And it can be made of silver or iron, resembling an open lamp, like a rod, and guide it in the same way.
et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief;	And if you see fit, make a closed rod, and let the instruments be filled for purging the liver;
et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And have your hand ready on the liver when you heat the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	of the flesh near the nose
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder;	Many times, at the nose's root, a disease is born which is called 'Telul', and grows becoming large until it is something visible to see;
et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant;	And because of this, you should cover it at the beginning, and have all bones set, then place the fire or burning medicine where the cautery should be;
et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens:	And if you delay covering it until it is large, take care if it is hard, shows a change in color, or exhibits poor sensation:
si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide;	Do not touch it with iron either, as this is an internal abscess. For if you cover it even once, it will cause great harm to the patient;
et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	And if the abscess is due to pressure from the skin, not by a change in color, and you see that it can be completely covered, so relieve the patient and cover with something soft, and treat the area using drying and restraining methods.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	When the nose has been cut and sewn.
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Know that when remedies of continuation come into one of these venous areas, it benefits little, for in some men.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc;	Then one must ensure this does not happen to anyone, if you see that the wound is fresh with all its blood;
et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then adjust the two lips to suture them, then treat him as long as he is sound.
et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet;	And if the lips are dried out on both sides, it is necessary to char all parts of their inner lining until they heal. Then adjust the two lips with a stitch and tighten them. Apply powdered dragon's blood powder and ground incense.
et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place the powders on a plaster of great strength or another soldering plaster, and leave it until it discharges by itself. Then treat with ointment as long as he remains sound.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution:	The method of stitching is that you join the solution:
ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre;	by needles, as we have said about the stitch of the belly;
ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	by thread, as I have informed you.
des apostemes des levres	removal of lesions from lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant;	Within the wounds of abscesses were found hard contents inside, resembling grains sometimes, smaller and larger;
adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie;	Therefore, you must open the wounds again, and cut through each knot, and grasp it with forceps, removing it in each part;
puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	Then apply the limb after the vitriol incision, as long as the wound is cooled down;
et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then remove the dressing, and clean the wound of dry substances as long as it is sound.
de la char des gencives	from the pulp of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»;	Many times, there appears on the gums something yellowed, that the old people call "albulus";
si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc;	If it is necessary for you to hold it with tongs, cut to its root, and let blood flow out or allow the blood;
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives;	Then place sulfur, vinegar or other drying and收敛ing powders;
et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize:	And if that flesh returns after the incision, and happens multiple times, if you cut it again the second time, then cauterize:
si ne revient mie aprés le cautere;	If it does not return after being cauterized;
et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	And these are the forms of instruments to use for cutting.
des sordens	Of cautering with fire, instruct the patient to allow hair growth until long and even; and if they pierce at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres;	Sometimes they gather at the root of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, and there are scaly and rough layers.
et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant;	And sometimes they involve the black and yellow tooth with worms, until the decay reaches the gum, and make teeth stink.
si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien;	If it is necessary that you place the patient between your hands, and his joints be in your correct position, touch the bones or the scabs until nothing remains.
et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees;	And then make them appear in blackness and greenery, and yellowishness and other tints, until they are healed.
et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin;	And if what is removed at the first reason is beneficial, that is good;
se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis;	But if not, start again on the second day and the third, until you have everything touched.
et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens;	And know that teeth have the skill of various tools for extraction according to what the work demonstrates, because the rasps used in removing teeth from between the gums are different than those used for teeth at the surface;
et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	And these forms and others prepare with you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire;	When treating someone for tooth pain, it is necessary to draw out the tooth as much as you can while delaying its extraction, because this should not cause them any harm.
car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	because it is such a high substance that one would not have any excuse for piercing it.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Therefore, when the patient is compelled to strain for the extraction, it is necessary that you are certain of which tooth is causing pain.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent;	Many times the pain leads to the body, and be sure that it is or a tooth, and extract the good tooth;
et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors;	yet still do not leave the pain alone during this time, until the bad tooth is removed, for we have already wished to do so with these soldiers;
et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars;	And when you are certain about the tooth that is causing pain, it is necessary to burn inside of the tooth with quite a large amount of spittle in order to preserve the gum from all sides;
puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles;	Then move to your hands or take hold of the delicate forceps at the first pinch and pinch again, until they are well dislocated, then firmly secure the forceps.
et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	and have the shoulder under the knee in your holy place between your knees, and hold it well so that it doesn't move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After extracting the right tooth correctly without breaking it, and if it does not jump out forcefully, take no concern with these instruments and gently push them in from each side. And move it just like you did initially.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont;	And if they have pierced and eaten through it, then you must fill with cloths where the holes are;
et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre;	and when using delicate forceps to hold it, make sure not to break it during the holding.
et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	And one must cut quite carefully under the gum to extract the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And see to it well that you don't break it and leave a piece behind; this will cause the patient even greater pain due to the malady of the root.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit;	And beware that you do not do it as the ignorant surgeons do, who break the bone every time out of haste and audacity, and do not carry out what we have told.
mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut;	But they cause to occur from time to time by the opening of this great disease through their roots that they bear, or through the matter they break, as we have often found;
et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil;	And when the flesh is torn, wash the part with wine or ale and salt;
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet;	And when blood leakage occurs, which often happens, cover the area with roasted vitriol;
et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And if that doesn't work, apply cautery.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent;	The shapes of the tools you use to remove teeth should be those with long points and thick handles, so that they do not bend when you pull out a tooth;
et ce sont les formes:	And these are the shapes:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And let them have large parts that do not bend when being pulled, and be made of very sturdy iron, and should have teeth to hold the pieces in place.
de la racine des dens	from the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou II, tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne;	When the root remains at the draw, it is necessary to place cotton soaked in moist butter inside the wound for one or two days until the wound softens. Then pinch the tweezers called 'algefri', by which the blood seems like that of a well-tended animal;
et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	and they should be as fine as a file and this is the shape:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out with all these forceps, it is necessary that you uncover the entire mass right up to the root, and then place an instrument known as 'althali', which is essentially an awl, as depicted here:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin;	And make it strong and thick so that it doesn't break, and if the root jumps out due to this, it is good;
se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	if not, assist with all your tools, of which the descriptions follow:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if assistance is taken from the instrument that has two points, as depicted here:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other tools that are in front according to the size of teeth, and from this tool which seems like large forceps, as depicted here:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont;	And make these instruments strong so they don't break, and know that many tools are used inside;
et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez;	And also other instruments, which are not counted;
et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And the wise surgeons discover their instrument by themselves, according to what their operations and illnesses demonstrate to them. For there are diseases where old men did not teach an instrument due to the diversity of these and they break part from the carriage or others' bones, or if it rots away, then he seeks out the instruments that suit him, which I have told you about, and helps with movements, whose form is this:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster;	And be thick and well-suited to hold onto the bone, so that it doesn't slip away, but can hold and remove it;
et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	and then restore the limb using suitable medications for this, and if there is rot in the bone, and it is small, if she retrieves all of her instrument:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer:	When the teeth seem not according to the body's natural course, and their form is ugly, even in virginal women, you must know if they were born after a tooth and are not in its right place, and cannot be seen or shaved.
adonques lou raie;	Therefore, the tooth;
et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	And if it is next to the tooth, take this tool described here, and it resembles a small beak, and it should be made of sharp iron.
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the hole is made small and smaller in my hands by its hardness due to tooth, and because you do not move others, and if it becomes apparent that one can shave it off, then I will shave with one piece of file as this forms:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles;	and is also like the file used to make needles;
et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece;	and gradually file down the tooth bit by bit with gentle hand movements, so that it doesn't move until it finishes;
puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	Then smooth it in the end for any rough edges, and if the tooth is too sharp and hurts the tongue, you should file down the roughness until it's level, so that it doesn't hurt the tongue or impair speech.
quant li dent lochent	When the tooth swells
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut;	When the teeth in front of the mouth, through impact or bite, and if the patient can't push on it while eating without vomiting, and you have treated them with restraining medicines, then this is not effective;
si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques;	if you need to restrict them with an gold thread, because the silver threads turn green and rot, but the gold never changes;
et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens;	and make the thread neither too thick nor too thin, according to the size of the space between the teeth;
et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part;	and if you see the teeth moving, take the thread and double it between the two healthy teeth, then place the dislocated teeth between the diseased ones, whether there is one or more than one, as long as you can feel them safely up to a healthy tooth on the other side;
puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point;	Then restart the covering until you reach the part where you stopped, and apply your skilled and gentle hand pressure, without letting it move at all.
et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	and make sure to bind around the tooth root so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue;	Then clip the threads with some forceps, and join them together, placing them between healthy teeth, and place them in such a way that they do not irritate the tongue;
et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil;	and leave it that way as tight as can be tolerated, and if it loosens or the threads break, apply a different thread to tighten again;
si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	if it can be tolerated for its entire duration, and this is the form of teeth and the position of the two healthy incisors and the two premolars as you see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit;	And when the tooth is withdrawn, if it is placed back in its position, time after time, as we have said;
et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	and don't interfere with any that aren't experienced and endure it, and not once do we shape a bone tooth like that of a cow, and place it in the spot where the defect is, and hold it firmly as we have said, and remains and serves for so long.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	To cover the tie of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi;	Not once does a tongue lien come from underneath the tongue or jaw, that one is born like this;
ou par accident de plaie soudee;	or by mistake due to a healed wound;
et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue;	and the procedures are such that you work on the mouth with the patient, have their head in your healthy position, and lift the tongue;
puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement;	Then cut the nerve link in the middle, as long as the tongue is dislocated from its place. And if there is hardness or swelling, and it's due to sudden injury, should you break the hook and cut the larger link.
et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz;	And make sure that the wound is not too wide at the base, for there is an artery beneath it;
et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin;	And once done, if you have used water that is pinkish and warm or cool, then place the head in a container of cold water. Afterward, put a linen tent under the tongue;
et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	And let the patient's wounds be treated every night, so that no pus may accumulate.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet;	And if there is blood drainage, then put vinegar under the head;
et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu;	And if it doesn't respond to you, then apply the gentle cautery, which is suitable for such cases;
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	then apply another treatment until it becomes clear,
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre;	and if you see it is of a red or black or hard color, yet the patient does not feel it, do not touch it, for this is a gangrene;
et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre;	and if it is draining pus and there's moisture, let the honey flow, and apply a thin needle cut, and relieve from both sides;
et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer;	and if it doesn't respond to your treatment, while you're working on it, put sulfur ash until it is coated, then return to your work until you use up all the strength;
puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then raise up the patient from bed and from rest, and continue other treatments while they are well.
des apostemes de la gorge	Extractions from the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde:	No sickness enters the throat glands which are called 'godath', and they should be properly referred to as the second pair of lymph nodes. And when you treat them, as we have explained in the division, if they are still inflamed, take care:
se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	If it's hard pus with small sensation and is colored, don't touch it with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc;	And if it's red and the root is large, don't touch it with iron either, for the running of blood;
mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi;	but let it be until it heals, and then you will remove it, or it would burst on its own;
et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if it has a pale white color and the root is subtle, if you prepare your instrument to cover, but first check that the abscess's swelling rests and has calmed.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme;	Therefore, have the patient sit facing the sun, and let their head be in good health, and make them open their mouth and place your forefinger between their hands on the tongue, pressing it towards all the instrument, as this is its form;
et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	And may be made of fine silver or very sharp like knives:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues;	Can you press the tongue onto this entire instrument, and see the abscess? If so, take an onion and a thorn, and drive them in from above more forcefully than you can.
et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces;	And take nothing off the skin with it, then grasp the object with the tool, from which there is this shape, that seems like some strength;
et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	And always the head is curved and one place to another, and they are very sharp, and it is made of iron or steel:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you don't have this tool now, take scissors instead; in this way it is formed:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom;	And be sharp on one side, and the other unnamed;
et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	And when you have gripped one of the kidneys, grip the other in the same manner, and after incision gargle the wounds with hot, then cold water, or with both hot and cold water. If bleeding occurs during this process, gargle with hot water, or use cooked pomegranate peels or rosemary leaves, among similar things, until the wound is fully healed;
puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then continue the treatment as long as he remains healthy;
et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	And no more abscesses form in the throat than there were two almonds, if they grow like so with exactly two almond-sized lumps.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens;	And I treated a woman for an abscess that was born within her throat, this being known as the small airway abscess;
et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And it had almost completely blocked the entire throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the constricted passage and could neither eat nor drink, she died if she had continued like this for a day or two.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscesses was so high that it had forced to make two holes through both nostrils near the nose.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe;	I acted quickly then, and inserted an instrument in the one inch opening, after which the straw came out, and with great force was a large portion of the food expelled.
puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue;	Then I would proceed to cut another piece near its other nostril, and open the wound with my knife and force the tongue.
aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc;	After inserting the needle into these abscesses, and removing some of them, only a little blood came out.
et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens;	And thus, the woman's throat passage was opened, and she began to drink water and then wine from now on. I didn't stop cutting out from that abscess for a long time;
et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros;	And the abscesses would reoccur immediately, filling up almost the entire cavity that I had emptied, until it became quite large.
adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge:	And then I would insert something and cauterize inside the throat:
ensi demora sens croistre;	So it didn't grow further;
et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	And I leave these parts, may God have mercy on him after me.
de l’uve	Of the eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»;	When it bends towards the eye, and it has lengthened and become elongated, this is called "perpendicular";
et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	And if it becomes swollen and round, it's called an "eye".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes;	When it is treated as we have described in the section on treatment, and if the treatment doesn't help, and you notice that the pus from the abscess has subsided, and there's a thin layer left, then it's necessary to remove it;
et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe;	And that which is round and not elongated;
et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	And if it's red or reddish or black in color, then it's necessary to make an incision into it.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger for the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant;	Therefore, when you see it, according to the manner that I have said, concerning its shape and length, you should have the patient face the sun, and press the tongue with the instrument about which we have made mention previously.
puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	Then place the onion in the stomach and treat it there, and cover it with the two instruments that I mentioned for incising the kidneys.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil;	And it is necessary that you do not cover more than the excess which is beyond the natural limit;
car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle;	because if you cover too much, you harm the voice and speech.
et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And after making an incision, use what we have discussed for the incision of the two kidneys, and treat her until she is healed.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patients are afraid of the cut, it is necessary for you to use remedies for the cautery of the sensitive area.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the way of the cautery is like boiling water.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere;	And it is that the patient should place their head in your good health, and then press their tongue against the tool we have described or the cautery chapter's instructions, and secure it with sharp blades, so that they are not too thick nor too thin.
et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	and by using the power of this tool, which is described here:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve;	And let your head bear a hair or where you apply the medicine, like how spoons do it, and place the tool with all the medicine over the wound;
et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece;	And let the patient stay still on their side, so that saliva and mucus flow from their mouth into the medicine, but not down to the throat, and rinse;
puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie;	Then hold your hand with all the medicine and press it on the wound for half an hour, as long as you see it seeping out and the patient's reactions to the medicine are calmed;
et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve;	And if you see this, take cotton and wrap it around any tool, and moisten the cotton in the medicine, then cover the tool with all the cotton on top of the canvas, until the cotton burns out on the surface.
et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V.	And do this often, until the cauterization is perfect, then leave it to dry, and remove it after three or five days.
Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine;	And if you need to repeat the cauterization with the medicinal preparation, do it again, and after the cauterization, rub inside the surface of the wound with cotton stuffed in butter, and clean what is inside from the medicine;
et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And rinse with cold water, or perform gargling treatments until it heals.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere;	This treatment is safer than incision, just using the cauterization;
s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir;	If it is treated with fumigation in this way, take calamus and myrrh and oregano and rue and chamomile and borage and similar herbs, and gather them all or some of them into a pot, and place them there, and bring the water to a boil;
et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	and let the pot be well filled with strong earth, and in the middle of the pot place the burning instrument according to this manner:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie;	And let it be made of silver or lead, and let one of the shoulder blades be placed in the mouth of the patient until the vapor rises through the nose by way of the throat, as long as the urethra is necrotic;
aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent;	After it repeats often, as long as the urethra dries, and remember that you should not do this at the beginning of the formation of pus, for many things happen;
et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	And do not use this force when removing an abscess tip.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut;	And if this instrument is not present, take a feather and place an eggshell inside the patient's head, so that the mouth of the diseased area does not get too hot;
car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	for the eggshell does not produce a thick steam in the mouth, and this is a good combination for healing together with health.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose;	Many times there is air in the throat bone or spine of fish, or no thing;
si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose;	Therefore, you should extract what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument, so that you see the thing move;
et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac;	And what does not open and is stuck in the throat, you should make the patient vomit this way that the meat be cooked in the stomach;
par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement;	By chance if by vomiting the substance comes out;
ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec;	or it is when the patient swallows an sponge piece, or a navel piece, or a lettuce root, or a fragment of dry bread;
et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse;	and attaches to the sponge a thread, and then swallows it;
et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer;	and when it reaches its place, if it inflates, and then draws out force;
et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	and if it does not come out with what we have said, take an instrument of plunge according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit;	And let the instruments be curved towards the head so that it can enter the throat more easily, and have the head raised to the top;
et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens;	and beware not to touch the epiglottis, that all may go well, nor to push any bone inside;
et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse;	And it is necessary for the patient to hold onto the tool, because if it moves or if the thing being treated becomes dry;
si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	If the tool is placed inside, or it is pulled forcefully to all parts of the instrument equally, as long as it is forceful.
de la sansue de la gorge	of the windpipe
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines;	No treatment heals without fluids, just as I have explained in the division, by medication cure;
et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	And when this does not help, then look at the throat of the patient towards the sun, and press the tongue with the instrument I have told you.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the vein, guide it with all small inch, or with fine forceps that are worth this.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if that doesn't work, take a thread and apply it in the neck next to the patient's wound, then move or pull on the thread until you feel resistance, and do this frequently.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if you irrigate the patient with water throughout the day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent;	Then take full sight of cold water, and work the mouth, and pour it into senses to swallow, and move it often with her hand;
et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	And if soon the fluids smell the water, she will defecate.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve;	And if it does not behave as we have said, then fumigate the patient with asafetida, using the tool that I mentioned for the fumigation of the eye.
fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	Do this multiple times, because it will expel without causing harm.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument;	And the method of fumigation is as follows: take a pan with charcoal briquettes, and place it covered with a perforated lid in the middle, and at this opening you place the tool's head.
puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue;	Then pour the fumigation, and the patient puts the tip of the rod in their mouth, and closes their mouth so that no smoke escapes but only goes up to the nose.
et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois;	And now the nostril will expel (the contents), and if it does not happen, repeat the fumigation multiple times.
et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue;	And the patient suffers thirst, and eats dirty things and such, and does not drink water;
et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And then it is necessary for her to come out through this governance.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge;	And the shape of the tool with which we treat the sanguine matter, when it can be seen, resembles curved tongs meant to enter the throat;
et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier;	And it has the appearance of a doctor's beak, and it has the roughness of a file, in such a way that whatever she takes, she cannot leave.
et vez ci la forme:	And here is the form:
li chapistres des apostemes	The chapter on abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille;	There are no descriptions of discharges until memory brings it forward from one or the other in this book, and they differ in puncturing and shaping;
et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	And this is through two ways; one being in its likeness itself, and concerning the one that holds moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second way is for those limbs which are inside the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	For the abscesses of the head are different from those of the base, and the abscesses of the internal organs differ from those that come to joints, and each has its judgment in action.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement;	And if it comes to discharges, one should not pierce them until the wound is healed according to its completion;
et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And for those that must be pierced when they are matured and do not heal according to their completion, such as discharges within joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscesses come from joints and they are allowed to continue until they become purulent internally, by chance, if the ligament and nerve of the joint get corrupted, this is a cause for contraction in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil;	If the discharge is within the main limb, and if you delay piercing until it is dead, it will harm the main limb;
ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs;	Or if it's within the foundation, piercing it or so long as it is dead;
et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule;	And it is not right that you pierce a mature discharge without full digestion completed, except for the one that's within the foundation where it can burn internally and result in an ongoing tunnel;
et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	And cannot heal completely.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes;	And you should know the time for draining the abscess which is determined by completion, and this occurs when the pain has subsided, and the departure of fever, and the reduction in pain and redness, and during the movement and improvement of the head of the abscess, and other signs.
et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues;	And you should keep the draining area or further depending on the location of the abscess, and where it opens will move.
et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And let the drainage be along the length of the arrow, and if the abscess is on the limbs or in joints and necks and arteries, and everywhere where there is no pleating.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In these cases, when they bend, according to that limb.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when abscesses are in the living tissue, it is better to let the puncturing happen until digestion is fully completed, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure;	For if you pierce it in front of that, it will lengthen the arrow with its venom and is full of maggots;
et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	And by chance harden the lips and weaken him from within.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if there are no abscesses pierced straight through the center of the body as per need for each limb.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus;	It is necessary that you remove small pus blisters, small wounds;
et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme;	And in large blisters, large wounds, and many cuts according to the size of the blister;
et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper;	And if there are such blisters or if it is necessary to cover with lard, and cover;
quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes:	when it has become as soft as leather, and is flattened out, then one should do as is done with infants:
et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres;	And for those that split into three corners, and those that are cut like the leaf of myrtle, like blisters from angles;
et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And for those where one makes a round cut, and other cuts and appearances of cutter.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement;	Those who do not have a head, such as abscesses located superficially, it must be that you pierce them completely;
et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie;	And when the abscesses are large, and they have accumulated a great amount of pus, you must pierce them, but do not drain all the pus at once in that moment, but drain part of it;
puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief;	Then apply an ointment over the abscess until another day, then do nothing until it heals;
fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute;	Repeat this process several times gradually, until all the pus has drained out.
meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	Similarly, if the patient lacks strength, or is pregnant, or has small children, or elderly and weak individuals.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For when someone tries to force it with the expulsion of blood, sometimes causing death of the patient, and you do not realize this.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite;	Therefore, proceed with caution in this chapter. When you have pierced your abscess, if a wound appears, and check to see if the wound from the abscess is small;
et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton;	And if it's a flat iron, you may try using linen or raw cotton thread.
et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre;	And if it's a large abscess and there are many wounds, you need to puncture each one so that they press against each other;
et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor;	And if you have incised in the abscess and sewed it internally, you should fill it with old cotton or linen rags without moisture and bind it up to the first joint;
puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then proceed with the bone and treat with ointment until it is sound.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if blood leakage occurs in your operation, then apply cold and ease, and moist with cloths, and place it in the operated area repeatedly.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut;	And if the bleeding persists, you should apply treatment and care, and use the powders that I have mentioned in this book; if it's or ten of a feather, and the patient is suffering greatly from bleeding, then it would be good to place moistened cloths and bandages on them using wine and heated oil.
et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit;	And if it's in this state, and the limbs are fatty, you should immerse them in wet cloths soaked in water and oil, or in wine and cold oil, until three days have passed, as we said.
et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then remove and clean the abscess, following the proper procedures, until it is healed.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes:	And one should know universally about treating abscesses:
or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	Or I have told you how to proceed before treating abscesses, and here is the chapter.
des soros	regarding the surgical treatment
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	For some small ulcers come from the head, and are in our style as they are on cloths, like a blemish on a rabbit's hide, and there are many that resemble.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz;	There are some that are fatty and others where moisture is also like peas;
et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	And for those that are hard and stony to the knife, there is no doubt that they are arteries and do not oppose.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the actions of cutting are that you should try with all the instrument which is called "entromissor", from whose form comes this afterward, what it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, you make the incision over its length.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien;	And when moisture is expelled, one must not leave anything behind the skin containing that moisture, for it immediately returns when nothing is left.
puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens;	then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it's available;
se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	if not that, then in water and salt, and apply it to the wound, leaving it until the next day;
et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	and this will help someone who is affected by night demons.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit;	And continue with the cotton, just as before, on the second day and the third, until you can tell clearly that it doesn't stay affected by night.
puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the wound with an ointment suitable for it, until it heals properly.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc;	And if an abscess holds tightly within him, you should remove it according to this form, long;
et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist;	and empty out your ashes, and scorch all around, and apply all your healing strength to the area where it is located;
et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	and if the artery goes against you, then do what I have told you to do afterward.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And similarly, deal with the abscess if it's due to stones, and when cutting and treating, do as I have instructed.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And when it comes to cutting on stone-caused abscesses and dampness, the operation is lighter because there's less blood involved.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme;	And if in any of these abscesses or head where there is no moisture, and for these old-style abscesses that I mentioned or the head of an elderly woman;
et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier;	and found the abscess to be as hard as a dense stone, rough and white, and could not break it;
et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	and if any were cut open, we would have made the wound as well as from a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe;	For other abscesses coming near the head, if they come near the heads of children and the roots of the ears, the incision should be made for all days at the earliest possible time, so that the blood may exit.
et les cure si com il covient.	and the treatment as it should be done.
des scrophules	Of scrofula
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times such abscesses occur at the neck, and in the throat, and near the jaws, and never come to any other part or on a body, they are round, and are bound together.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit;	And each sore is properly within its socket, like the node and the abscess near the head, as we have said;
et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And the appearances of these sores are many.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some that contain moisture, and there are others that don't want to comply with health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde;	In such cases where you see good positioning on the neck, and appears similar to the color of the chest, it is mute from both sides and not mixed under the collarbone nor near the artery or in the channel, and is not deeply seated;
si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief;	If it is necessary that you handle it from above, and burn each part, and keep the two lips close to their original shape when necessary, just like we have explained with abscesses on the head;
et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	And do it slowly and carefully, be sure not to touch the nerve or vein, nor should there be too much bleeding or cutting, that your hands don't escape, and don't see too far ahead, so you don't treat more than what you should.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie;	And if you treat the vein or artery and it doesn't allow you to open, then apply vitriol or some powders that stop blood, and restrain the wound;
et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	And let it be until the abscesses are calmed and the wound becomes soft, then begin to rot it.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses;	And when the patient has recovered from their illness, return to your work, as long as you finish it;
puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	And if there remain any small scabs, if they scratch and clean them out.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement;	And if the root of the pimple is large, it is not suitable to pinch that pimple at its root, but tie a thick double thread around it and let it hang down without causing harm;
puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	Then use old cotton dipped in Egyptian ointment, then the treatment.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you cure all the scrophula, it is necessary that you join together the two lips of the wound, and suture now, because there is no excess to remain due to the size of the scrophula.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	It is necessary that you understand how to cut into it and drain the pus, and then sew up afterwards as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure;	As for those pimples that grow excessively, pierce where they appear until they break.
et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption;	And pierce them in the same way as previously described, by holding them, then he applies lint and similar things with the ointment and such, so that it corrupts what is already corrupted;
et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the wound is properly cleaned, then the application of ointment to nourish flesh until it heals.
de squinance	"De squinance" in this context refers to treatments or procedures related to diseases or deformities of the neck and head region. This could cover a variety of topics such as injuries, infections, tumors, dislocations, and other medical conditions affecting these areas. Without more context from the specific text you're referring to, it's difficult to provide an exact translation for each line in this term. However, generally speaking, "squinance" implies a focus on neck-related ailments or surgery.
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge;	The old ones told and spoke about the surgery of the throat;
mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	but I never saw anyone in our land perform it, and this is their written word.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee;	For those with strabismus, it is necessary that the incision of the throat known as "the epiglottis" be made;
et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	yet do not underestimate this, because all the veins and the lung of the disease are in those with abscesses either within the mouth or in the throat or between the two lungs.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the channel of the windpipe, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to prevent loss from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	Therefore, when we wish to cut the epiglottis, we should cut it through three or four small incisions across, between the two circles, or by the size of the incision in relation to its depth, not in the cartilage.
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	And these joints are amenable to the cutting of the epiglottis where there is no flesh, and the vessel extends deep within.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil;	And if their masters are fearful, it is necessary for them to stretch the throat skin all the way up to the jawbone, then cut through the skull until they reach the bone.
et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	Avoid the blood vessels, if you see no thing, and then cut at the neck, just as we have said.
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	And it is demonstrated by the cutting of the channel of the jawbone which forces the fluid to escape through the bone that has been broken, and through the loss of voice;
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	And leave the wound open for one piece.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige;	And when the time has passed since one begins to doubt strangulation, gather together the two lips of the wound at the skull, and sew them all smoothly without touching the cartilage;
puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then administer medicines which promote growth of flesh, as long as they heal.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasim insists that one should not stop this process until the throat is completely swollen and the patient is pronounced dead, and until all deficiencies are met.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	Therefore treat the epiglottis because the patient cannot eat or drink, and they breathe through the wound, so thus precautions should be taken against death;
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	And to command the elderly to leave the wound open until the disease's malady passes, and it has passed after three or four days. And then they commanded to stitch up the wound and clean it, while keeping it clean;
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	And I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	I witnessed that a maiden took a knife and stabbed it into her throat, severing some of the windpipe channels.
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	And I was called to treat her, and I found her as dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound and found the blood coming from it, indeed, she did not have a cut vein or artery leading there but the veins were flowing through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	I hurriedly treated the wound, and as long as it was healed I attended to its cure;
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	and waited until she could speak again when her voice was restored, and then returned to her duties;
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I swear by heaven that in the tailoring of the epiglottis, do not have it done.
de la grosse gorge	From the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	Hernias are called "neck hernias", and they are large abscesses in the color of a walnut, and they occur very often in women;
et est selonc II manieres:	and there are two ways:
naturez, et accidens;	naturally, and by accidents;
ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	or natural has no disease.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	And the accidents occur in two ways, of which one resembles fat within us, and the other way resembles an abscess that comes from our veins;
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	And there is fear, and it does not require making cuts elsewhere than in the small ones, and proof and examination are made to every intrusion:
se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	if you find it as thin as I am not fat, and cannot be placed in any vein, if you operate, just like one operates on a horse, and treat it with all its coat, if there is even a little bit;
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And search well throughout, and treat it as appropriate until it has been cured perfectly.
des nous	after nails
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	Many ways of treating us exist, so I will describe all the similar procedures;
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	And it's necessary that I explain all the differences between horses and dislocations.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture;	I state that dislocation is characterized by heat and fever until the ebullitions have passed and gangrene has occurred;
adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	Therefore, rest the fever and the heat.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	With the new there is no heat or fever or pain, and contains the yolk, which is its own sack and is according to the color of the body, and it begins also like a germ, and becomes large;
et sont selonc II semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	and follows two appearances, or greasy, or moist, and much of the color is as I have said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	When you begin the treatment for a new case, it is necessary that you first examine and inquire about all the tools which are called 'jointer', according to their shape or the chapter that follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	And the method of extracting abscesses from us is that you take or more moist than you find in the abscess, and turn your thumbs little by little, until you know that the instruments have reached the core, then according to the size of the abscess;
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	then extract the pus, and take care not to rupture it.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	If moisture flows continuously, whatever its nature may be, if it cuts as I have said of other abscesses;
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	And if after the incision no moisture comes out, know that it is fatty, then cut it diagonally and hold it with forceps, and gently scrape it from each side. Wear a coat where the thing lies to ensure its removal is successful;
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	And if you cannot remove it successfully, remove it piece by piece so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	For if nothing remains, it will repeatedly recur through many times;
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if a little remains and it doesn't bother you, fill the wound with some corrosive powders until it heals, then restrain the wound and apply things that soothe abscesses. Let other treatments continue until it is healed;
et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	And if it is large, cut two sides of the wound, and treat him who has an arrow wound.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc;	And if the vein is thinner than desired or any other reason prompts you to do so quickly and use half of the vitriol solution, let it sit for two days or three, as long as the wound heals, and take a blood bath.
puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	Then return to the copper what has been left due to the new.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres:	Here are the forms of the entrails that are mixed up, and they come in three ways:
grans et moien et petit;	large and medium and small;
et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres:	and if there are three twists which are called "albaret," and one that is called "breb," and they come in three ways:
grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	Large, medium, and small, to surround abscesses of sinus;
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	And they are also like needles from which one removes the roots, and made of citrine amber, or iron, or silver. They are more effective than yellow ones for surrounding the folds of sinus;
et sont de III manieres:	And there are three ways:
grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	Large, medium, and small, according to the size of the opening in the lesion.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci:	The forms of the scalpels resemble sheep shapes, as you see here:
grans, moiens, et petis;	Large, medium, and small;
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi;	and if scalpels that have two folds in three ways like this;
et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres;	And if to pentagrams who have three corners, and are also of three ways;
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres;	And if to pentagrams who have two corners, and pentagrams of only one corner, and they are of three ways;
et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	All these are necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	The head of these is made to be sharp, and there are some who do not cut as much as from one side, which we burn, because they do not reach the vein or nerve;
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	And these introducers have their handles placed in sleeves, so that the patient does not notice during the incision of abscesses;
et sont de III manieres:	And they are of three ways:
grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	large, small, and moderate, as you see;
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	And no one uses force except on a joint, like legs, arms, nipples, and bones, and in those like them.
et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	And no small instrument is ever used otherwise, resembling the limbs of birds, according to this form, where one clamps blood.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	And it is placed only once at the sound position of veins and arteries, and never following this large form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	No man's nipples ever swell when they begin to become corrupt, until they resemble a woman's nipples.
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	And they remain ugly and swollen, and if one wishes to treat them, it should be done according to this form along the line .b. up until .g.:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	Then strip the fat, and apply medicine to heal flesh, then sew together the two edges of the wound, and continue treatment until it heals.
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures;	And if it slides down below the belly button, and is squashed by its size especially like in women, if she makes two ribs above, through two apparent fissures;
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	Because one is holding the other at the end of one and the other, so that the larger line contains the smaller along this form, from this line .b. to this line .g.;
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then shave the skin that is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and apply what we have instructed about sewing and powders, and whatever is necessary for treatment, as long as it is safe;
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	And if it is not safe, or the incision has not been fully made, because the patient does not want to rest or due to bleeding, you should fill the wound with moist cotton in a corrosive ointment;
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	And let it grow until it feels the removing of the fat, then treat it until it becomes clean.
des apostemes des asselles	removal of abscesses from armpits
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	Abscesses that occur in the armpits are ways of hard scrofula or where there have been nodes, and if any contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those who contain moisture must be cut according to this form, from the line b. up until the line g:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the pus in the abscess is drained, fill the wound with old cotton and let it stay until the next day. Then remove all the cotton and continue applying ointment until healed.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscesses resemble scrophula sores, make incisions as we have said for cuts on scrophula sores, and if the wound is filled with pus, apply a cautery as we have said earlier.
de la routure de l’artere	regarding the rupture of an artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	When the artery is cut, and the skin is sewn where it was, there are often abscesses, and similarly, it happens with drained veins and abscesses;
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	and if one knows this thus when it's about the artery, the abscesses are long and perfectly round;
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement;	and when you feel it with your hands, if you sense the constriction;
et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	and when it's about the vein, there appears a clear outline;
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	And it's madness to cope with this abscess, and similarly when it is around the glands and muscles and under the collarbone and in other parts of the body, and it's very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	It follows that one should avoid the iron treatment, and likewise for the head patient, and in the case of someone inflamed by artery within the skin for a long time;
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	Then proceed with the amputation up to the inches, and beautifully separate the artery from the tissues, until it is uncovered;
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples;	Then insert a needle at this spot, and pierce until it reaches the other side of the body, and bind the artery with a double thread for two lengths, as I taught you in the extraction of the two arteries that are located in the temples;
puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	Then puncture the area between the two threads with an introducer until blood flows freely and release the abscess;
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	Then carry out the treatment that the iron requires, until the thread is removed;
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then treat with the healing ointment accompanying this, as long as it is salable;
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	And if the abscess is due to the size of the vein, it's necessary for you to dip your finger that can touch the contents of the abscess into all the skin, then insert the needle through the hand you hold, and make a puncture, and have two threads, so you pull them from the opposite side;
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil;	Then tie the abscess, as I have told you, or use one part of the thread for both shoulders;
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus;	And if you doubt the thread will hold, then insert another needle with all four threads across the entire abscess at the first needle's incision, and tie the threads in four places;
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	Cut off the abscess until any excess comes out, then remove the excess carefully and leave the one that sticks.
puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then place on it a moist cloth in wine and oil, then apply treatments and applications until the wound is healed.
des apostemes des ners	from the pus of the nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Similarly, just like pus flows in the artery and vein, pus enters the nerves when they are cut, or by too much labor, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	This happens more often with shoulders and hips and in all places where joints are present, and this is the condition of abscesses, and its color resembles that of flesh, and it shows in various positions without pain.
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	And when it's squeezed, the patient feels pain in the affected area, and it doesn't quite reach down through the entire body, but only locally.
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer:	Move carefully in all directions, neither forward nor backward, neither to the side nor above. That which is within joints should not be treated with iron:
par aventure i vanroit contraction;	By chance it would move towards contraction;
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And that which is the head or forehead makes the skin shiny.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	If the abscesses are small, and you have some forceps, grasp it at its base;
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is large, suspend it above the knee and cut off some flesh. Then sew up the wound and treat it until it heals properly.
des grosses boces pendans	Of large boils hanging
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros;	It often occurs in the belly and nowhere else. It's a disease that is called "fungus" by its appearance, and it has delicate roots, and the heads are large;
et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	And there are both small ones and larger ones;
et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	And I saw two homes that had bellies which looked more like fungi than anything else, and there was no difference between them. They were white, had a small root, were slightly split, and were constantly moistened by moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	I weighed them and found in one, eighteen ounces, and in the other six. The workpieces after cutting show that if you look at whether the skin is wet or not, and the color of the artery appears white and moist with a subtle root;
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	If you hold them up to the fat part, and may it be in your presence the fire cautery.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	For when the surgeon often encounters large bleeding incidents, and if it doesn't stop with you, then quickly with the cautery;
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors;	And if you see that the skin is frightened and fearful of the incision from the iron, then take a well-made piece of thread, and bind the artery as we have said, and let it be for two days;
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail;	And then restrain it, do not stop holding back the thread of hemp until you feel the knot, and each time without causing strain.
et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne;	And if the roots are large, if they start to thicken in the process of cooking due to heat, but you can't cook them properly for the stomach, but you should only cook half of it well, then cauterize so that it doesn't rot;
puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	Then clean the wound, and make sure you don't burn off the tissue that is of a reddish color and has little sensation and is sensitive to touch.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For this is an abscess, and I will come to the treatment of the sore afterwards.
quant li boude ist fuer	When the buttock burns, it means
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	If the appearance of pus comes from a cauterized wound or cut near the stomach and there are some boils, just like in other cuts, where blood drains from veins or arteries according to what is happening ahead, or due to windiness;
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	And if it's due to the rupture of the spermatic canal and through the exit of the bladder, the appearance of the abscess seems like the color of the flesh, and is a light thing without pain, and opens from various exits.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is due to the issue from the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when one presses on its fingers if it returns and then comes back again, and by chance if it is squeezed and expands much at the entrance of the bath and through strong labor.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie;	And if it's due to moisture, it is a light thing, and opens well when you press it with your hand, without constraining.
et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	And if it's due to blood, it opens through these signs: the abscesses are large and hard, and they occur according to a quantity.
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it's due to wind, it causes swelling at the navel, and the organs are such that you should observe whether their appearance is due to the blood of an artery, or a vein, or wind.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	It is necessary that you leave the treatment.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear when it comes to abscesses, as I have explained in the chapter on abscesses, concerning arteries and veins.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	And if its appearance is due to an intestine or the bladder, it's necessary that you instruct the patient to bleed their urine, and have it spread all straight outwards, then strike inside throughout the abdomen;
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	Then instruct them to heal carefully in your hands, then go within the area you have indicated over the entire surface of the wound, then let half of the pus be above the whole large hook.
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	Then fasten it in with a strong thread or a firm cord of strong silk, and let the binding be securely done.
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	Then lay the half of the pus spread out over the binding, and set your finger on it, then hold the intestine.
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	If you find that it is caught by the binding, remove it and set the intestine at the back of the belly;
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	And if you find that it is attached to the bone, take it at the hook and cut off the excess.
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	And if it opposes the artery or the vein, if you insert them deeply inside, then return to your task and take two needles, and I put two lengths of thread, and place the two needles inside where you pierced when you made holes.
puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	Then hold the abscess with four fingers above the needles, and if you see it, remove the needles, and leave the wound until it heals, and dispose of the dead flesh by itself.
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	When it becomes subtle and healed, then treat as appropriate, and cut the abscess as we have said.
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And remove the blood or moisture that you find, then treat and heal the wound as appropriate, and stitch the wound.
dou chancre	and the sore
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer;	We have spoken about the signs of the ulcer and how one should open it through medicine, and how to avoid the iron treatment.
et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement;	Let's talk about the ulcer infecting the breast, and great caution in its treatment. It was said by the ancients that when ulcers are found on or near certain areas like breasts where they can be scratched off, such as ulcers found under nipples and in cooked foods, one should remove them entirely at the beginning of their appearance;
et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner;	And when it is large and old, one should not attempt to touch it, because I have never known any healing from such ulcers;
ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	No one has ever been healed of them in my presence.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire;	And regarding cuts, when it's possible to remove them like we have said, this means you should cleanse the patient of black pus;
puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige;	If it's clear to the surgeon that there is fullness, then have the patient lie down well so he can do his work;
puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier;	Then cut out your boil or pustule, and shave all around it, and extract the bone from all sides without leaving anything;
et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	And let the blood flow freely, and press well on the wound with your hand or on nothing, and if it starts to bleed in an opposing direction from the arterial or venous incision, then apply heat until the wound becomes blackened;
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then continue other treatments as long as it heals.
de ydropisie	Of cautery with fire, command the patient to let the hair grow long and even; and if they prick at their root, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer:	We have spoken about the symptoms of typhoid, and how an assembly of water is formed, and the signs of each symptom, and the treatment done with medicines, and that which is treated with iron:
si est eclites soulement;	If they are merely stumps;
et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances:	and should iron be applied in these two similar cases:
c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose;	This means, it's about peritonitis and sepsis, because it's fatal;
donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses;	Therefore, when treating the appearance of typhoid which is called "stumps" by medicine, and if the cure doesn't work, then look to see if the patient's condition is weak, or if they have another illness besides typhoid, like stomach water issues and other similar conditions;
si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance;	If no iron is used, because there's doubt;
et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	And if you see the patient's condition is very greenish and they only have typhoid without any other illness, and they're neither too young nor too old, then proceed like this:
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	Let the patient lie straight on your hands, and have the ministers press the belly at the lowest part of the back with hot water, then take the thorny spatula in this form:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And let there be two parts of this being divided.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	A needle, and yet it should not be so deep that it could reach to the intestine when one pierces until there, and one cannot cauterize it;
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines:	Then look if the edema is spreading towards the intestines:
si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil;	If it is necessary, you should cut in that place three inches to the right above the elbow;
et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois;	And if the edema is due to liver disease, then make your incision on the left side of the elbow three inches;
et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	And if it's due to the kidneys, then on the right side, and it is not allowed for the patient to lie on the incision so that excesses do not flow towards that weak one;
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor;	Then pierce all the skin with the tool, and push it through, then lift your hand completely between the skin and the flesh as you would when burning to the size of an指甲 or a little more.
puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	Then pierce the flesh until the pus reaches up to the point of eight, and this is the depth of water, then pull the thread outwards, and it removes this tool which I have described here.
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus;	And it resembles a delicate silver chain, and is like gold or brass in weight, and it's in the area below the small part.
et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus;	and it measures three parts on one side;
et II d’autre part, et I d’autre;	and two on the other side, and one more on that side;
et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	And it is the shoulder cut like a feather, and this is the shape of the incision that the writer cuts the feather in:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument;	At the top is the artery, so that when the instruments come to the water, now descending on the instrument;
vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	Empty then half or a third of it, for if you empty more than it should in that hour, by chance the patient might die from the release of their spirit to the weapon, or they would faint, or they approach death;
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz;	but empty according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the indications of virtue in the patient signify, and their pulse;
puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere;	then pull the instrument and hold back the water, and she is now held due to the spell that numbs the point above the heart, as I have spoken, puncture according to this manner;
puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	Then start using the tool again on another day, if you see that the patient is enduring this, and use a little amount of water.
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	Do this every day, and avoid overusing it as long as there is no remaining sensation but just a little bit of water.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre;	And if you doubt about the patient and leave a lot of water, if the body burns during burial or sand, or from much sweat or baths and under sunlight, and if it gets stained from drinking.
et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	And continue with the treatment of drying medicines until it is done, and apply cautery on the stomach and liver after removing water, as I have explained before.
de l’estopement de la verge	On the operation to close the penis
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	No child is born without defects in the penis, or if the defects are small, or if it does not remain in its place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If it suits to pierce him right away until all the pus is released very subtly according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet;	Then place or bury a thin willow stick, tie it and keep it for three to four days or until he wants to urinate. If so, remove the stick, allow urination, and then reapply.
et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	And by chance it might not happen, for the urine which comes out does not let him close.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	These are the parts that can move because of their nature, if they have a medicine like the fumigation of oak, as we said, if it expands.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut;	Those who do not have a foreskin in their body are blind, for none are born with a foreskin at the head of their penis, so they cannot urinate before lifting their penis up;
et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	And they cannot procreate because the matter cannot reach the tip, and it is a serious illness.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient;	The method of the operation is such that the patient lies on their back, and they are prepared with the head of their penis and the foreskin also as large as a feather, so that the foreskin lies in the middle, just as it should;
et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And protect against the many times bleeding that occurs, and if it happens, have someone who can stop the bleeding do so, and treat the wound until it heals.
des pustules de la verge	The eruptions of the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide;	Many times this happens within the penis, and there is an appearance of ugly flesh;
et en i a malignes et non malignes;	and some are恶性和无害的;
si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien;	it is necessary that you examine them closely and carefully remove all of them, then apply Egyptian cotton as an ointment.
puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	then perform the ointment cure with diafinicon until it is pure.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the bath is harmful, causing pus and discharge, then you should apply the cautery to it.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier;	When you have removed it, and if the pus is inside the penis and partly within the skin and partly outside, it is necessary that you remove the pus which is inside first.
et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	and when it has healed, then perform the cure for what was outside.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion;	For when you cure them together, there is no assurance that the head of the penis will not be punctured, and blackness and decay come to his penis and anus;
si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is necessary to deal with all that which is black and corrupted, then bind to the plaster of honey and flour made from walnut tree bark and times, then treat other treatments until he is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And when blood drainage occurs, if you apply the lunar cautery according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble:	The cauteries assist in setting up these arrangements:
c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption;	It means, at the release of blood, and during decay;
et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi;	And if the member is decayed and removed, it is necessary that you insert a gourd of garlic into the member, and let the patient urinate among them;
et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	And when the hairs meet at the tip of the member which has been found in uncircumcised people, or it happens due to injury or abscess, then it is necessary that you burn them with the hair removal tool until the knots are untied, and free the head from all sides of the member;
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil;	And if this is something that needs to be decided by you, then it's necessary for you to burn with the instrument of cautery near the root of the penis and the skin.
puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	Then place it evenly between two boards, and use a fine linen towel dipped in cold water that does not soak the head.
de la circoncision	Regarding circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies;	Circumcision is not like other injuries or dislocations;
toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Still, whenever we perform this task of our own will, and particularly on infants, it is necessary for us to do the best work, and the lightest one in terms of health outcomes.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the old ones didn't mention circumcision for their children, as they didn't use it in their law, and all we have about it is what we've acquired through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule;	For I want most of the masters and surgeons who performed circumcision in their own lands, and during times of strength, on all newborns;
si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	If it is the knee because there are two ligaments, and by chance if one of these is above and remains under that one.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre;	So the person receives the injury of having two pains, and the pain is doubled, and at the dislocation where it is not fully certain the tip of the limb.
et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	And in the dislocation of the nail by chance escapes the tool and runs the operation, and many times grow like they do not need dislocation, and I have seen this happen.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	From the shaving done during that time throughout the length of the thread I have found the goodness of experience, for the strength cuts just as well above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens;	For when you squeeze your hand, if cut equally in one line it will press all sides;
mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir;	but make sure the thread is well sewn inside the skin;
et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	and make it so that the way of the first operation is that you make the child think, if they hear, that you are only tying the thread inside the penis just like that, and then have them move in all the ways you can.
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens;	Then make them stand between your hands straight, and support the strength between your hands or off your feet that the child does not see them, nor any of the tools;
puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens;	Then place your hand on the penis and blow or clean, and guide it upwards until the head of the penis is inside;
puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien;	Then clean it well of the dirt that has accumulated, then tie its natural curve with a doubled thread, and tie it between one stitch and another;
et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	And hold it at two inches by the second row on the sack and at the navel line, and insert between the two threads, then lift the dirt quickly and pull the head of the penis;
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres;	Then let the blood drip slowly and steadily because this is the moisture;
et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And apply powder and on top of the powder I place a bandage moistened with a beaten egg yolk cooked in pink water, mixed with oil redolent fresh and good, and leave it for another day, and treat it with other treatments until it heals.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste:	The shaping of powers in the world is like this:
li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	Let the two shoulders be held and cut, and let the shoulders also be as large as the elbows equally:
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision;	The error in the world's creation lies when the intestines escape at the incision;
donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme;	Therefore, it is necessary for you to extend up to your finger-tip, so that the intestines can be released;
et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	And treat them equally, and if you cannot hold it by your fingernail, then use tweezers, and then treat it.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement;	And if they penetrate for three days, and the one who is on the verge swells up, you should let it be until the abscesses are soothed, and gently scrape lightly.
si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	If you can move it like that, and keep the part of the penis untouched, this will not harm it at all.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point;	Therefore, cure the wound from sudden injuries with powder, as we have said or treated with powders. And if you cut too roughly and it goes beyond, this will not harm;
cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Cure him accordingly, as we have said, while he remains sound.
dou retenement de l’urine	holding back of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	Retention of urine can be due to a stone obstruction, or frozen blood, or bowel blockage, or internal bleeding, or other such conditions we have discussed in the section;
et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz;	And if their urine is not being relieved, and you see that it is being retained due to a stone or blockage in the bladder's neck, then it would be proper for the patient to squat with their knees raised;
et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet;	And have them place their feet on the back, and extend their belly from the area above the back, and restrain the patient so they can barely stand.
et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	And then the necks of the bladder are constrained towards the expression of the stone above, so that urine is relieved.
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme:	And if it does not come out as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you should administer extraction with all the instrument which is called "syringe", of which here is its form:
et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil;	And let it be of fine silver, barely a hair's breadth, like the feathers of a bird;
et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	Let it be the length of a palm and a half, and let it be fine at the end.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue;	And the way of the passage of urine is such that you take a double thread, and tie it at the end of some wool or cotton, and insert the tip of the needle inside the syringe;
et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	And cut off the excess of the wool and insert it up to the tip of the needle, then smear the needle with oil or butter and beaten egg yolk, and have the patient sit down, and wet the bladder and the penis with oily olive oil and tepid water.
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude;	Then gently insert the syringe into the penis, until it reaches the root of the penis, then bend the penis upwards towards the bladder.
puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors;	Then push the syringe until it reaches just before the bladder, and feel the patient urinate until they are empty, and this is not done according to this order because for him who guides her to where she was twisted;
puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	Then stretch the thread all along with a gentle tug, and let the urine follow the thread, then pull it out gently, and ensure proper urine flow.
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And continue using the syringe until the bladder is emptied, and ensure that the patient urinates properly.
des maladies de la vessie	About diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When burns or blood come to the bladder, or putrefaction is assembled there, and you see waters and medicines distilling, if make everything for the tool called 'clepsis' (an ancient water measure), and its form is:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus:	It's sealed, and if there are three parts:
II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois;	On one side, and on the other, as you see;
et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	And if you are among those for whom medical care is as such that it makes the member feel well without addition, so long as there's no moisture and expulsion when necessary;
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens;	And when you see the medicine being discharged into the bladder, place the patient in moisture, and apply to the one who is in charge;
si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens;	If you remove the moisture from the penis, then firmly set the one in charge again.
si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	And if moisture enters him now and reaches the bladder, then the patient will feel it;
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie:	This is the form of subtle colic in which one treats the bladder with colic.
si est ci:	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut;	And it is made of silver or iron, and the shoulder blade rises higher;
et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet;	and reaches up to the spine or the neck of the shoulder blade;
puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu;	Then take a lamb bladder and fill it with moist heat that you see in the process of preparing the bladder, then tie it between the two shoulders using a good pair of twine, and heat one end of this moist heat on fire;
puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	Then conduct the bladder through the catheter into the vagina, then hold your hand on the bladder until all the moist heat has been applied, as long as the patient feels that this moist heat has reached the bladder;
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor;	And if you don't have a bladder, take a piece of parchment and make a circle, then pierce it roundly through;
puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument;	Then bind a strong thread in these bends, then form the circle as you would a hoop, and put inside what you see of dirt, moisture and water, and tie it to the tool;
et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And do it like you did with the bladder, pressing with your hand until moisture accumulates in the bladder.
de la piere	Of the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines;	We have discussed methods of stone extraction and combined treatments;
et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille;	And we have explained the differences between stones that obstruct the flow of urine and all the symptoms, and when one should open for size;
et en la vessie, et en la verge;	And in the bladder, and in the penis;
et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	And I will explain it clearly and briefly to you.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit;	I say that stones that are obstructed in the bladder occur more often in children, and this is a sign that the fever jumps from the bladder similar to fever by its subtlety;
et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist;	And when you open the wound, and scrape the patient's genitals, and do this many times, and then reassemble.
et a mout de ces saut li fondemens;	and at the mouth of these jumps there is support;
et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece;	and there is easy healing of children until they are four years old, and there is much complaint among the elderly, and it is midway, for those who are between childhood and old age;
et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	and healing is easier for those with larger stones than for those with smaller ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to treatment, it is necessary first to purify the patient by fasting, in order to drain out all the bile which is within the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it clogs up one way or another when seeking the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut;	Then take hold of the patient by their testicles and lift them up, moving downwards so that the stone descends to the front of the bladder, and does not protrude from anywhere above.
puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval;	then have the patient sit between your hands with their arms extended outward, so that the bladder is fully descending downwards.
puis la quier et la touche dedens;	Then touch and probe inside;
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	If you feel the stone in space, if you hurry now, cut into the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis;	And if it doesn't feel like it's at all under the toucher, moisten your index finger of your left hand, if the patient is young, or your middle finger, if the patient is old.
et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie;	And dig into its foundation, probe the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, pull it at the neck of the bladder.
puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	Then press on your finger, and dig outward from where you see to cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille;	And instruct the surgeon to press the bladder with their hand, and command them to extend their arms up with their right hand, and with their left hand hold the skin near the penis in the area where one would make a cut.
puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	Then I remove the swollen spleen, whose form is this:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre;	And they make in that which is between the kidneys and the foundation, not in the middle but at the edge of the left kidney's area.
et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	And let it be straight on the stone, and may your tool touch or be at the foundation, and make its size through such that it's wide outside and narrow inside, according to the size of the stone, not too large.
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail;	By chance if your tool that is at the foundation jumps senseless during work;
et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges:	And know that there's stone or it has edges and margins:
si est griés a issir;	If it gets stuck to come out;
et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	And if it's part that is under, resembles a gallbladder, and round, whose output is light.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant;	In the place where there are angles and margins, make the opening larger;
et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe;	and if it doesn't jump out, you should use forceps that are shaped like a file at the end, for to apply pressure on the stone so that it does not escape;
ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief;	or you press against it with the tip of the subtle curved instrument at its base;
et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	and if you can't use it like that, make it slightly wider but not too much thick, and if the stone is hard, apply it with vitriol;
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	and if there are more than one stone, first take the larger one from the neck of the bladder, then move upwards, then use force, and the smaller ones after if there are more.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if she is very large, then it suits to sever, and create a larger wound.
Car II choses avienent au malaide:	For two things happen to the patient:
ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder;	or he dies, or his urine starts coming out immediately when his legs can't be sewn together;
mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	but strive to treat it or use forceps until you remove it piece by piece;
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut;	and when you have completed your work, if you treat the wound with incense and aloes and dragon's blood, compress it, apply it topically, or place a wet cloth on it soaked in oil and wine, or oil and cold water and rose water, to soothe the inflamed area;
puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	then straighten the patient's back and do not release the ligament until three days have passed.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you untie it, wash the area well with oil and water, then apply the dyafinicon ointment and basilico ointment until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine:	And if abscesses come into the wound and cause corrosion, and blood clots in the bladder, and thus retain his urine, which is known to occur like this without jumping with urine:
boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	Therefore, you must clean the wound, and remove that blood, for if it remains, it will corrode the bladder, and it will rot.
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then clean the wound from water and slime and dirt, and assist with all methods you know, until it is healed;
et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	and ensure that every time you treat him, you tie the two legs together, and apply medicine to the wound.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir;	And if the stone is small, and it's located where the penis leads out, stuck in there, so that the urine cannot come out;
si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	if you treat him as I have described, cut him many times, and forgive the loss of length due to this treatment.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I already have this experience like this.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take one iron twig according to this form, and have it with three points stuck into one stake:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie;	then take thread and tie it around the penis near the stone, so that it does not come back into the bladder;
puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere;	Then bend the twig gently on the penis until it reaches the stone;
et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part;	and twist the twig in your hand at the stone little by little, until you can pierce the stone from elsewhere;
si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	if urine starts to come out, then press your hand on the one that is stuck from the stone which is inside the penis.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	If it breaks soon, and jump with urine, and beware of the patient;
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie;	And if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, tie a string under the stone and another above, then place the penis between the two strings in the area of the stone, then pull hard, and remove the string, and cleanse the congealed blood in the wound;
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And treat until it becomes healthy.
de la piere des femmes	From the stone of women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses:	Sometimes stones get stuck in women, and if it happens once, the treatment is strict, and it is forbidden for three reasons:
l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge;	One reason is perhaps that the woman is a virgin;
et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	And the second reason is that one cannot find women who know how to hide themselves even when they are chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains;	And the third way is that perhaps one cannot find women who know this skill of hands;
et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil;	And the fourth way is that the stone in a woman might be larger than a man's stone, so it requires a deeper cut, and there is great fear about this. And if necessity demands this, you must find an experienced one and with hands, do it where they are found; and if you don't find such a person, you should not hesitate to consult even the subtlest of mirrors.
et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	And there is a small incision in the woman's life, or a woman who knows some part of the art, and she is commanded to do what you command about stone interrogation;
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge:	and see very well if that woman is a virgin:
adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere;	then she must place her effort or foundation and seek the stone;
et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	and if she finds it, she compels her with all her might and seeks the stone, and I advise her to apply all her effort or strength in the area of the body, and presses and urges her left hand against the bladder formation.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse;	If she finds it, she must move it vigorously from the entry of the bladder until underneath, as long as she reaches the root of the thigh;
puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie;	Then cut into the stone at the root of the thigh where it meets the middle of the bone, there where the bones are joined, and feel the bone in that part.
et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	and do not move his hands above the stone or nearby; cut him to the first small size.
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont:	Then extend the knife in the cut, if you feel the bone increase the wound as much as the bone can come out forcefully, and know that many types of stones are:
c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	This is what you should know: there are small and large ones, hard and soft, long and round, and those with bends.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	If you understand the symptoms to know the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	And if he doesn't faint, then put some vitriol powder on him and keep it for an hour until the sweat is completely gone;
puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	Then return to your work, as long as the stone is strong, and have at hand the instruments I told you about in the extraction of the stone for yourself to help with your task;
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide;	And if it doesn't hurt you and the artery is severed, if you put the powder on the wound and apply pressure with bandages and bindings, do not repeat this action. Leave the stone alone and don't try to remove it, in case it might kill the patient;
puis cure la plaie.	Then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of blood has calmed down and the limbs have returned to normal, then return to your work, while the stone is still hard.
de hernie carnouse	of fatty hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef;	A watery ointment is nothing else but a collection of moisture or white fat, which resides in the belly of the animal that contains eggs;
et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef;	And it is called "fat," and under no circumstances is it properly in the egg's membrane, if one believes that it might be another egg;
et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit;	And this is the skin of the neck between the white flesh, as we have said;
et ceu n’avient se poc non.	And there should not be any lack thereof.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the formation of this mucus is due to weakness that affects the kidneys, and spreads this substance.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors:	And whenever there is percussion on the kidneys, and this moisture has many hues:
ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	or it becomes a declining yellow color, or without redness, or black, or aqueous white, and this happens more often;
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	and these are the signs to recognize this assembly; because if it is white flesh as we have said, then it indicates pus that has reached its limit, and lasts as long as an egg's figure, and does not open the kidneys, for it contains moisture throughout.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	And if there is moisture in the actual tissue, then the pus includes part of an egg, and because of this, one thinks it's another egg;
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien;	And if moisture is between the skin of the elbows and the white flesh underneath, you will feel it well;
donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	So, when you see to know the nature of the moisture, if you test thoroughly throughout the recessive square area, from which its form was previously.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	So according to what comes after the introduction, judge about what is inside it.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors;	And when we cure it with iron, it is necessary that the patient be treated according to our ability and their body's capacity;
puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	Then place it on its back, on something slightly elevated, and put a layer of blankets underneath it;
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions;	Then sit on its left side, and instruct the minister to sit on the right, spreading the leg between one of the two elbows near the elbows;
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	Then take the spit rod, and place the skin of the elbows among it along its entire length until behind the wrist, and make a straight cut throughout the skin of the elbows up to the white flesh, and gently scrape off slightly according to our ability;
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont;	Then pierce the eye fully with a sharp needle, and extract all the water, then put your clips on, and place the eye upper.
et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement;	and do not touch the genital area, but only the eye.
cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	remove it all or in parts carefully from beneath him, for if you do not remove it carefully, it will cause more injury.
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac;	and if the egg jumps to your work, then reset it in its place when you have finished with the eye.
puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then join the two parts of the genital area with one stitch, then treat it like other wounds until it heals.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc;	And if you find the egg corrupted by another disease, then it is necessary that you tie the veins that are suspensory, in case of doubt about blood loss;
puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	Then cut up to the entire suspension, and remove the egg, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices;	And if the wood is joined into two parts together, know that these are two branches;
si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	If you handle the other part in the same way as you did the first equally, then let out any blood, and apply wet wool saturated with rose oil to the wound;
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	Then place another piece of wet wool soaked in wine and oil over the two genitals, cover it with folded cloths, and fasten it up along the entire strip that follows this form:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil;	Then take two cloths and fold them using torn wool according to this appearance, so that they are joined together by sewing in the neck of the breeches. One part of the shoulder hangs down to the bottom up to the back, and the other at the area below the arm;
et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	And the other involves both shoulders at two angles, and all the assembly is confined within the loop of the pincers;
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	And when treated with this cautery ramie in the size of a iron tool, and you take the small surgical cautery, and stretch the skin around the muscles, and heat it as we have explained, so that white fluid from the water is revealed;
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Take the cautery according to this form, and pierce the whitish fluid like veins, and use it to cauterize with this small, hot tool:
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout;	And stretch it in all the ways you can, as long as you have heated it fully;
et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef;	And make sure that the fire does not touch the egg;
et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve;	And know that this work is more healing;
et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	and protect against the spilling of blood, and be cautious of the operations that involve cutting;
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And if anything opposes you or involves pus, bleeding, or other issues, treat what opposes you according to what was previously explained.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit;	And if the patient is afraid and cannot wait for this operation due to its horror, then perform a puncture as I told you, and when you are well certain by the explanations we have given that the watery part is there, make the patient lie down on the elevated seat;
pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors;	Pierce through to the part below where all pus is spread outwards, and make the puncture along the length of the body;
et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	Let them be wide at their ends, so that all the sharp points can fit;
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	Then place cotton on the joint, and tie it, allowing for the removal of the sharp point through the cut. Then treat until the wound heals;
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant;	And if the white cloth doesn't allow the point to escape from the wound's opening, it is necessary that you insert a feather or an instrument used to extract points from dropsy patients. The form of this procedure was previously described;
et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And expand the wound until you see that the point returns, and it is assembled after six months or a bit more. And when it's assembled as before, then the disease will pass during those days.
de l’aposteme des coions	regarding the discharge of testicles
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	Understand that in this limb part there is fear of more positions, which is why I believe it's better to leave as is;
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	And I will tell you about the work and the characteristics of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions;	So I say that many abscesses come from or around thorns, and likewise on animals;
et c’est par mout de cas.	and it's due to various reasons.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	This means that it is known through excess of sour matter and fever, which spreads on animals, or from impact;
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors;	And the appearance of the abscess depends on the color of the thorns;
et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	and you won't find any pain, it is an abscess with discomfort;
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	and by chance it is an abscess with sharp and hard pain, and of a reddish color, and never from the root of an artery, or inflamed vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	When it's due to lack of blood flow, it can be identified by the presence of an abscess; when you press it with your fingers;
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	and it is not right for you to touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	That which is caused by swelling of the vein can be recognized by its appearance at the point where it is palpated with fingers; one can properly measure this resemblance and others as well.
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	And if you grasp the tip of the cord, then it is at the navel, and the umbilical cord hangs down below, and the white thread runs through it; release the suspension from all sides around the egg.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	If the egg is already attached with these cords, then you should pull the egg and it.
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	And if it is at the stomach or within the vessels, it is necessary that you release all that tension, and round off the wound.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birthplace of the child is behind or in front, then you should remove the entire heart and take out the egg as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your tasks are completed, if you apply the wounded area with wet wool in oil rose and wine, then continue other treatments until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	regarding the discharge of testicles
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	This is an abscess wrapped in a wrapping resembling a clasp, with the softening of glands, and the patient feels severe pain as it grows;
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	And the treatment for this disease is as well explained here just like the one before, yet still we will tell you about it, according to what the old did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	It is necessary that you have the patient sit on an elevated seat, then pull them upwards with the support of the lower ribs using your hands, at all the vessels close to the penis, and guide their masters, and stretch them into shape;
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	Then cut the artery trenching broadly across the veins until they are revealed, and then sear from each side, as we have said in the extraction of arteries which are in temples;
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	Then insert a needle where there is thread, and tie it at the original spot where the thread came from, and tie it right away to the other end.
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	Then cut straight through in the middle, according to the length of the body, and drain out the corrupted fluids;
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	Then treat the wound as with others or by binding it up, so that no veins bleed through either of the sides;
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	for nothing ill comes from this, and if all the veins come together, it is necessary to remove the sides for all the veins;
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	If the eyes do not retain their sight due to cutting of the veins, they dry out and cannot help themselves.
de la routure dou syfac	from the rupture of the uterus
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	The occurrences of this branch are through the section that comes to obstruction or rupture, or extension on the belly in the abdominal area, because the intestines descend from that opening towards one of the kidneys;
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes:	And this opening is where the obstruction or rupture occurs, or from the extension of it, and come these two ways of origin of the cause:
ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	or due to percussion, or jumping, or grunting, or lifting of the rib cage, and by similar actions;
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	and when it is due to the extension of obstruction, if it occurs little by little, over a long period, and does not come suddenly;
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	And the abscesses are even until around their front edge, because the syphilitic presses on the intestine.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the symptoms are when it's about internal bleeding, she brings on a sudden sharp pain at the beginning, and various abscesses appear, near the skin, and this is due to the discharge of the intestine and the body outside the site of bleeding.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And the glands often descend with the intestine, and are retained within, causing great suffering to the patient when pressed, even if they're close by.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these iron treatments for fear, it's necessary to avoid them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	And the method of treatment is that you instruct the patient to have the hand of the diseased part rub inside the wound on the intestine, if it can enter;
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	then sew around its neck. With your hands, lift the thighs;
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	then extend the back above, and remove all the skin of the buttocks to the length;
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	then cut through the belly's layers with uncinate cuts according to what you need to open the wound, and do it such that they can easily come out.
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	then shave off the syphilis that is under the skin of the buttocks until all the white part of the syphilis is exposed from all sides.
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac;	Then bend your index finger towards the head that heats the egg, in the one located between the white yolk which is under the skin of the egg, and between the second yolk, and start from the one behind the egg, between the second yolk.
et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	Then move the right hand inside the abdomen region, and place the white yolk at your left palm in top position, and gently lift the egg towards the waist area with all of the yolks.
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	And instruct the surgeon to extend the egg upwards, and untie the one that is behind the ligament;
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	And with your fingers check if there is any part of the intestine or hard white yolk wrapped around it, and if you find nothing, pull it out from the abdomen area;
puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions;	Then take a needle or where there is a thick thread made of many threads, and place the thong at the back part down to the syphuncle, which comes after the skin of the groins;
aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz;	After that, cut the hairs that appear from the threads, until there are four threads;
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars;	Then join them one on top of the other in a cross shape, and tie the syphuncle, which we have mentioned is underneath the skin of the groins, with a strong ligature of two parts;
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	Then envelop the hairs of the threads, and tie them in two parts so that no vessels that supply them can enter there, preventing pus from entering.
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	Then place the ligature along the first line long two thumbs of that one, and after these two ligatures leave down to the syphuncle which is underneath the skin of the groins, leaving it as wide as a thumb.
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte;	And after all the rest according to the roundness of what the eye bears;
puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	Then cut in the area under the skin of the buttocks, as long as it is painless and the wound heals properly, just as we have said earlier;
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	Then apply wet wool in oil and place it on the wounds, and follow the binding method that we have mentioned.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And afterwards, cauterize the white fold as we have said after incision, due to concern about blood escape.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui;	For this happens many times, and leave the bandage until it bleeds for him;
et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	And if the bleeding is delayed, then apply hot water, and place on what we have said, until it bleeds;
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	Then treat the wound with another cure, until it heals perfectly.
de hernie carnouse	of fatty hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this branch, I never see anyone who dares to do the iron treatment.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	And the old ones said that it is done like a bundle of twigs bound together with resin, in such a way that you bind the vessels after cutting them slightly under;
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient;	Then take it over, and clean out the abscess for him who works, while the veins are still intact;
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and cleanse it as we have said, while the area is still bleeding.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus;	Never let surgery be performed during anger, as we have said, and when he opens them;
et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	And do not let any of the intestines come out during pregnancy; if they do come out, it is little, and repair them every hour.
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	And always, if he stays too long at this point, believing the wound or infection to be there, while the intestines are coming out;
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	And this happens through the extension of the syphilitic ulcer which is in pregnancy, as we have said, because it extends, then softens and swells his limbs and opens;
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit;	And the treatment is by cautery, as we have stated before;
et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	And often times it is treated with iron in this manner:
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois;	And when the patient lies on their back between your hands, then hold the head of the affected area swollen across the width according to the size of three fingers;
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	And then extract the fat that is under the skin which follows, take the thread and place it in the visible part of the fat;
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	And press it towards the front of the belly, then cut the two visible parts of the fat on the surface of the fat under the head of the thread, and cut both.
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	And then remove the head of the thread, do not cover or extend anything from the fat, nor apply any other thing as I have told you in the treatment of rancid intestines;
puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	Then the surgeon through the treatment of wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you operate on the children, if the world afflicts and treats the wound, until it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The syphon (a surgical tool) must be constrained and has no visible mark in the incision, and the cautery is heated at this location, closer to the recovery.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	from softening of the skin around the anus
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir;	Many times the skin of men's thighs becomes soft due to the substances inside becoming softened and one can see this.
et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil;	And it is necessary, when one wishes to treat it, that one make the disease affect his back, and pinch the soft skin on the natural skin;
puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement;	Then join the two lips with one stitch, and if you see it, make the first cut at the excess of the soft skin to three stitches or four firmly;
puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Then pinch between the stitches, and treat it like other wounds until it heals, and sew with thread.
dou chastrement	Of discipline
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre;	Know that chastisements and fines are part of our law, and because I prefer not to discuss them in this book;
et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres:	And requires for only two ways:
dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure;	And one is that the patient should know how to respond when asked and knows its cure;
et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	And the other is that we often need to deal with the taming of some animals to help us, such as goats, sheep and deer, and others.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres:	So I say that taming is done in two ways:
ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	either through attraction, or through weakening.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant;	In the method where we use attraction, we place the beast in warm water until its hooves soften and remain;
puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	Then take them with your hand while they recover and you no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille:	In the correction of size:
covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez;	It is necessary that you dye the beast. Press the skin of its udders with your left hand, then tie the tail ligature, and cauterize each teat individually when you have well scorched them;
et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz;	and I leave no small hole due to scalding and the fine scald that is inside the veins;
et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure;	And this method of correction is preferable to that done by attraction because with attraction there might remain some part of the udders, which makes the beast lust for more.
puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Then treat the wound until it is healed.
des hermofrodites	Of Hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes:	Hermodendry is according to two ways at home:
l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	One way is that between the two udders open just as in the natural figure of a woman, or may have hair, and sometimes through it she urinates.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	The other way occurs among women, with something resembling a penis and two sex organs at the opening.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies;	And the treatment of burns and scalds is such that you dress all bandaged areas, treating them as other wounds;
en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	In the second way, for men whose urine jumps through their foreskins, there is no treatment.
de la tentigene	from the cheek area
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir;	A tentigo is a dislocated shoulder in the natural part of the body, until it becomes too ugly to see;
et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	And some women have it as large as a hand, and this is the treatment.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement;	It is necessary that you dye away the excess of the tentigo on your hand or nails, and handle it lightly;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	And do not apply too strongly, so that blood does not spill out, then proceed with another treatment until it is clean;
et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	And there is another condition that emerges from the mouth of the womb, and the thigh, and by chance with a burst of force, and according to its appearance it resembles a cow, and because of this they called it the old 'cow disease'.
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If it is necessary that you take care of it, as we have said about the pustule, and the treatment until it heals.
de erratique	Of cautery by fire command to the sickman to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis;	Erratic if either the woman's nature is not fully perceived or the wound is small;
et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est;	And occurs naturally by birth, or through accidents due to illness that has come about;
ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit;	Or it's due to a shoulder injury, or from subtle or thick fat, and is performed in the womb, or on the chest, or under the arm, wherever it may be.
et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir;	And to conceive, and during childbirth, and by chance one might obtain flowers for having them.
et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	And the knowledge of these things is by the sight of the body.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	When the stabs are closely apparent, prefer striking at your hands or on the thigh.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi:	If it's deep and subtle, and close to the two lungs, hurry up, and do it this way:
met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes;	Put your two hands together, and have the woman on her back, spread out her legs;
puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens;	Then form both lungs until the subtle syphilitic sore is resolved, and is covered by the remedies;
puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	Then take wool and the grease in oil, put it on her body, and have the woman lie at home each day, so that she cannot be cured.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if it is hard and full under the skin, then you must apply a heated spatula resembling a mistletoe leaf.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope;	If the remedies are of earthly nature, then suspend them in vinegar and water;
et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef;	And have remedies for arresting blood loss, such as these, dragon's blood, incense, concoction of abundant egg mixture;
puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder;	then administer a wide bandage, so that the wound cannot heal over;
et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec;	and thus for a longer time, and he should have a tent of dry linen;
puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then perform other treatments as long as it is bleeding.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when it's an injury due to a fall, if you need to treat according to this manner, provided that it's not gangrene.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For the gangrenous abscess in the groin area, one should not use fire to treat it.
des emorroides	Regarding piles (hemorrhoids).
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul;	Emorrhoids are openings of veins that occur without proper care; and when emorrhoids become old they turn into thrombosis.
et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	And we have mentioned the appearances of these in the section for them, and their symptoms; I will now speak about those that require treatment.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that hemorrhoids and pus, when they are ripe in the anus, do not appear to touch, except for the cure by iron.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those at the mouth of the anus, which can be felt, are those that can be cured.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses;	So then, you should put the woman in a cool house, place the altar under the knives, and set her on its roots. Then sprinkle powders made from blood-restraining medicines such as acai, dragon's blood, incense, and similar things.
puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide;	Then bind his feet to the surface for an hour, then place them in cold water;
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	And if there is a bleeding, should it occur, let her sit in a decoction of sumac and the bark of pomegranates and soap and similar things, then take barley flour, mix it with honey and anise, and make a poultice for her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if it clots, that is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir;	If not, have her undergo suction cups on the back and breasts without causing injury;
puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	Then take fleece, mix it with the sap of plantain or the sap of agelnier with old wine, and have it applied to the affected area.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when the abscess rests, treat the affected area with ointment until it is healed;
et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul;	And that which is called "Albathir" is red, and it resembles the head of an asp, if you need to cover it as I have said earlier about the Theulus.
et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And continue the treatment until sanity is restored.
des apostemes de la marris	The contents of the uterus
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many forms of abscess occur in the marris, such as gangrene and stone-abscesses, herpetic lesions, intestinal ulcers, fistulas, hemorrhoids, and other diseases that I have mentioned in the division.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe;	So, I must explain in this treatise the pus-filled wound that comes in the belly, which is not among the abscesses that can be tied off;
et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	And if you want to understand the working of iron, observe how these pus-filled wounds are red at the beginning of their appearance and filled with heat and fever, and if they turn red, you will be able to see them.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie;	So don't rush to pierce too soon, but wait until the pain is relieved as much as possible;
et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe;	And then have the sick person sit on the chair, and place two small stools beneath where their knees would bend, supporting them with their back and having their feet touch parts in front of the legs.
et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien;	And let her hips be spread apart, and place her arms under her knees, and bind them well with a good band.
puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme;	Then direct her to lean towards the right side, and I will prepare the instrument used for working inside the womb, which comes next.
et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide;	And it is necessary that when you see the instrument being prepared, you make your first cut to assess the depth of the womb. So that what enters inside the instrument does not go too deep and cause injury to the patient.
et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve;	And if the tools are larger, it is necessary to cover the depth of the wound with cloths, so that the tools do not cause discomfort.
et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	And it is necessary for him to place the tool's cup above and to sharpen the tool.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit;	And when the abscesses open and one makes it with a gentle hand, if it suits to cover at the head, at the heart;
et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec;	And when the bag is emptied, it is necessary to place in the wound bandages soaked in rose oil, or in dry green oil;
et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites;	And place the bandage of the wound at the bottom of the wound, and place it forward on top of the wound and on clean wool that is moistened in water or cooked vinegar;
puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then after two days of ointment treatment, as long as it is bleeding;
et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites;	and then each time raise and lift the wound by applying a blister of water and honey, and afterwards with water or roots of lily and aristolochia that have been cooked;
puis reveigne a l’oignement.	then proceed with the ointment application.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is treated with mustard, you should avoid cooking it with iron, but treat it in the way we've instructed when discussing its application.
de l’enfantement	During childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar:	The first step in childbirth is for her to recognize the natural birth figure, and you'll notice certain signs when you see a woman preparing to give birth and feeling the urge to push, wanting to smell the air.
adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir;	therefore hasten the child to come forth with strength;
adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui;	know that this birth is according to the natural figure, and it emerges through her head, and the second stage follows him;
et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost;	And when you see these signs, it is necessary to gently press his belly, so that the child comes out soon;
car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification;	for when he descends from his head, then comes the second with him, and in this manner she is freed of her excesses by good childbirth management;
et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	And such other things do not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises;	For it comes only on his hands and feet, or under the body or shoulder, or on his belly, or in the groin, and is sometimes transformed by chance around its neck, or through other harmful configurations;
si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	So skill and subtlety are required in these matters for the midwife, and one must be aware of errors and deception, and I will show you all the forms as to how one should assist them.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent;	When the child comes forth from its head through a natural opening, and the woman gives birth in great pain, and her strength is weak, she should be made to rest on a saddle, or women should hold her.
et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	and from its essence, if fennel has been cooked, then place the baby between her fingers in a small spatula as described here.
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers;	and cut the second tooth, and remove any moisture that is trapped within until it has escaped;
et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament;	and continue to monitor the woman's stomach until the child descends; if it does not descend, then you should treat the woman with fennel oil and sesame oil enemas;
puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre:	then have her sniff the condisi, hold her mouth and nose for an hour:
si istra maintenant l’enfes.	If you are now taking care of an infant.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc;	And if both his hands slip out, it is necessary for you to gently and gradually push them back in.
et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut;	And if they cannot enter, make the woman sit up and lift her legs high.
puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement;	Then pull the stool off the ground, then shave the woman, so she does not leak during expulsion.
et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And if his hands cannot enter and the child has died, cut off his hands with the knife that was placed earlier, extract the baby, and pull equally.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	From the birth of the child above its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	When the child comes down through its feet, it is his duty to keep them up;
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	and then gently turn it gradually until it is even;
puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	Then carefully examine each bone and slightly, gradually extend it.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	Can't he jump up to his thighs, if commanded, and make him emit a sound of discomfort?
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	If he can jump, let God will it.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it is not as we have said, if you gently turn it bit by bit, until it is according to the natural figure.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	And then it should be done lightly.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier;	And if he doesn't jump as we have instructed, say that you are to take a muscilage of height, and oil of sesame, and melted gum, and grind everything together in the mortar;
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	and place the woman's natural form inside and out with this ointment, then have her sit in hot water up to her ribs;
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	and when she is thoroughly moistened up to the neck, have her wear a mirror bandage and put it on her, leaving it for an hour;
puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	Then make her sit on the stool, then have her sneeze and restrain her mouth and nose, and gently touch her stomach, for the fetus is jumping now.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	from the issue of the child at its knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	When the child comes in this form, if you place your hands on it gently and gently;
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit;	Then support it at its neck, and have the feet hanging down, and let it stand on the bed;
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	And bend its hands gently and gently, then take the hands to her belly, and keeps the knees apart as long as she hangs down.
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	And if the child does not jump, take its feet and bend it firmly, then bend her belly upwards, then put your hands back.
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc;	And let the child gently and gently;
et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	And instructs the woman to remain pregnant until the child is born.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	from the birth of the child which comes with one hand wide open
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	It is necessary to devise how to bring back the hand:
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	If one cannot bring it back, then lift the woman up and move her;
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	If she cannot move, make her lie down on the bed, and force her legs into position;
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	Then carry out the massage that I have described;
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	And if she does not give birth, make her sit on the chair, then study how to bring back the hand;
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	And turn the child according to its natural position, make her sneeze, and instruct her to remain pregnant until the child is born fully.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	From the birth of the child on its neck, and it spreads its hands, and its face turned towards the back of its mother's.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	It is necessary for the healer to clean his hand, then turn it gradually and gradually, and gently stroke it.
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	And when it is even, place on the natural tension and oil of the muscle, as we have said, then instruct her to move gradually and gradually.
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne;	And once you have done this, make her sit on the chair, and instruct her to pray;
et la fai esternuer.	And make her sneeze.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	In this same manner for all the second part
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	When it comes to this manner of completion for the entire second part, if you have applied the second part up to your nail as long as the moisture is drained;
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	And if it has spread to her face and neck, make sure you do it from the armpit, so that she is not restrained, and let the child die;
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	Then remove the child within, as long as you have placed it correctly, and instruct the woman to refrain from any single time:
adonques si istra legierement.	Therefore, if you gently handle it.
de l’issue des gemelz	from the issues of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII;	Know that teeth often come out, and sometimes they come out three or four times;
et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	And this is not an unusual thing, and little happens.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	Two are unusual things, and do not live at all, if only their names;
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	I know this, that they multiply and are destroyed by the sperm which devises them, which is bound to the womb;
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	And it is not as natural for them to come out as one under another, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	And if they feel painfully, with the treatment as we have said, and there are subtle issues, then perform what it does promptly and lightly.
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	Act in such a way that it contributes to healing.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	They are not formed in marriage I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or more than fifteen up to XV, and they are all shaped like a child by the measurement of the glorious one's wisdom. It is necessary that the doctor knows all this, for such things might happen.
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	Do it according to what is appropriate.
de l’enfant mort	Of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	When you treat the woman who has lost her dead child or whose womb is diseased, as I have explained in the division, and if nothing comes out, and you are forced to operate with your hands;
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	If you need to know whether she has natural health or if she has fear of death;
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	It is necessary for the woman to be able to stand on her own at the back, and have her shoulders positioned forward, and lift her legs.
et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	And the minister should use two parts of the tincture, or she should be bound to the bed so that she is not moved during childbirth;
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	Then rub the mouth of a pregnant woman with moist almond oil using a mixture of rosemary and fenugreek seeds, and linseed. Then anoint her hands with these oils and these mixtures;
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	Then carry her lightly, then when she moves her hips as it is in the instructions, and be careful that when the baby starts descending towards her head;
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	If the gallbladder lodges in its throat or around its neck or in its mouth or on its palate or under the beard or in the armpit or near the ribs, and if it descends into the belly, then it sticks or gets stuck at the mid-ribs;
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	And it is necessary for you to cut the gallbladder with your right hand, and place the curvature between his fingers of the left hand, and push it lightly with all his hands, and insert the gallbladder into none of these places that we have mentioned, as long as it does not reach the empty thing;
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	And this is the shape of the gallbladder:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	Then insert against another gallbladder, or the third if you need it, so that all extractions are equal;
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	And then extend evenly while moving from one side to the other, for the movement to occur, and whether it's the incisors to keep in place due to movement, as is shown here:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	And if he leaves out some part of it, if he greases his hands with grease from any of its sides, and rubs them on that part, and pulls the other part.
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if there's nothing left of it, place that tooth or higher up in its socket, and do this until it comes out completely.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	And if one hand comes before the other, and it cannot be pulled back by squeezing, then you should wrap around its tendon until it comes out completely.
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	Then the knife at the joint of the sole or at the cut, and similarly you should do with the other hand, and for both feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	And if the child's head is large and it is squeezed at the exit, or if its tip has an acutely assembled point, then you should push the sharp thorn of the skull between your fingers, and move the tip and extract the point.
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	or you will find it in the tool which is called "almidach", from this tool comes its form with the tools or chapters that follow this one;
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	and similarly, make it so for children with large natural heads;
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	and then pull the bones with tongs, and if the head jumps out and is restrained by force, even if it's broken, until the moisture or pus comes out;
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	and if it can't come out, cut it piece by piece as you can manage;
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	And if it is swollen in the belly or under the ribs, then you should pierce him as far as the moisture goes.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the child is on its feet, there's a slight pull, and the connection to the mouth of the umbilical cord is also slight.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	And if it is swollen in the belly or around the thighs, then you should drain him up to the fold of skin hanging on the hand;
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	And stretch the belly or the thighs as far as the moisture that is there;
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	And if any other bones are involved and the head remains, then grasp the socket with your hand from behind until you reach the root of the gum, and pull it up to the mouth of the gum;
puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer;	Then remove the socket or the second bone, and pull it out.
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	And if the mouth of the gum is narrowed by an abscess that has come there, then it should not be cut open, rather it should be treated with moist and fatty substances;
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	And the surgeon applies plasters, and also uses water that is soothing and moistening.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	And if the child is under his breast, and you can place it level, then follow what we have said about the live infant;
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if one cannot do so, if you pull it by parts, and leave nothing of the tail.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	And when you have done this, follow what we have said about treatments for abscesses that come to the gum;
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And if blood flow stops, then place in water and restraining it, and follow other treatments.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman who had borne an offspring that was dead, and then another one on him, and he revived the other.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, an abscess came in his belly, and it swelled so much that he opened up, and began to have severe pain.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was summoned for the treatment, and I thought for a long time, and could not accommodate the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I place under a strong attraction, and out comes one bone, and after some days another.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was greatly amazed, for this stomach has no bone.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point;	I want the wound, and when handling bones, until the woman was in her best condition;
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	And she tends to keep the woman long enough like this, and it would be a bit of support from the head;
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	And I remember this chapter only because when the masters find a strange thing, they need to know how to provide help.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to bring the shoulder back to its place.
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres;	Next comes the description of the presser, which is mentioned in the books;
et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	and for the second turning of the two shoulders of each hand.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	In every case, the horns should be more delicate than those of the retractor, and made of ebony or boxwood;
et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	and let the mouth of the pipe be two palm widths wide, and the margin of the trees must be long, up to one and a half palms;
et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	and in between the two levers let there be two attachments of this same pipe, which must be firmly attached on both sides, half a palm long or slightly more;
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	And these two adjustments are put in the mouth of the mare to open when one turns the second horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	Another form, more subtle and lighter in appearance, might be made of ebony or boxwood, according to the shape of the pincers;
et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large;	and has two dislocations, as you see, of the length of a palm, and two sticks of width;
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	And when you see the mare open to all the instrument, have the woman sit on the bed, her knees hanging and her legs spread apart, then place the two adjustments together in the mare, and hold the tip of the instrument under her armpits;
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Then work your hand with the whole instrument in the same way as you have done with the pincers equally, according to the amount that you see open the mouth of the mare, as long as the reins do what she desires.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances;	This tool is entirely mounted, and multiplied according to these similarities;
et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	And when you have equipped the tools, then your work becomes faster and more precise, and you stand taller among people due to their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	Do not hesitate with the instrument until you have arranged it, for its necessity is not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	When the second stage is retained during childbirth, it's necessary that you instruct the mother to hold back her waters, and then make her inhale cold air. Afterward, restrain her hands at her mouth and nose;
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	And if she jumps over it, it's well done.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	If not, take a pot and make it spill or cover it. Then place herbs that can open the woman's mouth such as mint, rue, anise, chamomile, clove, and lavender;
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu;	All these herbs, or any of them, be cooked or boiled on fire;
puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris;	Then place a stick or a reed in the mouth of the pot, and the other end in the opening of the mortar, and let the steam rise inside the mortar;
puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	Then make them sneeze, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If it jumps the second knee quickly.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine;	And if she still lacks strength after this treatment and has no force, command her to moisten her left hand in sesame oil or musk, and then with the ointment, and wish for a second one;
et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	And when she has found it, take and extend her gently, so that the mortar does not spill during extraction;
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie;	But you must gently move it to the right and to the left, and then cut.
si venra et se desaerdra.	If it comes and becomes dislocated again.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	And if their nose is blocked by mucus and inflammation, we have said the treatment for sneezing and herb fumigation;
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	and if it is not relieved by all that we have said, be careful not to cut without hesitation;
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	But it should be that the person at the nose opening is tied to the woman's thigh, then she is anointed with ointment and given a suppository treatment;
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer;	if it does not relieve the pain and will come out forcefully;
mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	but if it does emerge, then when there is a foul smell in the stomach and head, and burns the body.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu:	Then therefore appropriate fumigations must be prepared:
aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	None of the old ones have experienced the fumigation of watercress and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the tool used to fume the woman during the retention of flowers and the afterbirth is this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	And it is like seeing the appearance of a cane, and one places the subtle head in nature, and the shoulders wide on the fire;
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And have the fumigations over the coals, and let it cook until it is done, then start another one.
de percier lou fondement	of piercing the base
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	Many children are born who do not have the foundation pierced, but rather it has been disturbed by some subtle cause:
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	So then at the birth, let it pierce that cause to its proper place, and do not allow it to be pierced by any sharp tool, and guard the placement so it does not touch;
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then place on wet wool in wine and oil, then apply the ointment cure until it is healed.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt it will not resurface, then place or insert a tallow stick and leave it in for several days, and remove it when the child wishes to go indoors.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme;	And here comes this treatment of sudden injuries to wounds or abscesses;
si covient coper celui soudement:	if one needs to cover that suddenly:
si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	whether it is treated or, as we have said about the opium poppy's root.
de la fistule dou fondement	from the fistula near the foundation
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors;	Fistulas coming from under the foundation are nodulation, and grow larger those coming from above the foundation or in the space of two parts, if it is one fistula or more;
et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans;	and when that nodulation is old, if it works and brings moist resulting in white or powdery matter, and often these fistulas are painless;
et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	And they are known by those who experience or have an emaciation or windiness when the body expels, and sometimes jumps from one to another.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge;	And if it's about fistulas that penetrate up to the bladder, and up to half of the penis;
et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And they reach up to the joint of the knee, and up to the patella.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	And thus one knows whether the fistula is situated at the bottom, and not at all:
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And when you press on your index finger or bottom, and you insert a delicate needle like that of an arachnid or iron into the fistula without any twisting.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	And if it is twisted, then you insert a subtle tentacle like that of an octopus, or the hair of a horse, as long as you feel the tentacle or hair on your finger;
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	And if you do not feel it, and there is no change in appetite or wind movement or smell, as we have said:
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie;	know that she does not pierce through;
si te haste dou curer.	if you hasten to cure it.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula extends up to the bladder or up to where urine is conducted, if it causes urination and cannot be sealed by medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	If it has pierced up to the knuckle joint, then there is the temptation coming up to the elbow;
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	if there is no winding and the origin of the pain inside, then it is that it lies within a bone, and it does not benefit from medicine or immediately by salve;
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	and in these Persian boils there is no treatment for anything other than work and the vanity of those who interfere with them.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos;	In those that are neither Persian nor old, there is hope for healing through iron, as I have found out, and it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back;
et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	And he lifts his legs up to his thighs, and has his thighs inclined towards his abdomen;
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	Then bind an araneus tent or a tortoise shell if there is difficulty, as long as you know where the tent comes from.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet;	If the patient feels it in the foundation of their body, then you must press your index finger there, and if it is felt that the tent has been pierced;
et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	And when discovered, or if you feel something between your index finger and the side or the heart, then know that it is deep.
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If there's no trouble with it, one cannot heal it.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	Nevertheless, one can still often manage to cure some things, but this happens rarely;
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	And when assistance is provided, one heats the delicate cautery according to the size of the fistula, as was explained earlier;
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement;	and applies it hot into the fistula until it reaches the base;
et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	and do this two or three times, until you know that the burned outchar remnants resemble a bird's feather, which indicates they are fully burnt;
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	and then treats the wet areas with butter until the burnt outchar comes out, then applies ointment to cover and join the area.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If he is so healthy, that's good.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	That way, it cannot be healed any other way;
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	and if the tent sticks inside and doesn't penetrate to the root or base, then you place an thick covering of burned outchar or syfac between your finger and the tent, and you see the fistula at the place where the covering meets the skin;
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	If one begins by applying to the start of the fistula, and holds steady before the tent, then afterwards applies heat after, as long as it reaches the tip of the tent;
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra;	And the tent will be released, and there will be no harm.
puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	Then remove those veins that seem like a bird's feather, and do not leave any behind.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the wound doesn't heal, and cuts you instead of flesh, then apply a fire or an ointment to it.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses:	For the fire cauteries combine two good things:
c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	That is to say, the burning of these veins in conjunction, and the removal of blood and the drying out of moisture;
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	Then the treatment of wet tents with butter or ground-up herbs, until the limbs are bathed in water, and out comes the burned veins in the water;
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	Then treat the wound with the application of hot compresses made of durable flesh, and apply dried medicines.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, if it heals properly and does not recur.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes just up to the full depth of the wound bed, and is far from the body, you should fill it with your own finger or its depth, and check this.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres:	If you feel the tentacles, and within II there is silk or yarn or thread, or it is ready to pierce, assuming there is only a path of hope and no other way out, by administering one of these three methods:
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	or you cauterize it as we have explained, or you cut until the bottom, or if you can find tentacles and apply treatment as first;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	and don't cut too close to the foundation, that you might cut through the layer that supports the base, causing forced expulsion of contents by the body;
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	then treat it, as we have explained;
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	By chance if it is healed, or you remove that covering and cleanse it since it has been peeled from the bottom, through trial or with another tool directed.
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	Then purify that pus-filled wound as much as you can;
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement:	Then study to heal the wound, and to prevent the formation of a窦 in the lower part near the base:
si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If you can do it more lightly for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere:	And never let ulcers form in this manner:
et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And when you puncture the ulcer from within, and it is located under the skin near the base, if you take a puncturing tool in this manner:
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And attach one and a half twined threads, and insert the tent into the entire length of the thread in the duct until it reaches the head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	If it is deep in the margin near the base inside, then extract that thread of the diseased part, so that when you puncture your tool or the base;
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II;	And stretch the head by pulling the thread, and join together the two ends, binding one to the other, and leave it for one or two days.
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	And hold steady once or twice, until the thread covers these marks that are between the two ends, and they stick together;
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	Then treat the wound until it is healed and has recovered.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not burst, make it burst in all possible ways that you can, as long as it is not too far apart.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not suitable to sew it up when the wound is too deep and then treat it as we have said, until it heals.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	The form of the spinous spur that one creates for the fistula is quite small and from both sides, it cuts;
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	And on the other hand not, because there's one that should not be cut and one that should not be avoided, as you see here:
des emorroydes	From the arrows.
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres:	Worms can occur in two ways:
ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement;	They can be within the foundation, like pieces of resin, and there are small and large ones, bleeding in the center, and there is one or more of them, they lie outside the foundation and at the base of the foundation;
mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	But those which are deep if they have little moisture, and even still or a bit of yellow water or a bit of blood, and have the color of the flesh;
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	And for the treatment of those inside the foundation, you must instruct the patient to secrete through chambers until the foundations release, and it becomes evident that the fibers are present;
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	If you hurry, or use pincers to grasp it, or hold it with your nail, then pull it from its roots;
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	And if the root cannot hold it due to moisture, take it with its fur, or cloth, or a piece of camel leather;
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	And extract them with your hands, then pull, and dust them with some hot powders that are like fire cauterization;
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	For you should cauterize them as was said or instructed in the chapter on cautery; then treat other remedies until there is no fever.
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	And if the roots cannot emerge, then cauterize the patient using a cauterizing agent that is sharp and rough to wash out what is or has the root, so that it can come out smoothly;
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	If the patients do not improve and if their hair is thick at the root, then the treatment should be gentle;
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	And if you take them with your fingernail or tweezers and pluck them out, then treat them as we have said, until there is no fever and they fear the iron cut.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere:	It is necessary that you suture according to this manner:
pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large;	Take a piece of thread, and bind it into a needle. Then stretch the thread upwards and pierce another end of the needle elsewhere. Loop both ends of the thread over the needle and make sure they are wide.
et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	And tighten the thread in a knot, then cut off the thread, and pull out the needle. Do this process for all others and leave some thread to drain excess blood;
puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	Then place on the wound a moistened bandage in oil or plaster and put it on the wound. Command the patient to rest;
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then let it be until the patient has rested. When they are down, apply ointment treatment and other treatments as long as they recover.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	this means "by drying out or the ground" in modern English. The sentence seems to be part of instructions on how to dry something or set it on a foundation.
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times, there was the drying effect of earth in the intestines, and by the body's natural condition, and when the illness is old and medicine no longer works.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	It's necessary that you sharpen to the tip of a spatula or on your nail the skin above, which should not be moist.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	Then apply the cure as long as it is firm, just as is necessary;
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	And if it cannot become firm, then resume the shave more forcefully than before, until some healing occurs, and may be scorched;
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then apply the cure until it heals.
dou fremit	When the fire cautery instructs the patient to let their hairs grow long and even; if they prick at their base, hold steady until they fully grow.
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	A worm is a small rash before the body, and goes throughout;
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	And when the artery is blocked, it feels cold, and one also feels it like a pulse that has died due to tremors, spreading throughout the body, and more in the hands than elsewhere.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	And the treatment involves taking a cane with a goose feather or a strong vulture feather, and placing that stick over the tremors, until the purple circles encompass the entire tremor.
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	Then turn your hand to all of the hair until you grasp it completely by its trembling, and place it downward, and remove the trembling from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see this, do as with an arrow or iron in the shape shown, and make it both slender from beneath and piercing above:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser.	Do not neglect, for you must hold with both hands, and gently press.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	And if you see it, apply the cautery to the trembling, as is shown or detailed in the section on fire cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	of the shape of the bladder
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet;	Never use silver, or copper filings, or melted iron or brass;
et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	And never make these small and large instruments according to their users.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Therefore, when it comes to treating infants and those who are weak and in pain, they need small ones.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The shape of the small and large needles is made as follows, or when binding the abdomen according to this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez;	And if there is an opening or the belly is pierced, as you see, and if the head is inside.
et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I;	And has on one of the sides two missing parts, and on the other one.
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	And let it be in the belly or where we place the medicines of a beast's bladder or parchment, and make all around tiny holes, and have between each hole an inch of space. Then insert into these holes one strong thread of twisted raw silk at either end, and sew the belly up like a goat would;
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize;	And when the medicine is inside, if it sticks to the tool with a strong thread in front of it, then proceed with enemas;
et c’est li forme dou cercle:	And this is the shape of a circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	And let the medicine not be too hot nor too cold, and smear the area around the anus with oil or yolk of egg, or something similar, then gently apply it.
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet;	Then they guide the eye with both of their hands together until it is fully open, then remove the cataract, and lift the patient's legs to the face, and if the medicine desires to come out, then apply it as much as you can.
et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And if he sleeps through an entire night, that is more assistance.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you administer it during a condition of belly obstruction, and the medicine begins to come out quickly, then continue until it's relieved.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant;	And if there's bleeding or at the base or within an abscess, also if there's a cataract so delicate as for an infant;
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	and it is the form of the delicate cataract on which the skin is constrained:
des plaies	of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies;	We have spoken about treating wounds in the section on treatment;
or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	Or we will tell you about treatments for hands and medicine, according to their completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are various depending on how they were made, and where they were made on the body, and for what reason they were made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	The things that lead to wounds are by dint of stone, and the size of a sword or knife, or spear or staff or axe, or similar items;
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	or according to the body's bones, such as wounds that occur on the neck, or on the head, or in the chest, or the stomach, or the liver, and similar parts;
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	and I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and begin with wounds on the head that are simple, since the recall will come in its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut:	I say that when a simple wound comes or on the head, and if the bone is not broken, take care whether it was caused by stone or similar items, and even though the skin is completely torn and the wound is large, and you slightly doubt an abscess developing.
si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	If it is done immediately with the surgeon's knife right away if there is a little blood from the wound and the patient has been treated differently than the excised part;
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	And make the patient drink wine and eat heavy meats.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	And if they do not wish to be treated with surgery, then reduce their food intake, and do not drink wine, nor eat meat.
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	And place on the wound, if we find pus there, wet cotton in oil rose water only, or in wine that is astringent;
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	And if there is no pus present, place on the wound, if it has fresh blood everywhere, and isn't moved by air, powder, that I will mention a little later;
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the arm has moved, place some ointments on it, until it is healed.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large like that of a sword cut and similar injuries, and the edges cannot be brought together with stitches, then bring them together by suture, as I will explain for wounds of the abdomen, through sewing.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope;	If the wound exposes the bone, it will swell and may only remain for a short while, if treatment is delayed;
puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	Then treat the wound with medicine, and replace the hard tissue instead of skin. Instruct the patient to consume fatty meats such as chickens, cooked wheat, like boiled potatoes, and similar items.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	And if you find orrotting skin and it doesn't reach the bone, then cut away the rot completely, drain out pus, and then treat.
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	And if there is an artery in the wound or vein without clotting, and it cannot be stopped by medicine, then clip the artery, and if you find it has come loose, tie it with a thread.
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if this does not benefit you, then apply cautery to it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere:	And if the wounds are small and simple, their treatment is straightforward:
et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	and then apply this powder which joins together in such a way that when the heat of the fire touches it, it binds firmly.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est:	And here is how to use the powder:
pren encens une partie;	take one part of incense;
sanc de dragon II parties;	add two parts of dragon's blood resin;
chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	add three parts of fine chalk, and finely ground powder, then fill the wound with it, pressing it firmly until it dries well and binds with all its blood;
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle;	and mix it thoroughly, leaving it undisturbed until it doesn't swell;
car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	For one does not remove the medicine until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And always this is done with the charcoal alone, when one does not have the incense nor the blood of dragon, but when the art has healed the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	And if the wound has healed within him, even in that state, certainly do not put this powder on it.
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	but apply some digested poultices, or oat flour mixed with water and honey, until the wound weeps.
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then continue other treatments until it is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	And if bone fracture comes with the wound and it's small, then use delicate forceps;
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	and I will tell you about bone fractures in the head later on.
de la plaie dou col	from the wound around the neck.
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	This injury occurs in or around the neck; if it is simple, there should be no distinction between this and that around the head, but if a nerve in the neck or an artery has been cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	If it's the neck, without any other obstruction, leave the treatment and do not apply anything restrictive, because it harms the neck and causes it to shrink;
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	And do not place anything cold on the wound, for the substance of nerves is cold, and they are in continuous connection with the brain, which is the highest member.
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	but be it under medicine, as with soap washed in mild water and mixed with rose oil, and lace washed also in mild water, and other earths of the mine in this manner, and wet ointments.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, then sew it with bends, until it heals properly.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	And if the wounds are deep and the patient is covered with blood, if they puncture or deeper into the body;
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	And if an artery is severed, and blood flows out continually, then to open it, and stabilize, and cautery as needed;
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	And if the spinal cord of the throat is severed, or the ears, and guide the passage where the meat goes, so cut the ear above the throat canal, and do not touch the throat but return it according to its natural shape;
et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	And then it tightens the addition, allowing for several days, then treats with dry dressings until it is healed;
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	And if there is an indication of infection in the bone, then one should intervene;
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	And if there are pieces of bone, if you can remove them all with force, and those that cannot be removed, leave until the wound becomes infected and heals naturally, allowing for its discharge;
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wound is fresh, apply the powder I have mentioned on it.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone in the wound and it has a fistula, treat it as described in my chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	from the wound of a spear or a knife
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne:	If it's from a spear or a knife, and the wound is deep, examine if there is suction in the wound as long as the patient does not faint:
saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	Then you will know that the wound is fatal;
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	And if it is not deep, and the wound bleeds freely throughout its length, if one does not apply powder immediately at first hour or bind it up where blood runs freely from the wound and invigorates the heart, leaving the patient in peace.
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor;	but apply an attractive ointment, and bind it twice a day;
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors;	and if you don't have an ointment, put old cotton in the wound to absorb moisture, and let the patient sleep on the wound for three or four days, or longer;
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne;	if there is no spasm, and the heart does not experience harmful tremors or contractions;
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	and when you see good signs, know that the wound is healed.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Treat with remedies and other treatments as long as it is clean;
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule;	and if it cannot heal and work, know that there is an abscess;
si la cure si com on doit.	if the treatment should be as it should be.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	And if the wound is from a sword or knife cut, and it's simple or worse, or on the back, then apply the treatment as presented;
s’elle est grans, de cousture;	if it's large, with stitches;
et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	and if it's small, with powder; and if it is bruised into the bone, or if there are fragments of bone in it, remove the wound and the external treatments if they have been removed.
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	and if they haven't been removed, leave the wound to heal by itself, or facilitate the extractions;
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And for other wounds on other members is the judgement so as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	From the protrusion of the belly
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	The hernias of the belly are large, medium, and small;
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	From a major wound it can leap out once the intestine or the nerves of the intestines, through which their intrusion occurs;
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	And the stitches are more troublesome, and from no wound is it worse than the small one when compared to the large ones; because in this case we cannot set the intestines back into place, unless they are sewn stitch by stitch;
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II.	Because the intestines swell as soon as they feel cold; if they cannot be set back into place, then it is better to leave the smaller wound alone, because we must move the intestine back to its original position for others.
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres:	And know that the rupture of the belly occurs according to four ways:
les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	The two common incisions happen in the belly seam, and the incision of other wounds on the body has two other seams that are shared with other injuries;
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	Yet they are more precise with the belly seam, and I will say each one and explain them.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres:	I say that when the wound is small, and no part of the intestine is exposed, and if there's something to be sewn back in place, this is done through one of the two methods:
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	Or because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen due to cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	And when it's cold, warm him in this manner:
moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	Moisten an sponge or add a pinch of salt to boiling water only, or cook in boiling water containing cinnamon and pepper and cloves, and stir the intestines until the innards are well cooked.
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And once this wine has been strained, and made ready for reducing, it is hot to relieve swelling.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	And when you see the swelling leave, season the intestines with water or broth and ensure they are fully cooked, because through this method, the entry allows passage for little else;
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	And if it cannot enter, make a small incision in the instrument from which one extracts the worms;
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	The first treatment is to cook until it reaches the size of the cut, which we should not extend unnecessarily or without significant need;
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	And these are the tools to open them:
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	if you cut only within the bend and not outward, and see this shape:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged, and the internal organs are displaced, if you can set it back according to its natural form in its proper place, because this counts for movement.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	When the wound is wide, and it's in the belly area, you should make the patient lie on their back, and place their legs higher than their head;
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	And if it's in the belly area, place their head and bottom higher than other parts. And similarly, if the abdominal rupture is in one of two parts, put yourself such that the injured part is higher than the other;
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	And thus, it's necessary to follow what I say in large and medium wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres;	For small wounds, use what you're equipped with; then have at your hands the sacred minister that sears all the injury to its hand and joins the lips.
et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort;	And this is the common method of stitching, and you take one needle or more depending on the width of the wound's size, then leave about half an inch from the edge of the wound, and you put in a needle where there will be enough strong thread;
et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble;	And pierce the two ends of the leather with the two ends of the thorn, which is inside the leather, as long as you make it pierce that part, and join the two ends of the thorn together in four assemblies;
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	Then put two strands of doubled thread through the needle from both sides, then join the two ends of the wound together gradually, and then leave about half an inch, and put in another needle;
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	Then tie the thread like you did with the first needle, and continue doing this according to how many needles you need, until all of the wound is restrained;
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	And use needles of medium size, between subtle and bulky ones, because subtle needles cut all the flesh, and the too bulky ones cannot enter well at all.
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	because it is fitting for them to be of medium size;
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	and it is not fitting to have the needles sticking too far out of the flesh and skin, so that they cut and open the wound before stitching;
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	and when cutting the ends of the needles, ensure they do not irritate the patient while sleeping, and place cloths or bandages around the needle sites to hold them in place, and leave them until the wound has healed;
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II.	and this method of sewing with needles is more convenient for small wounds, because one or two needles are sufficient.
Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien;	The second stitch is common, it involves joining two shoulder bones and two symphysis bones together on one needle with a strong thread in the middle;
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	And when you have pierced all four bones together, remove the needle from where you started, in the manner one sews with thread;
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	and leave space between each stitch equivalent to the thickness of a small two fingers;
ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	These stitches cover the wound, and I sewed a belly cut that someone had made, which was due to a knife cut, and the wound was more than a palm in size, and there were intestines about two palms long, and it was a wound in the middle of the belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I returned his intestine to him once it had been out for twenty-four hours, and the wound was stitched up until fifteen days later. I treated it, and he recovered, and became healthy.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	And the priest had judged that he would die, and this was a miracle;
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	And I did not treat it with ointment, because I was at sea where none could be found, nor any medicine;
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And I changed the old cotton on it twice a day, and washed it with honey water until it healed.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture:	I will tell you two proper methods for suturing:
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	Take the needle, and make an incision from outside to inside;
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	when it has pierced the center straight in and out, if it touches the scrotum or has caused a wound, then you have made an incision, and make another incision from inside to outside.
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	And the principle behind this suture is that you sew as the rabbit does with its fur, and you leave one side of the scrotum alone, then take it up again on the other side, until all the suture is completed.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	The second method of stitching, which Galen described correctly, is such that none do it like this, who join the two parts together naturally, and apply one of the major joints to the other joint in this manner:
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac;	Prick an awl or join the major joint to the near one, and only puncture that higher area, leaving the two joints of the same side;
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac;	Then turn the awl and make it pierce from the lower part right up to inside there, of both sides' joints;
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	Then pierce both from the lower part right up to inside there, with two more joints of the opposite side that are on the other side;
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	And this is the way of stitching and it is the most common one.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	The surgeon states this sentence, and no one verifies it, thus the abdomen should be sewn with two needles, or where there is thread in each.
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	and one should push one needle from one side, and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew corroies;
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	Know that when the rupture is in the middle of the abdomen, the stitches are more painful than those of their other wounds.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	The judgment of the wound is as follows: just like the judgments for other wounds, it goes like this:
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout;	and it is that when you find the fresh wound filled with all its blood, just as the animal has moved it, then put back the intestine and the cut;
puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	Then sprinkle on the powder that stimulates healing, and once it has been applied to the wound, apply no other ointment as long as the wound is open.
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	and stitch the thread, and let the stitches hold, and let the wound heal;
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then treat the wound as others would, until it is clean.
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	and if you don't have medicines, apply it until the pus starts to drain out. Use old cotton and shake it twice a day until it is clean.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	For you don't need any other medicines in various preparations when the wounds are simple;
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	and if you suspect that the wound might cause complications in major body parts, it is necessary for you to soak thin wool in oil of moderate warmth or rosemary oil, and place it between the joints, and over the armpits;
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	And if there is pain or gangrene in the bowels, and this happens repeatedly, then use black wine enemas, and similarly if the gangrene reaches up to the intestine;
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	And pierce internally, and know that when it's the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the smaller ones.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestine that is referred to as 'young' cannot heal when it's injured, and this is due to the layout of the veins around it, and the subtlety of the entire body, and its alignment with nerve nature.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	And if pus jumps out of the wound, reset it as soon as possible like an intestine when it's fresh;
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres;	And if it's old and turned to pus or black, you should tie the black part of the wound, so that no blood flows out anymore, for there are veins and arteries;
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	Then cut the part between the tie and place the two heads hanging from the lower part of the wound until after it is released when pus jumps out, and let the wound heal.
de la routure dou boueil	of the rupture of the boil
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	When the intestines are intact, and the wound is small, if it can be restored in some cases, for I have seen that a man was pained or had an abdomen from a lance.
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	And it was the wound on the right side of the stomach, and it became stenotic and developed into a fistula, and there was the expulsion and the flatulence.
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	I applied the cure according to what I could, and did not cease refining until it was healed, and the wounds joined.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	And when I saw it heal, I wondered if the patient might be in pain in their stomach;
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	And there was no illness, but he remained in better conditions, eating and drinking;
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	And it was said by any experimenter that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it should be bound in this manner:
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	Take large needles, then bring together the edges of the wound. And when one of the needles has opened its mouth, place it on the two lips if she forces her mouth onto them;
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	Then press the needle into it, and this stays in place if it can't be pulled out, then put another slight movement after that manner as before, until the wound is entirely filled;
et cout la plaie.	And seal the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere:	For these are so intertwined in the intestines, and do no harm to the patient, and one can tie the intestines with a fine thread that has been cut from an animal's intestine, like this:
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	Take the tip of this intestine thread that is quite matted, and then tie it to a thin linen thread you've twisted. Sew it onto the intestine thread with the needle, stitch the intestine, and reset it in the cavity;
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	And this method of stitching together ribs is solely based on the path of faith and hope;
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	And if the wound is big and wide, especially when it's located in one of the abdominal organs, even if there's no pregnancy or health issue, due to its delicacy.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	regarding a fistula, or if it exists
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Know that any wound or abscess, as it matures, is universally called "fistula", and even when hair grows there and the swelling recedes.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	Fistula is according to the hard and white nodule, where no pain can be felt, and it's also feathered like the feathers of a bird;
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	And sometimes it is clear water, and other times it is thick;
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	Sometimes little, and other times quite enough;
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes:	And I have spoken about the classification of wounds in which any wound that is not healed, and there's no flesh, it can only be due to one of the eight causes:
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	This means, you need to know about the small amount of blood or pus;
ou por sa malice;	for its wickedness;
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	or because there is hard flesh within it, and above the lips, that does not allow new flesh to form;
ou il i a trop de bowe;	or because there is too much wax;
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	or the blood is thickened, and the substance is of bad quality;
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	or the medicine isn't good in the treatment;
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	or because the corruption is like a pestilence;
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	or due to the property in the area being late for digestion, and slow recovery, escaping naturally;
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	or because there are veins or bones;
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	And I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the treatments with medicines in this section.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	So, it is necessary for me to inform you about the treatment of an abscess which is performed by manual work.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	Know that fistulas occur in all limbs of the body;
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	for there are fistulas that come from large veins, and arteries, and nerves, or in the chest, or in the intestine, or in the bladder, or in any of the ribs, or in the spine of the back, or in any joint of the hands or feet;
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	and if it affects the property of the main body part, and shows its signs.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	And all fistulas that occur in this manner are painful to heal, and there is nothing else but treatment, and lack of knowledge;
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	And if there is no fistula that does not extend to what I have mentioned, and you undertake the treatment, and understand it well. If you take a spider web or iron wire, if the fistula is straight, then use it.
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	And if the fistula is twisted, seek out with a subtle attempt of a thread, for the threads fold and move along the twist.
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	And if the fistula has useless ends and you cannot properly search for it with threads, plug it by one of the useless ends, because moisture will spread from one end to another, then cleanse it.
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	Then feel it carefully with your power, so you know if there is bone or nerve, and feels it completely around, and ask the patient about the pain they feel when pressed by your hand, and find out where he feels it;
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	And when you truly know its location, and if it's far from a joint, or nerve, or artery or vein, or in any of the locations I've told you about, do as I have instructed. Remove the bone and the decayed tissues that are inside;
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	And then the treatment until it is healed, and if there's a sinus well located in the right place, you should fill it completely with clean pus, as much as possible. Then put wet bandages in medicine for leeches, and leave them up to the tip of the sinus, so that the medicine eats away at the excess that has remained at the bottom;
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And then I apply clean bandages until it heals.
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And if it does not heal through this method, then apply the cautery as we have said, and if the bone is decayed by the sinus, then remove it.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	And if the vein or major limbs are involved, as we have said;
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if the bone is exposed, and there's decay and darkness, then remove it until all decay is removed, then treat with clean flesh until it heals;
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	And if it is not healed, and returns as before, know that you are not quite done until further notice.
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	If it opens and spreads as long as you're at the bottom, remove all the decay, then return to its proper place;
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	And if it is well healed, that's fine.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	If not, know that the decay has penetrated too deeply, you cannot reverse it;
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	Only due to natural aging if there's no other reason;
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	And if there is just a small decayed bone, and you can remove it with tweezers, if you have the appropriate tool for this, and if there are many bones, then remove them one by one, don't leave any behind;
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	And if moisture makes it against you, and there's no mistake or fear, mix and moisture with flesh, and free the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	And if you can't remove them within an hour, put something that prevents putrefaction on the wound, and leave it until the flesh has completely rotted inside the bone, and then they will come out more easily;
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie;	And if it's a large bone, like from the leg or thigh, you should only wait for complete decomposition until all the marrow is gone, then heal the wound;
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	And if there's a large part of it still corrupted, and comes to the very bone dust;
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	If it's necessary to stay with it and cover it until complete decomposition occurs, then treat it until it is healed;
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	And I will tell you of a case which happened to a man in his leg, so that you may take an example and help in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	He was a young man around thirty years old, who had pain in his leg due to something that came from within the body, as far as the materials reached the leg, and then there appeared a large abscess, and no external cause existed for opening it.
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	But the doctors through their folly opened too much, as far as the abscesses burst open, and they ate away at a large amount of tissue, it became a fistula, and brought a great loss that all complained of sickness and bodily moisture;
et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	And many doctors treated it for over two years, and no wise man knew the art of medicine, until I was called to see him, and saw his leg and the treatments used to cure him, and what ate away through the losses with great bodily damage;
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	And the bodies of the young turned red, and had a yellowish hue.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I set up a tent at one of these hollows, and then searched all the hollows, finding that some came against each other from every part of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	So I hurriedly proceeded, and probed through one of the ulcers until I uncovered a part of the bone, and found it decayed and punctured, and the infection reached up to within the bone;
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	It was me who appeared to be the decayed part of the bone, and I believed there wasn't any other infection, since only that which I exposed;
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	I began to heal the wound with long-term medicine treatments, but was unable to stitch it up;
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	Then I restarted, and uncovered the bone as before, found the infection continuing inside the bone, exposed it, then removed it, and bent on stitching up the wound;
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines;	But I do not stop until I copied half of the bone with my palm, then I applied it to its entire surface, and afterwards returned it with medicines;
et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	And it healed and was stitched quickly; no further surgery was required except due to the weakness of the patient, who couldn't bear it, and out of fear of death that I had for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For during blood evacuation, it often happens, but it was completely healed. In the place of the bone came hard flesh, and it had good consistency with no harm or opposition throughout, neither outside nor inside.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, it should be treated in this manner:
pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	Take hold of it, and pull at the tip of the bone that is exposed, and instruct him to extend it upwards;
et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	and put another thread of thicker wool than the first thread, and tie it over the flesh that is inside the bone, and pull such that you draw the decayed flesh away from under it, and expose the flesh on the place where you want to see it, so that it does not hurt the flesh.
et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	And place a coal or an iron plate over the bone to melt off the putrid flesh;
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	It is necessary to do it just enough as one can see and feel the decay, and also to do it again if needed.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute;	And if the bone is decayed and does not open up, and decay is in the middle or a part of it, then expose all the flesh;
puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit;	Then place the coal over it, and then apply heat from one part to another of the decay, and ensure the heating lasts as long as needed for the decay, just like we have said;
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	And if the decay is in the joint, then cut out the decayed joint, and heat the bone where it contains flesh from the other side;
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	And if the corruption is within the continuous connection of two joints, if there's no other angle that would cause the copernic.
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	And if the corruption is at the base of the hand, or at the ankle of the foot, it's quite intense but nonetheless you must inquire about that corrosion, how it manifests.
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	And cleanse using all methods you can, but in such a way that the vein or nerve does not oppose you;
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	And know that the incisors and suture lines for bone are numerous according to the setting of the bones and their appearance, and their size and subtlety, and their bulk and smallness, and their hardness;
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	And for that reason, one must tailor each tool to the appearance of every task's form;
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	And know that the work will show you the instrument with which you must do your task, according to the knowledge of this craft, and provide evidence for how diseases manifest.
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	if you think about the instrument you need according to what is suitable.
dou feu	with fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	The thighs swell either from within or from outside;
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	And when you have treated that decay through the remedies, and if it does not improve, then it is necessary to amputate that limb up to its origin, so that the illness escapes either through death or through malice, which is greater than the defect of the limb;
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors;	And the signs are that the limbs turn black, as if they have been burned by fire, and after this blackness, because it is the decay spreading from limb to limb, and takes over the entire body;
si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	If you have a copper, and if it's through the impact with certain venomous animal beasts, like sea scorpions and snakes etc., if the corrosion is on both sides of the head, then take it off, and do not give it space to come up to the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	And if she comes up to the hand, if the copper is at the joint, or if the corrosion doesn't reach up to the elbow;
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute;	and if it comes up to the arm, if the copper is on the knife;
et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	and when it passes the knife, that's the end, and it's not worth seeking remedies beyond its potency;
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet:	and do so entirely until the corrosion reaches or slightly past:
s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	if it comes to the first joint, if the copper after another joint;
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	And if she comes or a step, adjust all the step;
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	And if she goes up in the leg, regulate at the knee joint;
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	And if it ascends over the knee, there is no other reason than to let the patient die;
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	And the method of adjusting or sewing the limb is such that you tie it above and below, stretching one of the ligaments on the lower side with one pair of forceps, and another ligament on the upper side with the other forceps, and you cut through the flesh that is between the two ligaments to a depth where bone becomes visible;
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	Then adjust or sew it, and place one piece of linen on each side, so that the skin does not touch the healthy part, avoiding further injury and discharges elsewhere.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans;	And when blood escape as you operate, if you see this happening, quickly apply the cautery to it, or place some restraining powders there.
puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then return to your medicine until it is completed, then bind the injured limb with a reliable bandage, and treat it until it becomes healthy;
et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet:	and I will tell you what happened at my house with the pie:
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	He was given a blackness that seemed to be fire poisoning, and this corrosion affected his left thigh first, spreading throughout the entire thigh;
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	And when the wound saw the corrosion, it covered its thigh to heal, and became healthy;
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	And long afterwards, the corrosion spread to both arms, and it came to me, and after my body's purification rituals, I applied counteracting things against it, but could not stop the corrosion;
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	And it says that I should apply my hand to him, but I refuse, because I have hope of being able to reverse the substance;
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible;	And I also doubted that if I cut off his hand, he would die, because the strength of my knowledge was weak;
et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	And he became very despaired, and returned to his home, and started trying to mend his hand, and eventually recovered;
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	And I am only including this because one might need to do something else, if required.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	There is no pus formation in his inner flesh, and it stays for so long that it causes a large gathering of worms;
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	And they then tunnel and pierce, and the worms enter his body, and remain in the patient's eyes, just like in a vase;
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	The skin above is as delicate as silk fabric and does not extend up to the bone or nerve, and such illnesses are called 'simple' and are not referred to as 'fistula'.
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	but if it is so extended that it reaches up to the bone without stopping, then it is called 'fistula';
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	and the skin should be treated as if you sew that skin entirely together, and even when it is delicate, like a piece of silk.
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	and does not tear due to its decay.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	And if you think that the skin should thicken and the decay is not in full, with skin filled with flesh, then treat it like a urinary condition thus:
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	Look to see if his breasts are large, and the womb that is within it has a foul smell, then administer an Egyptian laxative medicine which is prepared thus:
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	take asail, and oil, and litharge, equally, and cook them in a single vessel over fire until the medicine is red, and thicken it similarly to honey;
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	and then take from this according to your need, and make it in water and honey, and as an enema for the womb, and hold back the urine.
et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	leave the medicine in place for two hours, then remove it by squeezing;
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	do this number of times, until the breasts have shrunk and the womb has been expelled;
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	And in every case it is washed with water from ashes when this medicine isn't available, and you should take ash from vine wood, pour water over it, then drain it off, and use that for washing, until you know the wound is well cleaned.
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	And if the patient cannot tolerate it, or if neither Egyptian medicine nor water from ashes can be used, then wash with water and honey, or include a little borax.
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	or you can wash with honey and wine mixed, where the honey has properties to cleanse and wash away, and the wine helps to heal.
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	and when you have done this, and you are certain that the wound is thoroughly cleansed, wash with what causes things to grow in it, and take plaster of Paris, and apply it mixed with rose oil and wine.
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	You will apply various medicines and ointments to it, of which I have described their properties or written about the ointments;
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	And if the passage in the chest is small and the tube from the clister cannot enter, then widen it with a bit of iron, and place an Egyptian balm or basilic ointment in such way that it remains widened;
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if the wound is too wide, so that even when it's left just as is or with a paste, only then can the clister enter, and if the exit hole from which the pus flows is above, then cut higher or lower than where it is.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	For when the pus is at its peak, do not allow it to continue to fester;
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere:	And if you cannot cover the breast area as you see it, equip yourself in such a manner that the bow comes to its lowest point possible which it is at. For when the bow is perfect, do not let anything stick out and if you cannot cover the breast area as you see it, equip yourself in such a manner:
que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	that the bow goes smoothly downwards, and do not leave anything of the bow;
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain;	and take consolidative medicines to place over the healthy area, and they are on an old linen cloth that covers all the healthy parts;
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	then cover the area around the edge of the breast pocket that is somewhat wider than the first one, apply grease with the other piece of cloth according to the size of the edge, and place it on the edge of the healthy part to ease the bow, but remove only the large cloth after several days once.
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	And the one who is within the narrow part of the chest bone often removes the heart, know what comes from the heart if it's venom or pus or sufficient, or digested, or undigested;
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	And be vigilant if the patient feels pain or not, and check if there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has partially spread and you see its nature leap on the narrow part of the healthy side, then know that the disease is already present, and brings health closer.
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	And then release the tension in the morning or on the third day, and when you open the wound, if there is a different layer present, replace it with new dressing.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if after many days the breasts discharge an undigested substance, know that the breasts are not healing properly.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if delicate veins start to cut after a long time, do not despair of health, for the health approaches.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	For there are people who take too long to heal their wounds from blood, and those who do the opposite;
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	And if a person does not digest food after many days passing through the stomach, know that the stomach is not working properly;
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	And if the stomach takes too long to break down and is distant, adjust medications that are dry in form but moist in essence, such as an extract of oil, because they contain a large portion of sulfur, and this is the last remedy;
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	Take oil of diaphanity, mix it with rose oil, and season it with old wine in the same essence;
puis le confit et en use;	Then cook it and apply it;
et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	And similarly make a cooked thick honey, when oil of diaphanity is not available, or take myrrh and aloe and incense, grind them together, and add the powder to heated honey;
et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	And then in the use of glue, I spread it out, and it extends to the breast, and every time an assistant or surgeon longs for it, and he administers celestial roots, which is also like flour of cloves and cinnamon;
et en use de simples ou de compostes:	And in the use of simples or compounds:
broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	Grind them, and make powder, and place it on the honey I mentioned, and use it;
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	And if the treatment lasts long and is not cured by this method, then know that corruption has spread inwardly, and appears in bone or in hard parts of the body or in ligaments;
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	If the treatment for the abscess is according to what we have said previously.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the abscess under the nail
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	Panarice is an abscess that forms under the nail of the hand's pouch or foot, or by chance forms in other toes;
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	And when it becomes old, and if one does not take care, then the abscess may appear, and run and spread as far as the root of the nail, and by chance it might even reach all the way.
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	And when corrosion reaches up to the bone, as long as there is piercing pain, and the patient experiences double swelling, and the color changes.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have instructed in the division, and if the treatment doesn't help, then you should proceed to clip all the excess that has remained from the nail. After that, cauterize the wound.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	The cautery is very effective when the bone is healthy, and the nail is healthy;
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	And if the nail gets infected with pus and begins to swell, causing pain, it is necessary that you place a hot rod near the nail so that the pus points outwards, then lift it upwards, and remove this thin and gently the pus. And place on top of the pus medicine that is hot and corrosive to remove everything;
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the treatment of ointments until it is healed.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	And if the corrosion is in the bone, you must remove it and dig deeply, for as much of the bone that is corrupted cannot heal;
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if you see the knee corrupted, remove it from us as was said before, then treat it until it is healed;
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	And if it's hardened and pained, with great pain being felt, it is necessary to heal it first;
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	Then trim the nail under the spatumil at an angle from above, and be careful that the cut does not extend to the flesh beneath the nail, for it would cause too much pain;
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	And if this happens, put something on it that soothes.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	The pain originated from the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	I must adjust what is born in the hands of some men by chance and are very muscular, and by chance there may be bones here or there where they have bones, and none of them has a nail, and no one of these are born at the root of the joint, or where birth occurs in any way.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	Those born in no new note do not move, and those born at the joint of the old bone, by chance do move;
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	The size of the one who is muscular is so light, in such manner:
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	Cut it at its root as wide as a thumb.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer:	Those that are born at the root of the joint require cure:
si te tien dou coper.	if you hold it with copper.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In the one who is born or should have at the end of the bone, it's necessary that you first cut up to the soft tissue until the bone, then cut the bone with a suitable tool for this. Then treat it as long as it remains sound.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The fusions that occur at the joints are due to birth, or by the welding of wounds, or by the action of fire, or by similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	If it is necessary that you work that weld, so that it should be repaired according to its natural forms;
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	Then place between two wet tents or cloths soaked in rose oil, so that they do not fuse;
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	Or you put between two delicate pieces of leather, until their welding is done, as it should be.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	Welding occurs at none of his joints with the palm, if you take care of this welding just like it should be.
des vils	Of low-quality
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	The veins are thick, rolled-up, full of excess melancholic substances, which come from the head of many members.
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	And more occurs in legs of those who walk on foot and work and carry, than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	It follows therefore that you must administer one time a bloodletting procedure, and then heal it using basilica.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres:	The iron treatment is according to two methods:
l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	One method is that you apply them, and drain the black blood;
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	And the other method is that you open the vein, and drain it all forcefully.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere:	The cut is according to this method:
arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	First, immerse the leg in hot water for a while until the large veins are thin. Then stretch the leg from below the knee up to the part above the knee.
puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	Then open in my left or right side, from one large area, then lift and pull strongly for the black blood with your hand, from one side to another, as long as you are able to extract much blood that the virtues of the diseased body can bear;
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	and then rub it, and instruct to dye with black meat juice.
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	And repeat the evacuation and cleaning when veins are full, causing harm to the diseased person.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere:	The method of treatment is as follows:
reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	Lift the diseased leg, if there is much hair, then dip it in hot water, and lift the leg in hot water until it turns red and veins swell.
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	And if you do not have a cautery tool, heat it with fire, and then apply it to the vein along its entire length from the neck down to the knee, or in the part below to the ankle.
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	Then cut the skin with an awl, and scorch the vein from each side, until it appears when one feels it;
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	And you see it red and black, and when it enters or appears as if a white string under the skin;
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois;	Then pull the vein outwards until it is raised from the skin, and then cut with an awl gently, then apply it to another area above three fingers;
puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	Then scorch the skin above the vein until it appears, then gently pull with the thumb, just as you did, and cut with another awl, just as you did first.
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille;	Then take another size or more if needed, then lift it, and hold at the knee of the foot, then guide and lift until the second size.
puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	Then strain from one size to another, until all the strength has come out, then take it.
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	And if you cannot strain and lift it, use a needle with all the strong thread doubled, tie it and guide it, then cut on both sides, and turn your hand from side to side, until it passes through.
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	And make sure it doesn't stick, for if it sticks, one cannot strain or lift it, and this causes harm to the patient.
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset;	And when you have strained it completely, place wet wool in the wound soaked with wine and rose oil.
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the treatment as long as it remains clean.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie;	And if the limb is twisted and turned all together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must cut it in a twisting manner, but do not sever it;
et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And guide it as we have explained before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	The shape of the iron with which you twist the screw is curved, and does not cut, so it does not sever the vein;
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	And it has large curves; for if it were thin, it would cut the vein, but be thick as we have said, and this is its shape:
de la voinne civile	of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	This vein runs through legs, in warm areas where no herbs or trees grow, and in soil that lacks moisture;
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	And by chance it is born in another place than the legs, and this happens due to disease that comes from under the skin, as when it occurs inside the body like snakes and worms, squirming between the skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the signs of this vein's beginning occur such that there is a very great inflammation in the leg, then the veins change, and the vein starts to emerge outside, like the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	When the shoulder is separated, it is necessary that you wrap around it with a piece of oak about one and a half times up to two times., and tie it, and leave the oak on the leg, and every time there's need for more, if you wrap around the oak again, and tie.
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	And if it's too long, if you cut off a part and wrap the remaining back around, and don't overlap in its root, until all is out.
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	because if you overlap it, if it enters the flesh, and brings abscesses and disease or injury to its place, and causes bad illness;
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	Because of this matter it is necessary that she be treated slowly and gradually until completion, and does not leave any remainder or excess;
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse;	And in each case when she is treated for so many palms or X, and a short period of time has passed since she was X palms long, and only recently did she reach that length, after it was treated. If you take her pulse now, if there are one or two beats left over or missing, and you puncture until the bottom, ensuring everything comes out;
et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	And empty the substance that is inside, and administer to the limb remedies for pus every day, then treat it like abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains;	And always for this vein in the hand, and similarly when it opens at the ankle or knee joint, and there is much missing pulse, and where it remains;
cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	Cure it then as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	worms that come to life between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	This disease is called in our land "cow disease," because it happens to cows many times, and it is a small worm that is born between the skin and flesh, and travels throughout the body, going up and down. It makes one feel ill from member to member, until it leaves the skin where it was heading, and jumps out forceably;
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	and it is filled with corruption of some bodily fluids, such as oozing, serpents, worms and roundworms in the stomach;
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil;	And there is doubt about its nature, for when it travels through the body, and goes up to the head, and reaches the eye, by chance it returns, destroys the eye;
et ceu avient maintes fois.	This happens many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	When you see it being treated and bled, if one cannot remove it until it is about to:
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	So then, you must bind the leg above and below with a strong, tightly-wound rope, then cut upwards and bleed it, and if it is located in the flesh, and you don't find it, then burn it with fire while bleeding until it dies;
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	And the greatest harms that it causes, if run to the eye, as we have said;
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	And if you see it coming close to the eye, then bind closely around it, then cut upwards and bleed it;
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	And it is necessary to use the remedy of purification for body ailments caused by bad humours, and to be wary of meat causing putrefaction.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	The pain comes from winds or windiness.
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre;	This disease is called in our land " vakirir ", and it is a pain that comes to any limbs, and then spreads from one limb to another;
et je vis ceu que je vos di.	and I see what I am telling you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	I was summoned to attend a diseased woman, and she showed me her arms, and I saw a small swelling in the vein under the arm;
et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	and after that, I saw it rise as if it were a worm on the shoulder, quicker than anything else, like quick silver when cut from one place to another;
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	the pain left that side and stuck into the shoulder, and soon afterwards spread throughout the body, until it reached the other arm;
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	then she told me that it was tearing through her entire body, just as I saw it.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I marveled greatly how she moved from limb to limb in this manner, for I had never seen such an illness conducted like this before.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	In every way, I wanted many to want to move the pain of another, but I never did want it, just as I see in women;
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	And I thought that was because women had smooth skin, and their veins exposed, and that shows the constriction of wind;
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	And they do not see this according to that reason among those who have smooth skin and their veins covered.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	And when you see to cure this disease, and the patient feels pain, if it opens up like we said, open it quickly from top to bottom, and then proceed as long as that constriction of wind within the body subsides;
et cauterize le leu;	And apply the cautery to the area;
et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	And if you do not see it at your eyes, when curing the one who dislocates winds, such as foul pills and serpent pills, and similar others.
des saiettes	Of arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows are diverse, depending on their appearances and the locations where they pierce the body.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	The variety of these things is that there are those with large spikes, and small ones, and those that are pointed, and those that are glued;
et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	And of those that have two points, and of those that have tongues, and of those that have fragments;
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres:	And there's the one that leaks from no body part but leaks in two ways:
ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	or from the main body parts where it leaks internally, such as the brain, heart, liver, stomach, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar organs.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	When then it leaks not from any part of these limbs, and the sign of death that I will tell you later becomes evident:
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	If it is necessary for you to take out this arrow, because death comes after in various arrangements.
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	And when that bad sign does not appear and the arrow is not fully out, you should extract it, and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	And the sign of the brain when the arrow passes through and pierces the bone, and blood spurts out where it touches the brain, is when paralysis and numbness and vertigo occur, and a red tongue, inflammation and redness on the skin, and muscle spasms, confusion in thinking, and vomiting of bile;
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles;	And perhaps it affects the strength of the nostrils, or of the ears;
et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	And sometimes it affects speech and voice;
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	And from the moist wound, white pus resembling hair appears, and also in that jump like charcoal ash;
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	And when you notice this sign, take care of the treatment, and pull out the arrow if it is there.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	The sign of the arrow when it bleeds or stings, is that it's close to the left mammary gland, and also feels as if it's stuck in something hard, not empty;
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	And by chance the arrow also stops bleeding like hair, and black blood comes out, and coldness or cold sweat appears, and fainting:
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	So, without doubt, know that the person will die.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of an arrow that never leaves its wound is that without any foam spilling from the wound, and the throat swells up, and the patient's face turns a different color, and they sigh loudly with cold chills.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes;	And if the arrow bleeds in the undercoat near the buttocks, it is deep within the smaller ribs;
et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire;	And causes great pain and great suffering and sighing;
et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And it moves the entire limb from the shoulders.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrow stops in the stomach or intestine, by chance if it breaks out of the wound, there's no undigested flesh.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrow stops in the belly or abdomen, and it jumps out of the wound not through the intestines, there's no hope for treatment, nor is there any hope for extracting the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor:	And if an arrow lodges in the bladder, and the urine escapes in jumps and leaks out, and the patient feels intense pain:
saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	Know that the wound is fatal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other body parts, such as the limbs and neck and throat and shoulder and shoulder blade and back spine and ribs and arms and legs, and similar seeming limbs, are safe according to various dispositions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in the nerves or arteries and it's not poisonous, like what I will tell you, this happened to me because of what you were doing.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	It happened to a man that an arrow hit him near the neck at its base:
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	I tried it and pulled it out from the other side beneath the ear's fat, and was perfectly fine afterwards.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles;	And pulled out an arrow that had hit into the fat near one eye beneath the eyelid, and the arrow was found to be completely inside, only its tip could be seen towards the shaft, and it was an arrow as large as a Turkish bowstring, but without harming any nerves.
li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	The body was healthy, and no harmful accidents befell it.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	And he removed an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and the arrow was from Arabia to the ears:
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	I tended to the wounds, pricked them as finely as possible while I was extracting the arrow, and made all Christians well.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	And he removed an arrow from someone's house, that it was stuck in the chest or stomach, and thought he would die;
et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	and then having passed 30 days, if it did not change its condition;
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	I cut at the arrow, pulled it out, and forced it, and there was no bad incident.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	And if you find an arrow has fallen or stuck to the back of someone's house, and made the wound heal from there;
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	And the arrow stays within, not finding any harm in any of its natural works, nor adapting to its natural dispositions.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	And see another man who was hit in the face by an arrow, and they缝ed up his wound;
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor;	and he endured this without suffering great pain;
et mout d’autres semblans.	and no other symptoms.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie;	And one day he was hit by an arrow in the home of the princes' king, who had been shot in his neck, and he was leaning slightly to the right;
et estoit li saiette toute reponue.	and the arrow was fully inserted.
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	I was called for treatment after it had been three days since they were hit.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I found the wound to be very tight.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	I tried to get close to everything with a subtle attempt, yet I felt nothing.
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	And he complained of pain and discomfort in his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	I thought it was due to the tip of the arrow. I placed a therapeutic adhesive plaster on his head because his ears were not inflamed;
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	And my suspicion about the ear was confirmed by it.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis;	I had the plaster on for several days and quickly resolved the wound. The patient endured this long enough until he felt the arrow inside his nose;
et il le me dist.	And he told me so.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	I applied corrosive anti-fever medicine to the wound for several days until it was opened, I tried it and felt the tip of the arrow that was buried in his head;
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	Then adjust by using that medical remedy for the opening of the wound, until I clearly see the head of the arrow.
et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	and puncture well the ends for about three months, and then widen it as much as I can with my forceps, from both sides, and it couldn't come out;
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	then I didn't stop refining and engineering tools for the creation of instruments, until I obtained one day with well-made forceps, according to what its shape will be at the end of this chapter, until I used it, and kept the wound open.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	And the judges determine that the nasal cartilage cannot be restored:
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	So I kept it open, and healed the wound completely, and fully recovered the patient.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	You were told about the quality of extracting certain arrows, so that you place your treatment where I do not specify, because the books cannot take everything into account;
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	but the wise masters compare well to little more than a few things, and on what is current and lacking, find nine works, and nine tools, in the removal of foreign objects that occur in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres:	I say that arrows are stuck into limbs according to two ways:
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	either through the entry point or from another side;
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	And when it enters by the wound or where it enters, the arrow penetrates into the flesh, and this has happened no other times now.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	And if it doesn't spring up now, let it grow until the flesh is well rotted internally, and becomes free from disease.
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	And also if it's embedded in the bone and cannot come out, let her stay like that for several days, and remove a little each day.
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And then it will spring up, and if it doesn't, pierce internally with all the delicate force until the veins are widened inside, and then remove it.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide:	And if the arrow is embedded in the bone of the head and extends up to one of the brain's chambers, or any of the incidents I've mentioned occur within the patient:
si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	If you do not remove it, but let her stay until the wound is even after several days, because if the arrow reaches up to this point, it's a fatal situation.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is only stuck in the bone and does not go up to the sinus, and remains without any bad event for several days, then one should use a device for extracting it.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit;	And if it is firmly stuck like this and cannot come out force, then apply ointments internally, as I have told you;
puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the area until it becomes healthy.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	And if an arrow has been inserted inside the body and we can't see it, then look everywhere for it;
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	And if you feel it, then try to guide it with any suitable tool;
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	And if you cannot follow it due to the tightness of the wound or the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone, nerve, or vein, then cut as much as necessary for the wound to be open;
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	And pull the arrow if you can, and if it has ears on which it rests in the arrow, remove the flesh that is stuck from both sides as much as you can, and then break or bend the ears of the arrow until you can pull it out.
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And handle it carefully so you do not break the arrow, but pull it out more firmly.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot do it in one go, till your arm is numb from the effort, then move on, because the extraction requires endurance.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	And if bleeding causes you difficulty, then apply what we have said about treatment in our chapter concerning this.
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement;	and beware of cutting near the nerve and vein, and do it carefully so that you can remove the arrow without risk, quickly or slowly, firmly or gently.
et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	and guide the patient according to how they were before the arrow fell, because that is the greatest help for them, and if you cannot do so, then follow what the signs show you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	The arrow that came from another side, or if there appears to be no injury at all, or if the skin is swollen in the place where you see it or feel it differently:
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai:	Therefore raise up high, as long as the forceps can take hold, and then proceed:
si saut fuer maintenant.	if it jumps now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is held in the bone, twist your hand round as long as she enters the bone, and enlarge the bone, then pull her out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	And if it cannot come out, let her stay in place, and then start the extraction again until she jumps out;
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	and if it is an arrow that has been shot, if it hits the whole body;
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument;	and if it is in the lung, and you see that it is necessary to force it out, if you use the correct tool, so that the tip of the arrow enters into the handle of the instrument;
et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	and then force it, and if the arrow is buried, you force the instrument with its pointed end inside, to facilitate the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrow is touching, it is necessary that you remove all the flesh around where I come in, if possible, then treat the wound as is fit.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	And if the arrow is lodged or pierced in the chest or in the abdomen or in the bladder or in the rib area, and it's close to vital organs, you should only press up there, if you press down.
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	and protect against pressing the artery and nerve, then you extract it, and then suture the wound; this is a task for expertise.
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And treat until it is healed.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the tongs used for extracting arrows resemble a bird's beak, and here is the form:
Et en sont mout de manieres:	And there are many ways in this:
grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	Large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the arrowhead resembles the feathers of a bird, for it is pointed like the tip of an arrow; thus it looks like this:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	the shape of the tongs for shooting and retrieving is like this:
des voinnes dou cors communes	from the veins of common horns
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir:	There are 31 veins through which we bleed, of which there are or from which there is a head of 16, that is to say:
II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	Two smaller ones located behind the ears, which are called "two grasses";
et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans;	and the two arteries which are in the two visible temples;
et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	and the two veins that are in the two eyelids of the two eyes, which are called "apparitors";
et li voine que est emmi le front;	and the vein that is within the forehead;
et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	and the vein that's at the nose bridge on the head;
et les II guindeges qui sont ou col;	and the two jugulars which are in the neck;
et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	and the two veins that are on the lips above the mouth, and these veins are called "augueherich";
et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	and the two veins that are below the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras:	The veins by which we commonly cleanse are five in each arm:
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	One is the Cephalic type, and it's situated on the left side of the chest, and they call this 'the man of the head'.
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»;	And the middle one is called 'the fast', and it's made up of the cephalic type and the basilic type, and they call this 'a vein for the heart'.
et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	And the basilic is either on the right or left side of the chest, and they call this 'a vein for the belly', and it's located near the axilla, and it's the one that's bled from, which opens clearly in the armpit.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains;	And the basilic is the vein that's located between the little finger and ring finger, and it has two courses;
et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes:	and in the leg there are three veins:
l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit;	One is below the curve of the left chest pocket, and the other is in the ankle of the right side of the body.
et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	and the vein that's called "nasse", which is located in the ankle of the other side of the body;
et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	And in the other leg, there are three veins beneath those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	The cleanliness of the veins that are behind the ears helps with old plagues and migraines;
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre;	And the qualities of a surgeon, like what I've told you, and when you laugh at the head of an illness and touch the body or areas with veins with a rough cloth;
puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief:	Then squeeze the patient's neck like winding a thread, until you see the two veins behind the ears in two loops under the head:
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	Guide your hand there, and where you feel the pulse at your neck, noble sir of the wound;
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	Then take the lancet, and press it down along the vein until you reach the bone, then lift your hand all the way up to the vein above, cut through both skin and vein carefully as they should pass each other, and let blood flow out until you see it.
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	Then squeeze and tie, until the wound is clean;
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	And I have explained the incisions and the cautery in this first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	The cure for the two arteries that are in the two temples, requires ancient grain intake and rest, and systematic eye exercises, and treatment of cold tears from the eyes;
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	And the qualities of a surgeon are thus as I say:
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement;	and when the patient stretches his neck, so that both veins can be seen clearly;
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	and feels for the pulse all over your body, and then speaks of examination;
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	then gently raises the hand over the vein at your second finger's tip, and holds the scalpel nearby, then raises the vein at that point, and starts the incision, just as you did in other veins earlier, and perform the bleeding according to your need;
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	then frees the patient, place your second finger on the vein for an hour, then put it on cotton;
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee;	and then forms the cut, leaving it open until it heals;
et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	And we have spoken of them regarding their development and extraction, or at the beginning of this book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	The treatment for the vein in the forehead is just as important as that of the temporal vein when dealing with diseases affecting the scalp, and it includes migraine, and fever.
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	And its quality is such that the patient twists her neck, until the vein appears;
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	Then take the tool called "drill", as shown below:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	And place the tip on the vein, and press with your hand or another object, and let blood flow according to how much you see.
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	Then relieve the patient's neck and tie the vein as long as it is healthy and without any cuts, where the work of the surgeon should be with a wide flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus;	Otherwise, it is not right that the flames become too fierce;
et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	and the wound goes across, for the bone is close by, and by chance the flames might break the bone when it is thin.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	The treatment of the two veins that are in the two eyelids helps with the eyes, at the nose, and on the cheeks, and in the ear canal when it comes to the ear, and for diseases of the face;
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	and the quality of its treatment is that the patient tightens their throat by twisting some string, as previously.
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	Then apply the treatment, and let the application go across, somewhat in line with the length of the flame, somewhat wide, for there is no flesh.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise;	And if their flames are subtle, by chance they might break;
puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	Then drain the blood as much as you need to, and then tie it with cotton, and tie it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	The treatment of the vein near the nose is valued for fever and colds, and diseases of the face, such as migraine and redness that comes to the face, and especially when it is old;
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	And the quality of this treatment is that the patient constricts their throat, then pinches their nose with their left hand, and take hold of the subtle flame long, and insert it into the lip in the space between the two nostrils, because the vein does not open well like that, and the bleeding will now start to drain;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	And don't go too long without food, and adjust to your need the flow of blood, then leave for a night, as she is very quickly restored.
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	and it's the shape of the flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	The health of the lungs helps in tightening the alvine, and in the beginning of syphilis, and for many diseases, and in pneumonia, and corrosion, and in herpes, and tuberculosis;
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	And the quality of health is such that patients restrain their throat from one side to the other, as we have said;
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	And may the masters be on the edge of the patient's throat, and the patients sit at the edge, then heal the vein for a long slightly wider part, then guide the blood moderately, or as much is needed;
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle;	Then redo another part in the other vein, then untie this knot, and hold back moderately the veins, so as not to strangle the patient.
et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	and let it be until morning, that the wound may heal.
de la sainie des leivres	In the art of healing wounds
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The treatment of veins above the lips helps in closing them in the mouth, and it deals with gum decay, cracks in the lips, nosebleeds, and tooth pain.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	And the quality of healing is to have the patient stand in front of you, and hold his neck as I said;
puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	Then turn the lip, and look at two veins, one is on the right lip and the other on the left, and you know them by what they are black, and by what in their vicinity there are small black veins:
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	So pinch both, and if you don't know them and are in doubt, then pinch the largest of each part, and do similarly with the two veins above and below, for it is the same manner.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	In the healing of wounds under the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	The healing of veins that are below the tongue requires help after the healing of the cephalic region, and this is in constriction of the throat, and in diseases of the sclera, and in diseases of the mouth;
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	And the quality of the surgeon is such that when you squeeze the wounds between your hands in front of the sun and lift the tongue, and look under each side, you find a black vein:
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	Therefore heal both of them and do not overdo it, because there lies the arteries under them.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres:	The veins of the chest that we commonly heal are treated according to two methods:
ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	either by piercing with any large incandescent flame, or with an olive-smooth one like the blade of a trencher, and it is called "anevil";
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	And they are broad and fine according to the width and narrowing of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The shape of the fire brand Mirtin is greatly renowned, and it is quite wide as you can see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	And it takes skill to open thick knotted veins full of visible large blood, and those containing large blood and disturbance;
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	and it is the shape of olive oil flame:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	And it's more subtle and pointed, and it's for purifying the delicate veins, or having subtle yellow blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	The blood from the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases that occur in the throat, and in the neck, and in the chest, and in the stomach;
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	And it is necessary for the surgeon to heal correctly, and he must be aware of the artery that is nearby.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	And if he cuts the artery, and bleeding occurs, it is necessary to stop the bleeding, just as I have said;
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And must never grasp the flame, but cut it as before.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	And if the basilica does not open clearly, then it is necessary for you to extract it, and use another one;
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras:	or if you want no blood from it, or you open the vein instead of it with your arm:
elle apert manifestement;	it opens clearly;
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	and the cut is done with the flame as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	And if you know where to cut, it is necessary for you to pull the arm so that you touch the place as long as you can feel the pulse;
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	then mark where to cut, and then bind the arm, and cut the vein with the flame as we have said;
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere:	And remember not to cut into the artery when you see the limb swelling up, for it is from the artery:
eschui la donques.	Therefore, here it is.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	And if you see it bulging up high like the urine of a child, and the veins are red and delicate, know that this is blood from the artery:
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	Hasten then, and place your hand for a while, then press firmly until the vein stops bleeding, which has happened many times;
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides;	Hold his arm, and leave it like this, and do not move your patient;
et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	And lie on their back, and do not move them until they have cooled down.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient;	And if the vein has not stopped bleeding and it takes too long, and you lack medication, if you cannot close the artery when it opens, for its head is withdrawn;
et estainche li sans.	And stop bleeding the wound.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	And take an elm bark, and cut it, and take one of the halves and bind it well until the other joint.
se li sans estainche, c’est bien;	When the wound stops bleeding, that is enough;
se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	If not, then treat it, as we have said, with powders that stop bleeding;
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	And the stopping of the bleeding is not done with many preparations for the small size of the wound and the strength of the connection of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	The healing of the vein in the middle helps treat bleeding from above and below the elbow, because it is made up of the basilica and cephalic veins, as we have said;
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	And it befits the surgeon that they should beware of the nerve which is nearby, and if he does not go too far forward, and he finds the nerve, and it swells and harms the health, and by chance cannot heal;
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil;	And this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in any person due to its subtlety, it befits you to have the instrument sterilized before use;
et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	And listen to the nerve with your power.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is a vein between the two hands, cut it long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	The surgeon in the treatment of the cranial region helps, relieving blood flow to the head, and aids with eyes;
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	And it befits the surgeon to intervene in the olive oil vein or in the arm vein, for this is the safest of all veins, as it has neither nearby nerve nor artery.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	Always, strive for the lightest touch, and do not fret if you have to try it first time, and then repeat if necessary;
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	And by chance, the limb might swell in some people when done for the first time, but there's no harm if you do it again.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of health is according to your thought.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	The first thing you should know about surgery is that it's not performed merely for health preservation and to avoid future diseases;
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute:	and so, if the surgery is done in one of the three veins, namely:
c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	That's to say, frontal, facial, and basilar;
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	And one should perform surgery at the beginning of prayers while kneeling, and in autumn and winter after eating, when signs of fullness appear;
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	And one must cleanse on the first or third day, after two hours or three days.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	The treatment for diseases does not have a set time period, but rather depends on the need of the day or the body, at all hours and in every situation;
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	And it is not proper to cleanse children up until they are twelve years old, nor pregnant women for only a quarter of their term up until seven months.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	Neither should they heal the elderly who have passed sixty years.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	And when one desires to be cleansed, in whatever manner, it is necessary for them to perform mild bowel irrigation, if they have retained feces, so that the veins do not attract excesses from the intestines that harm the main limbs;
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	Nor is one cleansed by those who are overly bloated with meats, or drunk to the point of being incapacitated, whether due to excess strength or those with dehydration;
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	And if warned by the physician after colic pain, and vomiting, and abdominal distress, and frequent need to relieve oneself in women, and labor pains, of staying awake and working, and whatever saps the strength, or from something due to weapons or injuries;
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	Then refine the humors within you, if they are too abundant due to meats and beverages and medications; use your judgement for their intake.
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	Then take a bath or plunge, if nothing is lost in the process; this will help refine the blood and cleanse your veins of the belly's waste products, as we have said.
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	And keep this day free from work, pain, and excess, and any similar activities;
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	And be mindful of your diet and exercise moderation. Ensure the physician stays higher than the part being treated, and rub the arms twice or three times. Gently massage the bandage afterwards; if it is too tight or loose, it cannot properly contain the blood flow.
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	And then rub the area with hands, until the veins swell, and when felt.
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	Then moisten the wick of a small piece of old oil flame, then place his left hand's finger on that vein right under the area being treated for just a moment where he intends to apply heat, so that the vein doesn't burn and break upon contact with the metal.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	For there are veins that behave like strings when heated, and some are filled with air currents, in such a way that when placed over the flame, they pull away from the flame and fail to open up, and thus belong to those types.
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	And if it causes the vein to constrict, then the wound is too narrow for this; so that the flame must be aware of such things.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin;	And if the body endures this first time, it is good;
se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if not, try again slightly around that area or at an acceleration, as long as the limb isn't swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras:	And if the limb is swollen and the body starts to anticipate pain, let it rest for one or two days, and do not bind the arm:
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus;	By chance, there may come pus-filled blisters;
ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	Don't take baths, then start cleaning it if it suits her;
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	And if the wound is small or the vein is too thin and you doubt whether it's leaking as much blood as you see, pierce that very spot directly into the entire flame;
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez;	And the work proceeds somewhat hastily, so that the arms are swollen;
car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	For this happens many times, when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	If you see that the arm is inflamed, do not start anew with healing, and place a bit of oil on it instead, for oil lightens the body from blood, and heals there where oil is applied.
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	And administer the oil to every healing you do on veins, so as to stop the flow of blood;
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu;	And in the same way vinegar and wine help when applied to the arm;
si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If it is too large, refine the veins and spread them out.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	And if it comes about that there's an abscess large in size, which happens many times, especially when the wound is not fully healed even once or twice at the time of opening the vein, then hurry up, and place a damp sponge on top with some hot water and a little oil, then hold it for an hour;
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	And you should do this after the discharge of blood from the vein, and if it remains in place for several days without any blackness or greenness, then it does not harm him;
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if you see any sign of it, place something made from aloes or myrrh in a concoction of chamomile, mint, or similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique:	And often there would be pus and appearance at the healing of the basilica:
met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	Place your hand there, and if you find the elbow soft under pressure from your hand, this is an appearance of malady.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere;	So listen, do not apply anything from what we have spoken of, for perhaps in this there is no connection to the artery;
mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	but make it slightly damp to harden the elbow, then treat with another cure, until it heals properly.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treat each person with blood according to the amount of their virtue and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges;	For if the wound is black, let pus flow out as long as it remains red;
et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez;	and if you see it swollen, let it drain until it becomes thin.
et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	and if it's too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	And it's necessary for the full and healthy individual who needs blood extraction to make a wider incision and let the flames be wide;
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	And for the one who is weak, do the opposite, and it suits him well to clean often and gently, and you must clean him by cutting across, not straight.
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And this method of cleaning saves from the spreading of blood and constriction of nerves, and is better than long cleaning over width.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates;	And for the one whose body needs cleansing, it's suitable to give him moist bread made from juice of pomegranates;
s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	If he is flushed, let him drink three or four times of blood. If he has a cold complexion, have him eat something before the cleansing that's moist bread in syrup, or syrup with aromatic honey and spices like pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cardamom, and the syrup should smell very good.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if it fails in surgery, after the issue of a little blood, it should inhale soup of flesh, and pleasant subtle syrup, and use the other things that we have said in the section or chapter on collapse, for the evacuation of veins.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if they wish to bleed their arm, and then rest again, should this be necessary, when it has been weakened by much bleeding, it should be bled little by little, according to the strength of its power continuously.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And if someone wishes to bleed their arm after the first bleeding, and they have strong health, they should be bled seven hours after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And if someone wishes to undergo bleeding on another part of their body, they should be bled on the second day or the third day at the latest.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre;	For there is much blood within the body which is already heated, causing fever;
si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	If so, it requires large quantities to be drained, and widen the incision until it pierces the heart;
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	Then when you have fulfilled all the conditions of health, and place your hand on his heart when it is healing, so that death does not come from the heart rather than the lung, this happens many times, when the surgeons are careless;
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	And it is not good when you see the arm being released and blood being expelled a second time, and the incision is closed, so you press firmly on it;
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	Nor if he has curved it, to extend the arm quickly, for that would be badly done;
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois;	But let it grow until it heals for the second time;
ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	but when you apply it at the tip of the flame, until the frozen skin starts to melt from the heat, and place on a damp cloth in hot water, then gently press.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is swollen, leave it alone and don't squeeze it, until the abscess is relieved.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if needing to bleed again for blood, if the health is in that place itself, or in another vein, or on the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein exists in the arm just like the one by the head because it is made up similarly.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	And the method of healing is such that the injured person holds their hand in hot water until the pulse turns red;
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	then bind it moderately, so that the vein can be seen clearly, then heal now through it, neither too wide nor too long;
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	and if the cut is too wide, heal well near the wrist joint, and if blood cannot flow out, then place the hand in hot water, let the blood drain into the water, as long as you have enough.
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	And if it's in this state, do not reset the hand into hot water, as you would put it more at risk of frostbite than in heat;
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the healing of this vein is more certain than for all other veins, as it contains neither artery nor nerve.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	The healing of regaining the right hand is worth more than any illness of the liver, and this is how:
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	Stretch the hand, and reset it in hot water until the vein is visible, if you can see it;
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	And if the healing is across, and if you press all over it without causing any pain;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	And do not press too hard, for the nerve is completely bare of flesh everywhere, and then put the hand in hot water, if it's frozen in the wound and can't escape.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated the blood as much as is required of you, place on the vein where and with a needle to solder quickly, and thus do for each rain.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The health of the left hand is to the disease of the mouse, and do everything as I have told you regarding the right.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The healing of the sinew affects all diseases that are within the body, such as diseases of the liver, and blockage of fluids, and diseases of kidneys, and of old hands and feet, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet;	And the quality of its health is such that the patient bathes their feet in hot water, and rubs on the wound until it heals, and applies this to the joint at the ankle.
et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	And when the wound is on the ankle, then above their foot many drops of rain occur;
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	So heal it properly or even more extensively, whether it's on the ankle, as long as you can move it freely.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant;	And if you heal it on the foot, be aware of the nerves that are nearby, and heal across in the same way as when peeling.
et soit li flaimes anesil.	and may the flames extinguish quickly.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if it cannot come out without causing harm, then put the bone in water and ensure that the vein is well emptied.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	And if it needs to be healed once, then try the second time starting slightly above, because the skin is salty;
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	Do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and similarly perform surgery on the other side equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The veins of the sciatic nerve are at the ankle joint on the side, and its health corresponds to hip pain, when it's due to internal bleeding.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne;	And the quality of its health is such that it allows the patient to bathe in water and exercise on the ankle, turning four times by twisting, because otherwise the vein will not be accessible;
et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	And if it opens, heal her in all possible ways and when crossing over;
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And it is better if you hold her down because the leg muscles are strong and she responds well to human hands.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	And if you don't find it, heal no part of what opens or at the back of the foot, and toward the small toe, and guard against nerves.
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint;	And make such correction of the blood as you see fit, and then untie the knot, and place a cotton bandage and tighten it.
ele est maintenant sanee.	The treatment has now healed.
des sainies de ventouse	Of suction healings
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre;	Pessaries are made from horns, or spiders, or worms;
et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres:	and cupping is performed in two ways:
ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	either by piercing and drawing blood, or without piercing.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres:	And this cupping that involves piercing can be done in two ways:
ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	either it is with instantaneous heat, or without heat.
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief;	And cupping that involves piercing and the extraction of blood is done in four quarters of a man's body, where one is completely solid.
et li autres est emmi le col;	and the other is around the neck;
et II autres en II costeis dou col;	and the other two in each side of the neck;
et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	And the suction cup under the chin;
et li ventouse des II espaules;	And the suction cup on both shoulders;
et li ventouse sus les crupies;	And the suction cup over the pimple;
et les ventouses emmi les II bras;	And the suction cups on both arms;
et les ventouses des II jambes;	And the suction cups on both legs;
et les ventouses des II chevilles;	And the suction cups on both ankles;
et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	And suction therapy does not address large blood vessels that are scattered throughout the body, for it would weaken one if done so, just as we perform bloodletting;
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And it should not be administered, nor at any hot or without heat, in any disease caused by excess, until all the bodies are emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	And if suction is necessary due to diseases, or by habit, we should administer it every hour at the beginning of her period, or at the end, and throughout and in each phase;
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	for there are some who, when they need to suction, if they do not rest often;
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	and for those who experience swelling and heat in their face, and head, and neck, and the eyes appear dark to them;
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	and those who notice a drop of blood in their mouth, and have an extended tongue, and cough up blood;
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	and if there are those who think, see through the nose blood and ashes and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we observe these signs, especially during the first month, we instruct people to take some air after three hours of fasting each day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	The health of the nose helps with inflammation of the head ... that comes to the eyes, and it should not be after the evacuation of all over the body;
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	And this process of drawing out evil spirits, if it is to be done in the health treatment for the head, should not be used by those with cold constitution or who have fever, because it causes much harm to them.
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	And for this reason, one should not use it if they have health issues related to cold conditions or cold nature.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And the one who often seeks cleanliness, becomes forgetful, and because of this, it is necessary to place the suction cup a bit further down due to the element of forgetfulness.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	The process of ventosation in the neck is part of head health care and basilica treatment. For this reason, it is valued for its impact on the foot and for cutting the channel of the heart lung, as well as generally, and for refilling;
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	And it should be applied gently, as if it is held too tightly, it may cause paralysis or stomach and heart issues.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique;	The ventosations at the two ribs of the neck are good for head pains, eye problems and toothaches, and for strangulation, as well as pain in the root of teeth, being part of basilica healthcare.
et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	And it is necessary that you instruct the surgeon to prepare his hand for surgery, not to cut the artery and avoid any spurts of blood.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche;	The breaths under the chin if they lead to mouth diseases, and gum decay, and similar illnesses that are in the mouth;
et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	and it is related to the health of the inner lining of the lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The breathing around the shoulders leads to illness caused by heat and congestion.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	The breaths around the elbows are as significant as the three major veins of the arms, for they carry blood from these large veins;
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	And instruct the surgeon not to cut too close, for the muscles are bare of flesh and touch near nerves and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire;	The suction cup placed on the back is related to kidney disorders and illnesses nearby; it must be large and made of skin so that it can properly treat.
et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit;	And by chance, if she were subtle, she would break;
et i fai grans plaies.	and I cause great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors;	The leg cups are applied firmly, because they draw blood from the entire body, and are effective against old abdominal pains, menstruation pains, and bladder issues, and relieve swellings;
et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	and are located on the two shins and the two ankles, and moreover they weaken the body after long use, and cause pallor in various conditions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc;	The method of applying the suction cup is as follows: you apply it first in a vacuum state, and maintain continuous suction, applying it quickly, moving evenly, and continuously doing this until you see the area turning red and swelling, noticing the heat from the blood.
puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez:	Afterwards, and replace the suction cups, and be cautious in the placement of the horns, for there are those who have thick flesh, and clear pores:
si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes;	It is necessary to cut only once, and it is necessary to make large wounds, and a bit deep.
et suce legierement.	And suck gently.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois:	And if the animal is large, it may be necessary to cut twice:
la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	The first time to subtilize the blood path that is thick.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois;	And if the animal is very fatty, it may be necessary to cut a third time;
et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And when we wish to milk slowly and gradually from the blood vessel, we only apply it once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent;	And if we want much blood, then we often renew the application;
et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	And if the wound is deep, so severe and piercing that it immediately pierces the veins, this technique is suitable for those with thick skin and hardness, who have endured much pain. You should grease their wounds with suckers that open and dissolve when applied.
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	If it's in purple fat or sweet almond oil, or pumpkin seed oil;
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if it's in fat (of an animal), use mustard oil, or rosemary oil, or chamomile oil, or any similar kind.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the excess is large and cold, take oil of arnica, or balsam, or juniper oil, and similar things.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if the skin is in need of strengthening and has large swellings, no oil should be applied; it's better to wash after suction with pink water, or cold water, or mulberry water, or cucumber water, or porcelain water, or any similar.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And whoever has much moisture, if they rise from rest, or from water of myrtle, and from sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	And for those who have large excesses, they rise from old wine or vinegar, or from the distillation of juniper or chamomile, or other similar substances;
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II;	And they should not be treated with suction cups before or during the bath, but after the bath for an hour or two.
et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And do not sleep after suction, it is necessary that he take care, when he should be suctioned and when he has been suctioned.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	And watch over him who is being treated and is hot-tempered, and if he is too active and inflamed;
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	It is necessary for him to eat cold things, such as pomegranates, endives and lettuces in broth, and similar items;
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And eat fowl, and beef stew, and moist meat.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	And for those with a cold constitution, they should eat honey syrup and fragrant half-aged wine, which is between old and new, and eat small portions, and fowl stew, and small birds such as pigeons;
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	And on the day he gets suctioned, he must drink more than eat;
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	And it should be given to some people no garlic or muskmelon before suction, or after, to strengthen the main limbs;
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And you should sieve the water, but it is not good for those who are cold to drink them.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne;	The suction cups that are placed to hurt are those placed on the liver, and on the spleen, and in gout, and on the stomach and intestines and kidneys, and buttocks. For this member does not suffer being hurt with needles, and it is only done forcefully to draw blood from limb to limb, as when we place them on the nipples when the child cannot suck;
por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	to thin out the viscosity in the limb, as when we place suction cups on the stomach and intestines to reduce the limbs;
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	And for pain when there is an obstruction or stone, so by its attractive power it may adhere to the obstruction, or evacuate the stone from its place;
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement;	And thus she acts when you place her above the heart and under the belly in cases of retained wind, and these suction cups are administered empty to remove such wind only;
et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	And sometimes they are administered with fire, and sometimes filled with hot water, as in illnesses causing colic, and in such manner one fills the suction cup with boiling hot water, or with water that has cooked suitable herbs for this purpose.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The shape of the suction cup administered with fire is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	And it should have half a palm wide and deep halfway down, with its edges at the midpoint one small notch, as to pierce like a needle, made of brass so that it doesn't cause the patient pain when placed on the limb;
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	And in the middle there is a rod crossing like an arachnid or iron, for to hold a candle, and it should be large and small according to the illnesses and age of those who use them;
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	for the suction cups for children are different from those for adults, and the thin ones are different from the fat ones.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	And one should place this suction cup like this on the limb:
empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	take the wax candle or the cotton thread, and place it inside the suction cup through the rod that is in the suction cup, so that the light is at the bottom of the suction cup to not burn the patient;
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	and then place it on the limb, and you should do this at the part as we have said, so that when one wants to, if there is vapor going up, remove the suction cup;
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And take the thread path as before, and repeat it often, if you need to.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	In the suction cup then, which is administered in the disease of pleuresin, for all colds, there is no pus nor discharge, and it is administered only when it is full of water, and placed solely on the limb;
et c’est li forme:	and this is its form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	Without utensils, they are administered only in limbs where suction cups cannot be placed due to their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar parts;
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	and in their naked flesh, like buttocks or cheeks, and other similar areas;
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	and as for the quality of applying suction, if you find without utensils that are in mild water without pus, take them;
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	And place them in sweet water, until they become familiar, and have nothing in their stomachs;
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	and then bleed and use suction cups, then rub the limb until it turns red, and place it on stones;
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	and when they're full and start to bleed, if it's possible to place suction cups, do so, because this is not much after.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	If not, raise the limb from the bed and then water, very well, and then incise;
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	and if the limb bleeds too much after the use of cups, moisten it with a linen cloth in cold water and place it there, until the cups are cool.
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	and if there are multiple cups, place them on powdered vitriol or garlic and similar things, until they cool.
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	You place half of peeled hazelnuts inside the limb, and let them dry there until they are now sealed off.
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	And if you need more, take other walnuts instead.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	And if walnuts cannot be quickly obtained, rub the limb with fresh blood, or stick an awl there until blood flows out, then place them on top. Soon after they sense the blood, they will dry;
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And when you see that they are excreting, sprinkle a little aloes and ground grain or ash powder on them, and they will start healing now.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book on fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it deals with the restoration and healing of fractures.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	Know this, you young man who looks at this chapter, that they have never seen any of the old books or read a letter about it;
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	And because of this reason, the knowledge has been extracted from our land, for I have never found any good;
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	And I know nothing of it, for through the knowledge of old books, which I studied so much that I dealt with this knowledge, and through experimentation, and through the habit of my life;
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	And in this chapter, I have described what is contained here and summarized it at the end, clearly showing the forms of the instruments that are used, as I did in those two chapters before.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	Therefore, it is necessary for us to outline the essence of this book in its introduction and prologue, and highlight the chapters where wise minds apply their intellect. We should adhere to truth, so that those who have been taught can understand and learn this noble art, and teach it to others as well.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	I state that when any fracture or dislocation or twists or bruises occur in no part of the body, it is necessary for you to quickly cleanse the patient on both sides, if nothing weighs them down, such as weakness, children, or elderly people;
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois;	If the tightening is too tight, or too cold;
et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre;	and cook with cold broth, which means chilled soups, and onions and parsley, and do not drink wine, nor eat any fatty meats, and make sure the dish is not too full of foods that fill the veins with blood until you have no doubt of an abscess or the spreading of material in the body;
si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	if the patient's condition improves as per their initial regimen, as they have used it.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary to nourish the patient with foods that cause heavy digestion or are viscous, such as cooked wheat in water, and onions, and leeks, and peas, and cow liver, and eggs, and fresh fish, and heavy wine, and similar items.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For at any time of loosening they are moved more quickly and quicker is the breakage.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	And know that broken bones of the elderly and those in decline cannot be healed or joined well according to their nature due to the drying out of the limbs, nor can such bones which are too tender, like those of young children;
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant;	But if there is no cure, reset it at the broken bone on the large tendon that stretches out and joins the limb together, until you force it as it was before.
et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And do not finish his work entirely, and for this it is necessary to nourish with large meats, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that fractures are varied in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the breakage of the head is different from the breakage of the foot, or of the leg, and I will tell you all manners of breaking in this chapter.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there are breaks that go to the elbow, and others through prodding, such as the size of a feather for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if it's a broken bone with an injury, or a break resulting in a small crack.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	And each has his own means and proper instrument in the restoration, according to what memory comes to his mind;
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	And it is known that the breaking of the bone occurs when his ear is twisted, and opens well below, and is squeezed by the pressure of the hand;
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	And when there is no twist and the ear is not pierced, and the patient does not feel much pain, if there is no breaking;
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	But it can well have twisting, or cracking, or a small break.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	If it doesn't suit you to move it with your hand, but apply the remedies that follow, and then gently strain it now.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	And know that the break which happened at the shoulder, and it has two parts separated, they now need to be put in equal alignment, so as to have abscesses lie straight or run.
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	And if the pus-filled abscess is drained, if he leaves no day, until the abscesses become calm;
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces;	Then apply it evenly as you can lightly and wisely, know that the restoration of this is easier than restoring those with pieces;
puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	Then compress it, as it should be done as described hereafter.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	And if there are broken pieces in the bone, and it is divided into two parts, whether they are bones or wood, or under your hand if it's a small member, or divided by two strings, or with one string and your hand;
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	And place the limb according to its natural shape, so when the parts of the injured member are healed, you can realign it through every effort by moving them as much as possible, and make sure that in your actions no injury or pain befalls the patient.
et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And adjust well the two ends of the bones according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien:	And feel it well in your hand if you think it is not properly done:
si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	If it's done beautifully, and you don't pull it too much, not pressing as those who make the abscess swell and cause muscle tension do in their own way, as we have wanted many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	And when the limb is ready, carefully guard over the patient so they do not move it, whether awake or asleep, when turning or in any other manner;
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And make sure the limb is so securely placed that no pain is felt.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	And when there is no pain being felt, it means that it isn't in the right position, and one must place it in such an arrangement that no pain is felt.
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	and see to it that it is placed correctly, so that there is no distortion when restored;
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	And the quality of the broken limb matches what I'm telling you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that limbs broken vary in size and extent, and in shape.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans:	For there are smaller limbs such as arms and legs, etc.:
si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	and it is necessary to wrap them with soft and fine linen;
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe:	and those that are larger, such as the thigh and leg:
si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	If it is necessary to encase with a wide and hard band, for wide bands embrace the whole large limb, and restrain equally from all sides, so that there is no difference;
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	Then bind around with light straps, three times or four according to the limb, and hold your hand slightly on every band, then go above the breakage and restrain less there, so that the breakage may be moved a little upwards.
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	And soften the band gradually and gradually, until you reach a large part of his healthy limb, then take another band and return around him towards the broken limb;
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	Then return to the part below the breakage and restrain moderately, neither too hard nor too gently, as we have said in the first instruction above;
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	Place between the linen loops or pieces of cloth, as long as they are all even, then tie everything over with a bow, and then place your well-made stars on top, if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	And if there is swelling or an abscess, then place on something that soothes the abscess and removes the swelling, letting it stay like this for a few days;
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	Then tighten over your stars, and they should be half the width of a tightly wound rope or bamboo stalks, or from what is used to make darts, and they should look like this:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	However, it's necessary that the star placed on the break be slightly larger and wider than the others;
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	And let it be as long as is necessary for the size or largeness of the limb;
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	Then hold onto the pins just like you did in the first instance, then add a strip of fabric above it, similarly to what was done in the first instance on the burn wound;
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins;	The constriction becomes tighter over time, gradually reducing.
et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	And it is necessary for the thread to be of medium size, neither too thick nor too thin, and made of soft linen.
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	For if the thread is thick, like those that farmers use to tie their linen ropes in their work, and this is a great mistake, because the tying cannot be equal if it is too thin, and it does not suit for there to be less than two fingers' width between each pin.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patients are sore from the nails of the stakes after the tightening at their healthy parts, then put patches of linen or shoddy wool on them, so they do not blister.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is inflamed and the joints are broken, I will describe the treatment below.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it is not right to constrain all limbs broken on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	For when the limbs are large, it does not suit to use pins straightaway, but rather after five or seven days, or more depending on the severity of each successive abscess.
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion:	And here is the way of old plastering methods to restore fractures, dislocations, and twisting:
et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	And take flour that remains in the walls of the mill, mix it with plenty of eggs, and prepare this concoction, neither too thin nor too thick. Use it, and this is the common method of plaster restoration for various types of damage, as well as women and small children, because it does not cause harm whether it's too hot or too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion:	Another method for restoring plaster to fractures, dislocations, and twisting:
pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.;	Take ginger, onion, garlic, and asafetida, and gum Arabic, mix them with water equal to three parts of the total weight of these ingredients;
mirre et aloes, ana V З.;	And myrrh and aloes, mix them with five parts of water;
alechil VIIII З.;	The number seven;
et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef;	And make it into powder, and mix it with the yolk of an egg;
se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	If the condition of the patient is hot, then use this plaster, for it has a good composition, and heals broken bones quickly, and benefits many people.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion:	Another way of using the plaster that is beneficial for dislocations:
pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.;	Take milk and vinegar, use in proportion of ten to one;
mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.;	Mix myrrh and aloes, use the ratio nine to three;
acaice VI З.;	Use six parts of sugar;
bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Take ten parts of Armenian balm, grind it well, and mix with water or the yolk of an egg, then administer it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure:	Another way to treat joints and fractures is by setting them back into their places, and alleviating the pain that follows, and they cut down the bone, and apply pressure.
pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Take a new one, and mix it with honey and oil that has been cooked, then place it on the wound.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	Plastering does not heal completely, but it is better for soothing abscesses and properly treats bone pains.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez:	Another way to set bones which breaks bones back into place:
pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Take dried fig leaves and leaves of terrestrial mulberry, grind them together, then make a plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another method of plastering for the restoration of bone breakage and to soothe the removal of pus.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie;	Take root of balm, chamomile, flowers of violets, meal from cloves, one part of each;
et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	And grind it with wine, and apply the mixture to heated limbs, or mix it with moist parsley water, or water alone, and use it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another method of plastering more firmly than the first when an abscess is returning to the restoration of the limb.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie;	Take roots of valerian, and seed of flax, rush, marigold, and wormwood, and flowers of violet and chamomile, from each take a portion;
et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	and grind it with the strength of salt water, or sweet cold water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	In his book, Hippocrates states that to restore strength in a fractured limb one should apply a salve made of beeswax and oil, and nothing else more. He says it should be between two layers neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems to Galen that we should place upon the broken limb for restoration, things slightly moistened but somewhat warm, such as mirr (mastic), aloe, incense and similar things, just as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor:	Another method for plastering that is useful in injuries and pain:
pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Take the gall and kidneys of disemboweled men, or bird feathers, valerian, and an equal part of saffron, and grind them together, make a plaster from it and apply it.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu;	And then remove the plaster slightly later, and be careful that the patient does not feel any pain, nor is there movement of the bone in its place;
si ne lou deslie par mains jors.	If not by hand for days.
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant;	And if pain comes to the limb, or itchiness, without rest or swelling, should you feel urgency, and dislocate it, and set the plaster now;
et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	and take a light cloth, and a moist sea sponge, and dip it in water, and cool the limb, until the itch stops, and pain is soothed;
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	then let the limb rest for an hour, then place it on dry wool, soaked in water or rose oil, and bind it with a bandage until you are sure of removing heat.
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant;	and let the inflammation settle in the limb, and sooth the pain, then resume gentle movement, and a little plaster, do not strain it as much as before.
et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And precisely when it is healthy.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you notice that pus and redness, pain and swelling are subsiding, indicating the injury has healed throughout, then you need plaster and bandaging; start again as you did initially.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII;	And if nothing of what we have said happens to the limb, or if it is not released until after three, four, five, or seven days;
et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	And leave it for twenty days, as we see fit, until the fracture heals and brings about an adjustment of the flesh;
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant;	Then increase the restriction beyond the first stage, allowing for growth of its flesh, as I have said before;
et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	And if you see the limb drying more than it should, know that there will be no improvement;
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	Bathe it with hot water afterwards, every time you release it, and let this happen each third day, and scrape a little of the joint;
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement:	Through this work then cut into the flesh of the limb, and quickly follow what the foolish surgeon does, that leaves the member deformed:
c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	This is bad, and if it's full of pus-filled boils, I only see one way to do it: leave the cuts straight and open them properly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	Through various methods of breaking up
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	There are many ways of fractures, and various shapes, and their causes are specific;
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust;	because there are fractures caused by the impact of a sword, and the elbow bone hits all the way to the joint that is below the bone, similar to how a mallet or staff might cause damage;
et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	And because of this, this kind of fracture is called 'mallet injury'.
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»;	Or the sword hits the bone from above without piercing it, and this kind of fracture is called 'absolute'.
et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	And these are the injuries from these two fractures, large or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is sequential impact, or crack in the bone, or injury from stone, or impact on stone, or other similar occurrences.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a break that approaches until it reaches the tissue beneath the bone, or above the bone, and this wound can be large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	And if the wound is healed in the bone as finely as a hair, and the crack is small, because of this it is called this "hairline" fracture;
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres;	And if the wound is made either by piercing through stone or falling or from something similar, and the piece of bone enters below, so that it is split in the middle like a candle when it has burned through the candles.
si entre li piere dedens.	And if within the stone.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	And this happens more in those with moist bones below, such as children's bones;
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles;	And occurs through all these ways of fracture that result in small fragments like splinters.
et je em parlerai en son leu.	And I will speak about it in its place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And let us know all the ways of breakages through the diminishment above them, and the examination at stakes, and by the corrupt flesh which is upon.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The appearance of hair can be recognized when one has exposed the bone and rubs it inside, revealing the black breakage.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In treating breakage, beware of adverse effects due to malaise, and if you do not encounter any bad side effects such as vomiting bile, loss of consciousness, stretching, pallor, fever ague, and other symptoms appearing in various conditions, it cannot be cured without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see an alarming mishap, and you hope for salvation, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when winter comes first to you, and if it is winter, then it's necessary to remove the bone before the fourteenth day of the month that you can.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is spring, then you should hurry to remove the bone before the seventh day, in such a way that the pus around the bone is rotten, and accidents occur as we have said.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi:	And if the breakage of the bone comes up to the membrane that covers the brain, then it is necessary for you to cut the broken part in this way:
et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	and when you touch the unripe head of the patient, and expose through the bone in every way that you can, and on the shape of the wound as much as you can, and if blood leakage occurs during exposure of the bone or pus appears, then use what is necessary, and when you fill the cavity with moistened cloths in olive oil;
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc;	and let the wound rest until the pus subsides and there is assurance of blood flow;
puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige:	then begin digging into the bone, and this is done according to two ways of operation:
l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	One method is to cut closely at the front, and this is its shape:
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then make another cut larger than the first one.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde;	And the second method is that you have several different sizes of cuts, some narrow and others wide, and they should be pointed, and made of iron indelibly;
et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And work lightly, so as not to cut the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os;	And if the bone is firm and hard, it must be pierced internally, so as to apply cuts with needles instead of directly, not piercing through the bone beyond the testicle, and there should be a margin or circle above the tip that does not allow the tip to pass beyond the bone;
et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test;	And it must have several (needles), so that each grows into its place of the thickness of the bone, and you will have needles for all testicles;
et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	And this is the form of the three ways of cuts:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez;	The quality of piercing inside the broken bone is that you place the cut on the bone, and turn with your hands until you know that the bone is pierced;
puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures;	Then place another cut somewhere slightly later on, and thus do this all around. Then scrape in the space of the bone that is between the teeth, and do this more subtly than you can, gently, as we said, until you pull the bone to your hand, or to none of the instruments you have such as forceps;
et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	And make sure not to touch the brain or the sinuses.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	And when you have pierced and treated the bone, if it is necessary that you finish off the edge of the bone left from the os to all other instruments like a tooth, but it must be more robust and more delicate than the other tooth;
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens;	And if it remains with no small bones, nor any scales, if the bones are lightly struck with instruments;
puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	Then treat the wound with bandages and applications that we have discussed.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus;	And another way of treatment is what Galen said, which is safer;
et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	and the oath very strong, and it's his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first to uncover a part of the bone where the fracture opens and moves. So when you have uncovered that part, place underneath the tip of this ophthalmic incisor, as described here:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os;	And don't cut from one side only, and the injury is divided into two sides, so that cutting faces towards bone;
puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	Then strike with a small mallet there, so that you gently hit the bone all around, and be well aware of the thread that is nearby;
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	If it is close to the bone, then gently hit the bone because hitting the bone causes no harm and no fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the bone break does not pierce until the cloth and only cuts through from above, with small pieces remaining, then after that roughness, use a fine razor to remove the scales. You must have various quantities of this tool in order to administer the most suitable treatment for each location according to the manual and the appearance of the break.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you stand before great razors, and after finer ones, and do not stop doing this until it is well done.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement;	In each of the other hair trimming cuts and delicate breakages, you must apply your skill according to its direction;
et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	And this matter is not answered by the one who has dedicated their studies in this craft.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	And if it is revealed to be pus, then you must apply linen bandages according to the size of the wound, and mix with a little rose oil, and place it on the wound;
puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil;	Then take another bandage doubled in two or three layers, and soak it with wine and rose oil, then place it on the first bandage;
et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	And do this as lightly as possible so you don't burden the pus, then administer another layer of bandage above it, but do not apply too much force until only the wound is dampened;
et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses;	And let it be so for one or two days until the abscesses are somewhat calmed, then displace it and give medications like root extracts of this, cornmeal, incense powder, and sage, as well as similar things;
et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	And make a powder from these and put it on the wound, then give appropriate medications without causing irritation.
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice;	And see that the wound is clean, do not leave any ointment on it and do not allow the scabs to stick together. For when scabs stick together on the brain tissue's mesh, they can move about and cause great harm to the patient;
car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	And when you place something corrosive over it, it eats through from above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Take care then, so that no harmful events occur to the patient as we have said, in case there is doubt without doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	And if fear does not leave you only because of the medicine we have placed on it, and this virtue exists, then you should take part of honey and three parts of rose oil and one drachm of glue, and place this mixture under your tongue;
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then apply the appropriate curing methods until they are cured, when it is healthy.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os;	Know that neither of the two parts above the nose are ever broken, or just one by itself, for these are two bones;
et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	And that below is cartilaginous and does not break, neither can it be twisted or bent, then heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	And if one of the two parts is broken, you must pinch your little finger or under the nose, and make the break equal in the tip of your ring finger, then by rubbing through the middle, as long as the nose regains its natural shape.
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And do this gently, and guard that the patient does not feel pain through your operation.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is above the nose part and cannot reach to its place at the head, then it is necessary that you make it equal to the tip of a stick somewhat thick.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	And if the break is two parts, redo another piece, and strive to restore the first day, if you can;
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	But if not, after the seventh or tenth day when the abscess is subdued, then apply to the head under the nose with strips of linen bandage, and if the break is in one part.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est;	Or you hammer on another side, if the break is there;
et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	And let them be large enough to fill out the hollows under the nose.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And they say no healer should grease the nipples with butter, and change each day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin;	I don't think this is quite right, but they should be moistened in the preparation of a mixture with egg and powder.
puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	Then leave the tent, as long as the bone is hard, and the cartilage has hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi;	And no later than once or twice use goose feathers instead of tents, and if the bird's body swells inward, and there is a stinging sensation, then let the wind blow through them;
or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	just do whatever you see.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if abscesses come to the nose in the same way as you are doing it, then put a poultice or wet cotton in oil mixed with it, or in one corner of a spoonful of snail juice.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	And if pus forms and doesn't go away, apply a poultice outside, made of ground myrrh and powdered frankincense, mixed with yolk from an egg. Then place it on light bandages, but don't tie the goose's neck;
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	And if the cuts on the nose are small and the bones have broken into small pieces, use tools suitable for this task, then clean out through the incisions with things that cause purging, and then seal it back up, using poultices or ointments that are suitable for this purpose;
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there is no wound within the nose, treat it with a poultice, and place a wick in it, as long as it heals.
de la routure de la mandibule	Of the rupture of the jawbone
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jawbone is broken externally, and there's no wound outwardly, only the fracture is external. It isn't broken into two halves completely; rather it breaks internally as well, which can be discerned lightly.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide;	It is necessary, if the breakage is in the right side, that you bend your ring finger towards the mouth of the wound;
et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	And if the breakage is in the left jawbone, then bend your ring finger of the right hand, and gently place the break inside, and work it out on the other side by the exterior, and apply evenly.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if there is a break in both parts of the jawbone, it must be treated with extension of half parts, until they are equal.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double;	And if tooth movements or rupture occur, then stretch it with a thread of gold, silver, or silk, then place on the broken jaw plaster, and set upon the two cloths;
et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And place on the cloth a well-made wide board, or an equal piece of leather, long and wide according to the jaw, and fasten it at as many points as you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and eat light meats.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet;	And if you notice that the shape changes, dislocate it on the third day, and then set it back to the position where it changed.
et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote;	And place plaster on it, mixing the powder from the mill with enough egg or flour of almond meal after you have removed the wax.
et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez;	And place on the plaster a soft wool, and if the plaster hardens and the condition of the patient does not change, leave it until they are well;
maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	Many times, one is well in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if pus-filled ulcers come about, then apply what we have repeatedly instructed.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee;	And if there is both fracture and wound together, remove any piece of bone that has broken out.
si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	If the extraction requires delicate tools suitable for this task.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, widen it with fire according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all these pieces and there is nothing left, if the wound is wide, place one plaster over it suitable for this purpose to promote healing until it heals.
de la forcele	with strength
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres:	The forces break multiple times before reaching the shoulder, towards it, and the breaking happens according to three ways:
ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer;	Or she is broken and drained in two parts, with fragments, and it's the more lightweight one to restore;
ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	Or there is breaking with wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie;	And the operations occur when breaking is felt through the wound, when you have two helpers, so that one marks the shoulder where the force is broken;
et li autres estende lou col vers la partie;	and the other extends down along the neck to the affected part;
puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	Then place the break evenly on your thumbs, so that the shape is as it should be, and there's no appearance or strain.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit;	And if you need to extend more, place a round sponge under the shoulder for the patient, of cloth or wool, and its size should be according to your necessity;
et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And they make it slightly weak, hold the spear to your hand so that you can apply an even break, as is proper.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot draw the head from the strength's force behind it, because it comes forward, then the patient must lie with their head resting on their pillow, and place one of the shoulder's cushions under both shoulders. Have the attendants press the shoulder downwards until the bone of the strength rises.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus;	And address the break to your fingers, and if you find weak spots, it is right that you split through there;
et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as;	And pull the parts gently, and if the bone cannot join despite any exertion, it is to be cut at one of the incisions you have made;
mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	but make sure you have a firm grip on that instrument, to withstand that tension:
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre;	and make it resemble a spoon, not too thick, and be as wide as it should be according to the size of the bone and the strength of the task;
et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	and have two heads, as you see, and make one wide, and the other thin, as is the wound you made when treating the bones;
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	And when you are sure of the location of the abscess, if you cut the wound, and if its rupture is small, or if you doubt about the location of the abscess, if you treat the wound with bandages and tents, according to their quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And when the abscesses are drained, if it is moist, soak bandages in oil rose and in sweat and wine, and place them on top.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	The grinding of the bone, when it is concerning wounds and surgery, consists in applying a plaster made from the powder from a mill and some butter of an egg onto the bone. Place light pincers on top, and put a sponge underneath if needed;
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre;	Then take a very large band about the size of a palm wide, then place two layers of bandages on top of the pincers and plaster;
puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	Then take an elastic strip about three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around the bandage, so that the tip of the bone is hanging down.
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide;	And place the iron above the wound, and turn the bendstick towards the neck, and across the healthy elbow, and across the diseased elbow;
et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	And reset each part individually. When you see that the heat keeps the wound steady near the break, and you clearly see that the iron doesn't move over the broken bone, then reward it every day, and when you remove the ligaments, then you hold it in place;
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut;	And let the malady discharge on its back, and place him when he sleeps with a small pillow under his elbow, to raise the shoulder up;
si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors;	If it reduces the strain of the muscles by adjusting the position of the shoulder, or you tie his arm to the neck, and do not release him from this injury until no bad accidents occur for 20 days;
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez;	Then reapply the plaster if you see it is needed, and hold it in place without moving it until it has healed.
et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	And it usually takes up to 28 days, or sometimes less time for recovery.
de la brisure de l’espaule	From the breaking of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement;	Sometimes the shoulder breaks or is injured at its end or in the middle, and it's damaged only due to impact;
si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	If you align it according to the break's shape, and reset it according to its natural form, in all ways that you can;
puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double;	Then apply flour ground in the mill with plenty of eggs, and gently rub it in, then place a double layer of cloth on top;
puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment;	Then place a broad and slender bolster under it, somewhat wider than the shoulder, and ensure there are no movements anywhere on the shoulder; if there is hair or linen strands, position them so that the bolster sits evenly.
et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor;	And then he restrains it tightly for quite some time, so that the limb does not move from its place, and he checks the connection each day;
et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit;	And each time he pulls it back, if he restrains, and puts the limb on par with where it was originally, should it be at its place, and lies the patient on their side;
et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en XXV.	And the shoulder is restored in 20 days or in 25 days.
Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	And when this number is completed, if it dislocates again, be sure, for it's not an os that will put itself back lightly.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a bone fragment is ahead and not at the corner, then do it above, and the wound will open again. Then, follow what we have said about treating bleeding abscesses.
de la brisure dou pis	of the breaking of the foot
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc;	The bone is broken once in the middle, but this happens rarely;
mais il brise sovent au defuer.	but it often breaks at the end.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken at the middle, if the arm is lowered and there is great pain felt by the patient, and lack of circulation, all over the body, and sometimes vomiting blood occurs, and cuts open in the broken bone, and one can feel this well.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient;	And in the restoration stage if the body lies with its back and hips on the ground, then place I under his shoulders, press the shoulders down, and assemble the ribs of the second ribcage with your hands. Carefully adjust them to be equal across all manners that you can perform, until the shape of the bone is as it should be;
puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve;	Then place them on the plaster and wrap them with the subtle pile of salt, or another light substance, and cover it with a cloak. Fasten it onto the broken bone so that it does not move;
et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint;	and twist the banding round on the back, and tighten it in correspondence, and reward each hour the ligature, and if it relaxes, then tighten it;
et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures;	and if it seems to be untying due to corrosion or itching that comes to the body, or pain or abscess, then hasten, and untie it, remove the plaster, and treat in ways of treatment for what has come upon them.
puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then remove the plaster, and hold it until it is sound.
de la brisure des costes	from the breaking of the ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses;	Know that the breaking of ribs only occurs after a large hit on the back and within it, and they bend only because they are brittle;
et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	And one feels this well during examination at the testicles.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And for the repair, you should make the break equal, as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And then apply the plaster, and bind it with one strap if necessary.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile;	And if the breaking of ribs occurs within, one feels great pain and sharp pain, as well as crying out, like in childbirth, because the bone pierces the skin;
et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And it causes pain points, all over and vomiting large amounts of blood, and this is a sick health, and the old ones had to endure great suffering.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if there are those who say it is necessary to consume meat that inflates the belly, in order to expel wind from within.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not follow this, that pus and sulfur should be introduced if it has not already been there.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it has already been there, then heal it.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison;	And it was said that one should put suction cups on the body to drain fluid, for this is in line with reason;
toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	Nevertheless, there is doubt as to whether the suction cup attracts excesses towards the head due to the condition of weakness.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And it is said that when one must cover the body with wet wool in heated oil, and to place cloths between the ribs to make the wound equal inside, then follow the treatment of bleeding, of meat and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac;	And if the patient feels intense pain that cannot be borne by the bone piercing through the skin, there is doubt for the patient, whether it's necessary to cut towards his head from the place of the broken rib, and it's advisable to use tools under the pectoral muscle to prevent further collapse;
et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then one must cut the bone, treat it lightly, and then stitch the two edges of the wound if it's large, and dress it with plasters until it heals.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu;	And if pus comes out, put wet cloths in oil and place them on the wound;
et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And treat while the wound is as it should be for pus, and always place remedies on the ribs where it needs to be, until it heals.
de la brisure dou col	Of the breaking of the neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie;	No break occurs to the bones of the neck, and no bending is caused;
et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	And similarly in the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to any person, and you wish to determine if they will heal or not, watch carefully whether their hands are softened and swollen and dead, and cannot be moved or extended, and when you prick them with a needle, if they do not feel it.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Know that death can occur in various circumstances, and if they do not move well when held back and forward, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the disease has been cured, if care is applied to it.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit;	And if such a thing happens in the spine of the back, you should know whether it is healthy or not. Take heed if his joints are softened and if he experiences accidents involving his limbs, and above the back, a gust of wind and involuntary emission;
et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And when it occurs on his belly, an involuntary emission happens.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when it is observed on its back and it wants to rise, if it cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz:	Know that these are fatal:
si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	if no care is taken in its treatment.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this misfortune does not happen to him, then it is a matter of less concern.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez;	And the treatment consists in giving care if there is an abscess to drain, if you apply oil on the spine or on the spot of blood or of the yolk of egg, until it soothes;
puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer;	Then place on one of the soothing plaster, drying ones, and tie it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest;
et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And do not sleep on that part where he feels pain, until it is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur;	And if any bone dislocates, you should cover the socket with it;
et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And set the bone, then join together the two edges of the wound if it's large, with stitches. Then treat with ointment until healed;
et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier;	And if the bone head is broken, which they call "the bone of the knee", then squeeze your pouch from your left hand, and place it evenly against the other hand at your power, then apply the plaster and the poultice on top, if you need to.
puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Then it is held, and if there are broken bones, they are lifted up, and the bone is set, and the wound is treated until it heals.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	Of the breaking of the hip bone
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief;	It happens that the hip bone is broken, and if it happens, if there's a bit of discomfort in the head;
et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	And stretches for a long time, and descends into the pubis, and comes with pain in the head, and bruising, and inflames what is broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure;	And for the treatment, you extend your hand up as long as you are over the breakage;
et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li;	Know which is the break and its alignment;
et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And if the break is only in the head, set it evenly to that break, as long as it's in its natural alignment.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the break extends along or declines towards inside, have the patient lie on their stomach, until you achieve the restoration of that break.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve;	And when you have placed it evenly, set it on the plaster, then place it on a stick or reed stand, and hold the joint still so that it does not move;
et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	and guide his head towards the ribs, until the shoulder joint is evenly aligned.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	Instruct the patient to sleep on their side or on their back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit;	And if the abscesses are close together and come out, do not touch them until the abscesses have subsided, then place what we have just said in front.
et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident;	and then return to the healing process, hold it as necessary, if there is no bad incident;
et c’est li maniere.	and this is how it is done.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	Regarding the breaking of the shoulder.
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres:	The shoulders are those that lie between the blade and the top of the shoulder, and if they are broken, you should restore them according to one of two methods:
dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	Do this: take a rod of medium thickness, according to this shape:
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege;	And bind them with two straps, and place them on top, and seat the patient on the position;
puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval;	Then let his broken arms rest on the rod, until it reaches under the armpit, and has made a bend equal to the length of the rod, then place him on anything heavy or have them lower him down;
puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	Then place the broken part evenly under both hands until the break returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	The other method is that you fix the skin on his neck, and tie the hand to the neck, then command two attendants that one of them shaves the one above the wound with their hands, and the other cuts down to all half an inch, and extend each in their respective parts.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is more severe, then hold tight to the thread around the bruising, and above the bruising, and extend each of the ministers to their share.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure;	And if the broken part is close to the shoulder joint, you should place one strap under the armpit and the other towards the elbow, under the break.
et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute;	And similarly if the breakage occurs towards the blade, then it is necessary to place the thread lightly, without effort, until the breakage is even on the surface and on the blade;
puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	Then equalize the breakage, as necessary, and apply pressure, if pus does not come out.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez;	And if pus does come out, then do not apply pressure until the seventh day, and place on wet wool and oil rose for as long as the pus is relieved;
puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein;	Then apply pressure. The method of applying pressure involves placing the plaster over the breakage and then aligning the arm with the shoulder, and putting your hand on the shoulder or near the breast;
et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	and apply the bandage, and hold it with the shoulder, and on the arm, so that the arm is in its natural position, if no object impedes or if the bone is not broken.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part;	And if you doubt that the bone does not move, use these methods, and place one bale on the fracture larger and stronger than others, with two inches between each bale, and ensure that every bale is large enough to pass three inches from both sides;
puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	Then apply pressure to the bales as I instructed at the start of this chapter on fractures, forcefully but not too much when spreading them apart.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit;	And if you see the setting of the bales and the compression, as we have explained, when you are restoring the broken limb, and if there's any doubt about the abscess, leave it to be bound until seven days, as we have said.
puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	Then look at each three days the bandage, so that no itching appears or spreads to the area, or there won't be pus formation coming into the limb because it's too tight.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If the address, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac;	And if no such events occur, should the dislocation not be corrected until three days or more have passed, and let the patient rest on their back, having their hands on their stomach;
et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens;	and place underneath the shoulder a cushion evenly filled with hair, and observe every hour of the day or night, whether the shape of the broken limb does not move or if the joints are softened;
si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz;	if it is treated with the aid of medicine, and give them the meat that we have prepared in front, in such a way that the meat becomes first refined;
et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	and when it begins to increase, if it becomes large.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout;	And it is customary that the shoulder and the leg should be replaced within forty days of everything;
et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	And then one must release it and apply baths and remedies of ointments for the ease of the limb.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the constriction is ugly and tangled, it should be left for loosening for one or two months.
de la brisure du bras	of the breaking of the arm
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet;	The arm is made of two bones, which are called the pair "foscile", from which one is smaller, and it is this that supports the pit.
et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi;	And the other is large, and this one is underneath, towards the small two;
par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	By chance only the large "foscile" breaks, or the small one, and by chance they come together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations;	When the small "foscile" breaks, the restoration is light, and the healing;
et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	And when the large ones break, the healing is bad, and more painful than when they break together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If only the small bone breaks off, it should be gently extended and made equal.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort;	And if it's large swelling, then you must restrain it more forcefully;
et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor;	and extend it toward the chest, and mark the hand bag higher than the others, and place the small fingers lower than the other fingers, and make sure the wounds are crossed over themselves, and the chest in front of him higher, so that the wounds do not experience any pain;
puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	then extend the servants' arms to the part under their hand, or at the elbow, and another servant on the other side above.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then place the eyes evenly, according to their best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if during the breaking into pieces, you place each back in its original position, and if none of them is broken to be grasped by the hand, and you cannot restore it to its original position, then you do work on and the bone, as we said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler;	And if regarding the burning of wounds, I have spoken about it in the single chapter;
si pren la cure.	then take the treatment.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz;	And if during the beginning of the restoration there appear pus-filled ulcers, then apply a bandage made of oil-soaked rags and white beeswax, so that it is neither too hard nor too soft;
et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	And let me handle the task carefully, so that when the abscesses are lanced, they are relieved.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres;	And shape the paste, and apply the plaster made from powder mixed with egg abundantly. Then place the needles in, ensure that the needle for piercing is slightly larger, and make it a bit wider than the others.
et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions:	And know that there should be six needles or sticks in several arrangements:
soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II;	So if the pain is in one of the bones, or in two;
et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre;	And hold it more above the pain than anywhere else, and all days reduce its distance less, as I said at the beginning of this chapter;
et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres;	And let the bandages that cover the pain be soft and damp, not hard or rough;
et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	And let the child, which is pulled by thread, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And reward the limb and the connection after some days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez;	And if any bad incidents occur to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, then it is necessary for you to immerse the limb in hot water, until that itchiness is relieved;
et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	and let the limb not be forced to rest.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then continue the reduction, and if the ligaments have been torn and the bones exposed, and resembling a thing, perform it.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if precaution is taken so that no distresses cannot come to the limb because it is too constricted, it should be that you soften it with pox (a kind of compress or poultice), and leave it in this manner for a few days, until the distresses have passed, and then you should tighten.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things we have said come to the patient, or the release does not happen until after twenty days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos;	otherwise, during the night, then place your hands on his neck, and if his necks are equal, and be cautious of movement and excitement, and sleeps on his back;
et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	know that this cure will take place in thirty days or thirty-five, and perhaps in twenty, depending on the combinations and qualities of the remedies.
de la brisure de la main	Of the breaking of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that on the back of the hand and around our thumbs there are few breaks, and only bending happens many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement;	And when the hand is broken or bent at its joints, it should be treated with a warm application, and held straightly in front of them equally;
puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint;	Then place his hand on the extended table and extend the attendant's broken bones, and set them equally straight, until they are properly joined together;
et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu;	And place the dressing and splints, if no abscess forms, then he applies an ointment according to the size of the wound;
et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	And let it be wrapped in a single linen sheet.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie;	And if the injury is at the elbow under the belly of the hand, make an ellipse of cloths, and instruct the patient to press it against their broken hand;
et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And then the stretching of a long strip, and if the earlobe is well formed as large as the width of the hand, and it stretches, just like it should.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the breakage is at the front, it is necessary to place an electrode above and another under in the sole of the foot, so that the hand be open and straight, then tie it completely around the hand, and seal the connection between the fingers.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient;	And if the disconnector comes to break any of our toes, it's like it's twisted, so put them equal, just as it should be;
et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve;	And stretch with the sole, and if you see that placing a small upright earlobe helps to lift the disconnection, and don't let it move;
et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés;	And if the disconnection is at other toes, like in the index or one of the others, put them equal, and hold it with the healthy toe that follows;
ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet;	Or tie them all together in an 'I' shape, if it moves, or place them on an earlobe, as one would wrap.
et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And take care in the restoration and arrangement of each abscess, and aid those who come with it, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	Of the broken kneecap
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier;	The bones of the elbow are often broken, and well can be seen when it turns both forward and backward;
et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	And for the restoration is one who binds above the breakage, and the other below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment;	And the patients lie on their face, then extend each minister's bandage evenly to its counterpart;
et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	This is when the break has reached the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the break is close to the root of the arm, then one end should be tied towards the hand, and the other end away from the break.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval;	And also if it is near to the knee joint, and then let the knee bandages be loose, and let the stretching go down;
puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	Then place the eyes of the bone even with its two hands, as long as it follows its natural form, and then apply the plaster, and secure the bandage, should abscesses not come about.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure;	And if there is an abscess causing pain, let it subside then return to your task and your treatment;
li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	The labor is performed in a proper manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus;	It is necessary that you wrap around the wound two strips of cloth sewn together in two or three layers, and leave the excess. Then turn the leg so that the heels reach the root of the thigh, and thread one piece of yarn long between the crotch and the leg, under and past the knee, and pull the string over the head;
puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe;	Then wrap the bandage around the leg and thigh again, then place the candles on the wound. Place a candle on the bone of the leg;
puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure;	Then use eight loops of cloth strips on the thigh and hip to ensure even tension, then begin tying in forms of three or four turns around the wound;
et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint;	And when you go further beyond the cautery, and let it relax less;
puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet;	Then direct your attention to the two knees where you have tied a thread between the leg and thigh, and secure three pins above them. Then return beneath the thread near its head until you see it pass under the foot;
et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	And hold it so that it doesn't move from its place, then leave him like this. Then wait until no abscess forms or there's any other sign.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois;	And if it happens, set him free and address whatever comes, as we have said many times;
et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet;	And if there are bone fragments that penetrate, it should be removed if possible;
et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer;	And if one cannot remove them, then it is necessary to cut open the wound and drain the pus.
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the treatment as we have said, until it becomes clean.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras;	And each time the egg is broken in such a way that it takes these remedies, as in the shoulder and the arm;
toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	Therefore, when restoration is made in this manner, there is no pain for the patient.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	Know that the skin is restored in about one day, or somewhat more or less depending on individual differences.
de la ruelle dou genoil	from the garden alley
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	Know that near the knee joint there is little cracking sound, but it bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, it's only a crack or maybe it just bends out of place. This affects every wound and can be felt during the wound, and one can sense this well.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet;	Therefore, this restoration involves placing what is round at its due place until it can be moved assembled;
puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant;	Then apply the plaster, and if needed place a round candle, and hold it as necessary, then adjust all positions as we have said in other breaks, such as abscesses or similar conditions;
si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	So apply what is suitable for each incident until it becomes clean.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the fracture of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»;	Know that in the leg are two bones, of which one is named correctly as 'tibia', and the other is named 'fibula'.
et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	And every injury or breakage occurs just as it does in the arm, and for this reason its restoration is comparable to that of the arm, uniformly throughout. And all procedures are thus one. If both bones are broken together, then the leg turns in all directions.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the delicate bones are broken, then turn in front.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien;	And if the large bone is broken, one feels great pain and sees it clearly;
et torne desoz.	and twists inward.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement;	So then apply extension, and place it evenly, and secure the joints evenly;
mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere;	However, if the breakage is ugly and there are several fragments, then the extension should be less and more gentle;
et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	And it grows according to your power.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz;	And when you have completed all your tasks, take two pricked sticks that burn the leg on one side and the other, and let them be as long as from the leg to just below the knee.
puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien;	Then wrap them around the legs above and below, and tie them in the middle as well, and at this time prevent the leg from bending to the right or left, and thus it is done correctly.
et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie;	And no one administers to the leg from the length of the leg, and it's done with wood, and you place the leg to guard against movement, and this is properly done in the fracture where there was an injury.
et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident;	And each day move the leg to see if there is pus or any other incident;
si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the treatment continues until it is finished.
de la brisure des os dou piet	From the breaking of bones at the knee
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle it does not come from breaking, but with bones at the knee breaking occurs and in the legs, there is only force that acts in various positions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus;	And if it happens to a bone in the foot fracture, and you see these bones rising over each other, then put some hot ashes on the earth next to them, as if they were trying to move, and then place your foot on their own, where the bones are lifted, press it so much that it revives in their heels;
puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	Then place the plaster and wrap it up, and put a small table with two full foot sections under the foot's belly, then press it into the foot's fitment, and once you have covered it with blankets and other things you need.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And once three or four days have passed, you'll find that the ligaments are equal; whether they were broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main;	And if any of the fingers are broken, fix them again, just like we explained for the fingers of the hand;
puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment;	Then place at the elbow one pillar according to the length of the two, and make it slightly wider, then place under the foot that board I said, and press it firmly into position;
et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet;	And if there are two or three, or more, break them; then place one pillar under each according to their quantity, wrapped in a linen sheet, and hold the board firmly under the foot;
et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And stay on the top of the board above the stomach under the foot, so that you can press it well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit;	And you must not forget the other things I've said about other fractures, once we have discussed them.
et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And attend to each incident as it should be.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the breaking of the hand bone
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier;	When the bone of nature in the woman is broken, if she becomes swollen, then incline her towards the back part, and hold her from behind;
puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto;	Then fill the cavity with the nature of the material of cloth, and also place it as large as needed.
puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto;	Then lift the woman, and gently lower her back bit by bit, then make the cotton jump until it reaches the entrance of nature, and let the bone return with that.
et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor:	And when she wants to urinate, if you remove the cotton, and when she has urinated, put her back, and do this for 7 days or more.
si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature;	If the break will be restored, and if you see it, take a goat bladder, and attach a stick to its base, and fill the entire bladder into the natural opening.
puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens:	Then blow through the stick until the bladder inflates internally:
la nature si revenra li brisure;	The nature will return to him the rupture;
puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then fill it with cotton, and leave it like that for some days, until it heals.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche;	And when the bone of the hand or leg of the person is broken, or in a woman if it's left like that as we have said about the hipbone;
et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	And these nearby breaks should not be hidden from the person who devotes their study and usage to it, and heed my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration:	For breaking signifies in many positions the right path of restoration:
enten le donques.	So understand it then.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge;	In the penis, if broken, take an oxtail and put it over the penis;
puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	Then wrap it with bandages tightly, and let it for three days or until dryness sets in, and it will heal quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	of fracture with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for the one who has a fracture with wound, even if it's large, like in the case of a rib or shoulder blade or similar, that it be treated surgically now, so that the surgeries we have mentioned can attest to this.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is healing well, one may use vinegar to do so, should you have nothing else; then proceed to heal the fracture in that same hour or day. If abscesses form and remain there, however, then start again on the treatment of the fracture at that point.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And should abscesses continue to form and remain there, let the healing process continue for a new day, until the abscesses are subdued. Don't touch them on the third or fourth day, as you would cause unwanted complications.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the bone is broken and visible under the uncovered part of your body, you should place it lightly with your hands, in a small extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie;	And if it extends beyond what you can adjust to your hands, then use this iron instrument that has seven or eight points of length, and the width should match the size of the wound;
et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure;	And for that, the surgeon needs to insert three or four times, depending on what is needed in each case of fracture treatment;
et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And make them round and somewhat thick, so they do not bend under compression on the limb during your operation, and have them smooth in front, and bulge outwards at the middle forward, like this:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent;	And call it "palanché", because it is necessary that the curved heads be placed on the head of the visible bone;
et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And apply heat until it heals, so long as it grows even on both sides.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the break is subtle and the instruments cannot take hold of the bone well, it must be that you catch the tip of the bone as long as the instruments have power.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir;	And if you cannot return the bone as we said, using an appropriate tool suitable for this, like an incision knife or a scalpel, to your ability;
puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	Then scrape out the bone that is lodged in the hard and scaly portion of the bone.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is returned, and after the patients feel great pain, know that it has not been placed in its natural position.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit;	Continue until it's back in place, then cover the wound with black, thick wine, and properly if it's in muscle;
et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption;	And do not put tallow or anything else on the wound that could cause gangrene and decay;
puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure;	Then administer the doses when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cover everything else thoroughly according to the size of the wound, and make sure that the wound is not restricted by splintering;
et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois;	And many times this has been done to the foolish patient, and caused either death or corrosion on multiple occasions.
et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	and let the healing of this be softer and more enduring than that of other injuries.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles;	And if the wound is deep or large, and you doubt that improper occurrences have taken place, as we have said, and you find pain at the site, then it should not be applied to the wounds;
mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	but wrap around internally, instead of applying ointment, use hard bandages and bind them.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one day or two days that the wound begins to heal, remove what you have placed with all kinds of vinegar, and apply healing ointment for wounds, such as tetrarmofarm and similar.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it must be that you dislocate the limb twice a day, in the morning and at vespers, until it is joined and healed.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it should be that the limb is placed so that the bone goes back up slightly gently.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if this continues for several days, and it can't join at all back to its place, know that there are small pieces of bone, so you should treat the wound with a plaster bandage, and remove all these pieces that cause pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if there is a fistula at the wound or some other form of infection, it is necessary that you treat it according to what he explained in his previous chapter.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse;	And when bone is broken and exposed in the body, such as the bones of the ankle or shoulder, or other large bones, do not attempt to set them since many die from this; but let it heal until it has rotted.
par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues;	By chance, wait for up to 20 days or 30, then treat the wound if possible;
et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And if you cannot, leave it as it is.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	The burns that come from sweat
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre;	We often experience many times the relief from the cold, especially when it's close to the joint, and it is a difficult thing to observe the limb's shape;
et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	And by chance cannot perform his natural tasks with the limb.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres:	Therefore, take care that if it feels fresh:
si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil;	If it is administered restrictive medicines such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, sarsaparilla, carob extract, etc., like any of these things, or all together, mix them with a stoptive wine, or with enough egg whites or with anise;
et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors;	And place them on the node with points, and hold it firmly, ensuring not to release the joint with your hands during the process.
et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee;	And then reset it, and start another one until all dislocations have been relieved;
ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite;	or you apply force with a well-made piece of wood;
car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres;	for the property of wood is such that it relieves all swellings on the limbs;
et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent;	and if the dislocation has become hard like a stone, and needs to be relieved, if there is a lump above it, make the excess visible;
ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	or you take it to no surgeon as long as it is relieved, and the treatment until it heals.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	Of the member which becomes weak after garrisoning
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes:	When the breaking of the bone is restored, and after that the limbs remain weak and delicate, it happens through various reasons:
de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit;	Of which one is due to the fact that it was tied too tightly, and wasn't allowed to be tied as it should have been;
ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre;	Or because there was too much binding, and the body couldn't return to its natural position in the limb;
ou por multitude d’arosement;	Or due to an excess of swelling;
ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre;	Or because of too large movements, not done in their proper time;
ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	Or because they lack blood in their body, making them weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui;	And the treatment is that you must eat the disease and make the body tender, until there are multiple infections within him;
et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce;	And he administers baths, and then brings joy and comfort;
puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre;	Then put wax on the limb, so that the wax attracts to the large artery, and frequently washes it with tepid water, until the pulsation matches the limb.
et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	and restores its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	If the member is bent after illness
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil:	When the limb is twisted after restoration, and if a bone is broken open, even though the form of the limb may be ugly, it still retains its natural function:
si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre;	do not believe the fools who say that we should break the limb completely anew, and many people have done this in our land;
et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors;	such practices are criticized, causing great harm, and even death in some cases;
toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses;	Nevertheless, if the blisters and pains are fresh, it is good to immerse them in hot water, or to cook soothing herbs, such as leaves of savory, roots, and borage, and similar things;
et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus;	and make them apply a soothing paste, such as well-made yarrow, and you take the savory muscle extract, and cook it with fat of geese or oil of saffron, and make an application with;
ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	or you take dried figs and mix them with hog's tallow, and similar medications that reduce the burning.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And never is removed the operation of rubbing constantly and for a long time with wet hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And let there be a movement to the member every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement;	And if the stiffness has aged and hardened like bone, and requires roasting with iron, then it's appropriate to cut until you reach the bone, making a subtle incision lightly.
et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And apply diligence and study in the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	This begins the book on dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing great pain and injury to the patient.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation affects any part, if the situation requires it now, you should attempt to reduce or reset it without delay.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu;	For if one delays, the limbs will swell, and by chance they might be put back into joint pain in the limb;
por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez:	By heavens, it should not be moved when it is swollen at that hour:
maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	Many times it brings on pain and other sufferings;
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez;	Nonetheless, when this happens, have the surgeon care for the patient, then leave him alone until all abscesses are at peace;
puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	Then immerse the limb in hot water and oil, then gently reset it, and treat each member as their treatment comes to its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have arranged the chapters on shoulder dislocations up until this point.
des mandibules	of the jaw
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres:	It happens that the jaws are dislocated downwards, and the dislocations of both shoulders follow two ways:
ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc;	They are somewhat hardened at their ends, and slightly softened.
ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	They are completely dislocated and hanging towards the buttocks, and can't hold their saliva in, nor can they close their mouth; instead, their tongue is enveloped by speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it can return through various positions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	And if it's whole and complete, you must reset it quickly without hesitation;
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars;	And in such a way that the ministers cut on the head with the aid of someone else, and push one of their thumbs into the socket of the malaide at the root of the mandible's dislocation inside the mouth; if the dislocation is from two parts.
et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal;	And the other should have their hands forward for making it even.
et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And instruct the patient to soften them, their jaws, and move them in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And keep the fingers steady until they return to their place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement;	And if it returns with pain, even if the two jaws are together, if they are immersed in hot water and oil, as long as you gently manipulate them;
ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	Do not be afraid to return it, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	And when they are returned equally, and the mouth of the patient closes well upon softening, then place them on wet cloths in a poultice made of oil roset and beeswax, then bind them gently with moist linen;
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	And let the patient rest on his back, and the head stays between two cushions, so that he does not move nor to the right nor to the left, nor forces himself to twist, but should only eat light meat until the pains subside, and tie the jaws.
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And then, gently taste it, and doesn't cause any trouble in opening the mouth for eating and drinking, until the jaw is well set and healed.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two lower jaws cannot be properly aligned within an hour and are not turned back to their original position, fever and chronic fatigue will result, and in some cases, abdominal pain or vomiting will occur.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions;	And when you see that, then know it's destruction;
et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	And often, the one who has this will die within nine days.
de la forcelle	from the lever (referring to mechanics or possibly medical tools)
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The forces cannot displace from within along the middle of the chest and the back; it is displaced only outward, and one feels this clearly.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras;	And for its restoration, let the wounds lie supine on their back and extend their arms;
et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra;	And then press it with your palm in its original shape, and it will return to normal;
puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	Then place it on the plaster and cover it with a bandage, and secure it;
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer;	And the shoulder opposite the knife cannot dislocate;
se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit;	If it doesn't move, and if it dislocates once, then reset it to its place, as we have said.
puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then place it on the plaster and the bandage, bind it, and instruct the patient to rest until they are sound.
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And in this way, the shoulder blade is brought back when it has been displaced from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	On the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres:	Know that the shoulder only dislocates in three ways:
de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz;	The first way is when it dislocates from the part of the scapula to downward;
et li seconde est a la partie dou pis;	And the second is at the bottom part;
et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	And by chance dislocates from the top part, and this happens rarely;
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners;	And does not dislocate behind for the shoulder, and does not dislocate within for the nerves;
et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment;	And many times dislocates away towards the elbow, even in those with little flesh, for in these cases it moves quickly;
a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	In those who have enough flesh, it jumps to the bone and returns to the bone.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	By chance, it happens to some men from a blow or dislocation, and the shoulder swells with an abscess filled with heat, and they think that she is dislocated because of this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains;	So you must verify it, as long as you are certain;
et adonques encomence la cure.	And then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	And you will recognize dislocations when it moves towards the elbow, and you can make a distinction between the diseased shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find the obvious diversity between them;
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes;	And you will find a hollow at the top of the shoulder, and along the elbow to the neck, as if it were an empty space;
et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	And the patient cannot bring their hand to their nose, nor move it with any movements;
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	And also, if it is dislocated high up, if it's not hidden, because you clearly find it at the temple;
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	This way of dislocation can only be corrected when new, or when the child is still small.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu;	And the method is for the doctors to lift the hand from the child's head at first, then place their palms under the armpit, and lift the joint up forcefully towards the shoulder.
et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz;	And the doctors lift the hand and extend it upwards before placing it under.
si venra hastanment.	If it comes quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude;	And if it doesn't come as we have said in the following days, then you should immerse the patient in hot water;
et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	And the healer gently relaxes and soothes it, as with an infusion of rosemary, fenugreek, and melilot in water, and it should be prepared.
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	Then sew the wounds on his back, and place a piece of soft, even wool under his armpit, not too soft nor too hard. Then position one's heel on top of the wool, and lift the shoulder blade with a strong yet gentle movement, and pull the hand towards the discomfort.
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval;	And assist in lifting the back of the affected limb, so that it does not move downwards;
celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	This shoulder is returning now, and if you see whether to reset it according to this manner:
et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides;	And be sure that what you prepare at home is larger than the discomfort;
et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	And keep it straight towards the chest, and support the shoulder under the ribcage of the patient, lift the ribcage upwards, so that the patient hangs down.
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	And have another assistant guide your hand from behind towards the abdomen.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the body is too light, it can carry nothing heavy, and the dislocation returns immediately.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere:	And you can also perform this reset in other ways:
et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	and place it like a long spike in the ground, so that the shoulder is also held upright like a pistol, and not too large or too loose;
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust;	then place it under the patient, but make sure there is soil underneath, and the patient stays upright for the length of the staff;
puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	then extend her hand downwards on the other side, and the joint will return to its place quickly;
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure:	And if she does not wish to return due to all these things we have said, then perform this treatment:
pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	Take two large sticks from the shoulders and four broad ones, which have their heads rounded so they can enter smoothly into the socket, following this shape:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide;	Then fasten at the head of the pole covered with cloth so it doesn't irritate the skin, then place it next to the socket according to the patient's skin;
et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part:	Stretch your arms on the pole from the top and fasten the aid to the pole, and put your arm at the head of the hand. Then place the arm onto one of a long stick about broad, making sure both hands are facing down. Leave the body hanging on the other side:
li jointure reva ens maintenant.	The joint now begins to return.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when she is in this condition, no matter how it may be, if you need to place a piece of equal thread over the joint, then apply plaster mixed with flour from the mill, along with incense and egg yolk oil over the entire shoulder and around it, then remove the thread when done applying, and tie the bandage over the plaster, and wrap your hand around her neck, and keep your hands in this position.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost;	And it is necessary for him to move slightly, as long as the limb is stabilized, because he will heal more quickly;
et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve;	and then move more after five or seven days, and start exercising;
et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	and if it is hard and not softened, you will find it healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is out of place due to moisture that has come or for some other reason, it is necessary that you apply three cauterizations to it, as was mentioned in the section on cauterization.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis;	And if you do all of this, and it dislocates after seven days, and the joint doesn't hold, and can't lift their arm up, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is either cut, stretched or softened;
et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	and you will know that the joint will never settle in its place again.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure;	The dislocation near the buttocks and breasts, or behind, if it is caused by pushing and stretching of hands, is administered elsewhere;
et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And treat until it becomes clean.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after healing there are still pains in the member and late movements, then one should bathe their body many times, until those pains ease away, and it returns to its original condition.
de la dislocation dou coute	From the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient;	Know that the shoulder joint is dislocated at its tips, and comes back to them;
et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien;	And it is dislocated in all directions, as well as in front and behind. The dislocation is not corrected because one can see it clearly and feel it distinctly;
et desalue selonc chescune figure.	And dislocates according to each form.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you unite the knife with your hand, if you can see it clearly open.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is sore, and cannot bend the arm or reach his shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener;	And you should reset it this way that abscesses are both placed and move away, for if they were placed and came in, it would be a complaint to bring them back;
et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier;	And by chance cannot be reset completely all at once, even when it's behind;
si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	It is worse than other dislocations and causes more pain, and by chance death comes to it.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains;	And this restoration is, when it's like this that one can bring back, you extend his hand to your two hands;
et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And his arms are spread out, and the hands direct towards the center of the elbow both inside and outside, forwards and backwards. Force the joint back to its position either at the top of his shoulder or at the base of his palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And when the dislocation is forward, it returns whenever it doubles its hand with its own and pushes from the base of the palm using the lever that is dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension;	And if it does not want to return to place, administer strong stretching;
et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension;	And when you have administered the extension, both hands hold the arm and apply it firmly, so that it does not move during stretching;
puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	Then turn the arm from every side, then that you have enveloped a double flag long and wide;
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	And when the eye touches the joint with its hand, if it rubs with any oil to soften the joint, then shape the joint properly, until it heals;
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And when it's in place, she places a dry plaster with egg white on it and holds it steady. Shape the area, and allow the arm to be bent at the neck of the patient, then leave it for some days. Afterwards, release it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse;	And if the joint is firm in its place, remove the bandage and leave it;
et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis;	And if you notice that the joint is not healing properly, redo the plaster and the bandage, then leave it like this for a few days until it's firmly in place;
puis le deslie.	Then remove the bandage.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez;	And if they feel pain after returning the joint, and it moves again, then wash and scrub beautifully, press until the discomfort is relieved;
ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	or you place a thick layer of fatty lamb fat on the joint, then leave it for a day and a night, then apply heat, and let him take a bath;
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain;	and when it sweats, gently rub the joint, then put the fat back on, and then take a bath;
et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do this two or three times, until it is healed;
et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus;	and if you see that, put moist cow dung heated with butter on it, and apply heat;
si revenra a sa disposition.	if it returns to its place.
li dislocation de la main	The dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures.	The wrist dislocates and its return is light, more than other joints.
Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	In all cases, it is advisable to return it to its normal position as soon as possible, while it is dislocated, so that the arm swells or an abscess forms.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	And during the return process, you should place the painful hand on a board and extend the other hand's hand, then align it so that its palm is placed in line with the appearance of the joint, and hold it until it heals.
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu;	In all cases, you should check if it is properly in place;
adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	Then have the patient place the back of their hand on a board during extension and retraction.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, then have the patient place the back of his hand on the table and you place your hand on the appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	If it returns now, it's indeed so.
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If not, if the pressure of plaster salves on the abscesses and then lets it be without further recurrence.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it back after some days, if the joint remains twisted;
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout:	and does not harm him as long as his hands are swollen, and cannot constrain anything at all:
adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere;	therefore know that the nerve is cut, or the artery;
si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	if there is no other means except to apply the cautery in the case, and by chance it is not worth any other thing.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the arms are in place, put on the plaster that we have described, then apply pressure and leave it for five days, then release and leave him like this.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he cannot move it well, and there is no swelling, with hot water, and rub it until it becomes clean.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	Never let the shoulder joint of the hand be dislocated to each side, never on the back of the palm or belly;
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	Therefore lift the head, and hold the dislocated shoulder in your hands until it heals, then support the neck of the head, and guide it towards the part where it was separated.
et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor;	and let it be for two days, and then place him evenly on that day;
et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut;	and bind him as we have said, and do the release of the day, and let him move, and rebind him at night;
et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do this often, until it is tight, and do so similarly, if it is dislocated in the chest of the hand, and do it like you have done before, until he heals;
et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	and similarly do so when it is dislocated on the other side.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	Careful repositioning of the ankle, care of the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When it's dislocated in the back or neck, or there are multiple dislocated (shoulders), if there is no treatment, for death comes to the patient quickly.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I.	And the signs are that the digestive actions jump without volition, nor can they be held, and many times soften any member, or both legs or both arms or one.
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars;	And many times the cheekbones move to four parts;
celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	That which moves at the back is called 'Gilbositez':
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance:	The treatment is that you should reward when Gilbositez comes from childhood:
si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	If there is no cure or healing at all.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	And that which comes from childbirth or impacts or similar matters, the old methods of treatment through great words say, they have no benefit in all great ways;
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	but I have abbreviated it according to my intention and formed tools in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	I say that when Gilbositez comes down towards the groin, neither harm nor healing occurs;
et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	And also know that what comes directly to the two ribs, and one cannot cure outside of this precisely which goes to the back, as I say;
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	And know that the body's tissues extend above its surface to one side in such a way that there is tension on it, so it does not get bruised;
puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	Then stick the first thorn into the head in the earth forms, and the other at points, and tie a band around them under the armpits of the body tissue, and the other at hips, and knees, and ankles;
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons;	And two attendants know the bands, one at the head and the others at points, among the two thorns;
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	And be well closed, the thorn as we have said, and the patient puts her palms on the prick forms, until she regains consciousness.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	And if it does not return through this treatment, take a board of three arms long, and place it over the wound. If the patient is on their side with the diseased limb towards the front, have someone hold onto one end of the board near the wound. Then put the middle part of the board under the spine;
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu;	and place his elbows on the other end of the board, and press well, until he returns to his senses at his original position;
et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	and if you see that it turns around the elbow that bends towards the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	And if you put two fire sticks at the elbow of the sick person's arm, one hand-length away from each other and towards his elbows. Leave an inch between each stick, directly above and below them.
et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent;	And place in each ember twigs or the turning bone, and make sure the embers are firmly in the ground, so they do not move.
et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	And in each pair of embers place one turning ember, so they cause the bone to turn, and include two small twigs about the length of a palm for turning the bone.
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And then tie the ligament that's among the muscles at the elbow towards the head, and the other ligament at the feet on the other elbow, and each of the assistants turns their elbow all along the ligament, and the masters place the spine evenly as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when it's even, then place on plaster with abundant egg whites, and then the oil, and then the incense from a tablet of three inches long, which purges the inflamed area and the healthy part of the spine, then tie with a ligament as we have said, and treat the patient with subtle irritation until it's healthy.
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant;	And if no healing comes at the end of health, then it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines, with the aid that we have mentioned earlier.
et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations;	And each time administer a piece of flax, and each time the appearance comes in the lower spine at the back, take care that it is a dislocation;
et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption:	And it's the bone that opens, so we must not presume anything about it:
par aventure feroit venir la mort.	By chance it would bring death.
des dislocations de la hainche	Dislocations of the hip
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures;	Know that the joints of the hip and shoulder come only from dislocations, not like other joints.
et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties:	And the hip joint is dislocated according to four parts:
dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier;	Beneath and removed, and forward and backward;
et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	And more beneath elsewhere, and somewhat dislocated in front and behind.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	And the knowledge of his dislocation beneath is that when one joins the diseased leg with the healthy one, it's longer, and the diseased knee opens more than the healthy one, and the diseased knee cannot bend back;
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And it is the limbs that are swollen above with pus because the shoulder of the roast comes there.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of him who comes to the death, is that this event is contrary to what precedes.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement;	And the signs of him who experiences forward, is that his leg fits well according to its completion;
toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	Nevertheless, it does not bend the knee without pain, and if one wants to make him move, he cannot before, and holds his urine, and swells the groin, and when it goes, it passes over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs for him who approaches from behind, are that he cannot spread his foot out, nor double it, and one leg is more twisted than the other, and the ankle is softened, and there's swelling in the calf up to the knee over the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure;	The restoration of this illusion of dislocation is that you return it when the dislocation is old, and it remains according to its position, if there is no treatment;
et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	and there should be no assumption about it having healed.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre;	And for those in which the dislocation is fresh, and there are four ways of dislocation, if you hurry to return the joint, and extend it both inside and out, and move it to the right and left;
par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	By chance if it returns, and there is no need for any other treatment.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	And if it doesn't return in this way, you should apply strong force and hold the leg firmly with both hands, or with one band where it is tied above the knee;
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe;	And another attendant extends their hand over in such a way that they pinch his hands near his elbows, then drives them away with a single breath against the belly;
et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	and some others grasp the nape of his neck;
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And extend up and down all at once, until the patient is lifted from the ground once, and remains hanging.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This way of extension is common for four similar cases, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is indeed well.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance.	If not so, then it must take care according to its appearance.
Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	When the dislocation is in the shoulder, you should remember to lift him up on his healthy side, then tie the bandage around the root of his elbow, and the part that's over the armpit. Then stretch the bandage towards the armpit, against resistance;
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment:	Then request another attendant to hold his arms, and grasp the broad part of the patient's armpit, and extend it towards the front.
si revenra a son leu maintenant;	it will return to its place now;
et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	and this way of dislocation is less severe than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres;	And if you cannot hold it in this way as we have said, then you should tie the two legs of the patient together tightly with a strong bandage around the two heels and the two knees, and so that the bad leg is extended by about two feet more than the other;
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc;	then hang it from the top of a pole, and above ground by two long lengths.
puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	Then instruct the attendant to hold the top of the armpit area, and have another attendant with the patient, who holds the armpit in place, because the joint is now returning quickly.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	And when the dislocation is in front, if you lie the sick person down, just as we have said for someone with glibosity, and pull on the leg at the bad part of it precisely, and also on the knee.
puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	Then place two prongs, one on the head and another at the knee, then insert the prong between the thighs at the sick person's dislocation in the shape;
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And place wet cloths around to prevent the patient from blistering, then extend each limb towards him, and have them set in an even position according to their hand at the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, it's good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, place it on 'ie' table and press it like we have said in the distension exercise, and let the patient lie on their healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit;	And when the dislocation is in front, you must extend the bad leg quickly, and according to what I have said;
et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And place their palms so that they press against the painful part of the bad leg, then press with the other hand, and extend it downwards towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches;	And if the dislocation is at the back, it does not require extending the patient downwards or lifting them from the ground. Instead, they should be positioned as if their buttocks were in the same place after being reset backwards, as we have explained regarding lying on the two buttocks;
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	And if it is on their face, and the neck stretched as we said before, they must apply pressure to the joint at the table;
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz;	And it will be right when the patient stretches their legs, and they will be equal in length;
adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	Therefore adjust the hips, and apply the plaster, and bind with a bandage, so that the buttocks do not move;
et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus;	And let them rest for three or four days, then release, and apply the plaster again;
et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors;	And if you see that they are equal, hold them as before, and let them be for three days;
puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	Then release the dislocation, and treat him gently, until the limb is strengthened.
de la dislocation dou genoil	Of the shoulder joint dislocation
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres:	The knees are dislocated in three ways:
c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier;	This means, namely, internally and externally, and behind;
et ne desalue point devant.	And do not dislocate in front.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	And the signs are that you command the patient to bend his leg at his knee. And if it does not adhere at his knee, know that it is dislocated;
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	And the restoration of all this is that you make the patient sit straight, and extend his leg if he can, and put your back on his buttocks, and place his foot on your feet;
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment;	Then take his shinbone between your palms, and pull it between your thumbs. Then bend both sides of the shinbone that form it.
et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	And stretch out his leg with others assisting, until the knee returns to its place. And the signs are that he has correctly aligned his leg gently with his thigh;
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie;	And place the plaster on, and have him lie with his leg straight at the knee, binding them together tightly for three or four days, then release.
et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And do not perform any surgery involving the joints until the limbs have been strengthened.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limb is not present, apply strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it returns to its normal state.
de la dislocation dou talon	Of the dislocation of the heel
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heels are never completely dislocated and neither fully out of place, both inwards and outwards.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	And you will know this by signs: that the ankle is swollen and tends forward to the part where it was dislocated:
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	The repositioning is gentle, and you should gently extend it to his hands when he is only slightly out of place.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	And when it is free from all pain completely, then you must make the patient lie straight and hold them up with the helpers by their leg, above the ankle;
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	Then pull the leg towards you with your right hand, and then twice to your left, then stretch it upwards, and firmly position the leg upwards;
et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet;	And do this two times, as we have said, by holding and pulling the leg;
s’elle revient, c’est bien;	If it returns, that is well;
se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	If not, start the process again, because it will return.
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	And if it cannot return like this, make the patient lie on their back on the ground, and plant the post firmly in the earth between their buttocks, and wrap cloths around them, so that they do not bruise the patient.
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	Then the surgeons clean the wound, and other surgeons stretch out his legs or waist so they can be bound to the neck of the animal;
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	Then extend each surgeon equally, and place the bundle so that it rests between the legs of the patient to hold the patient when they are extended.
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	Then set the joints equal on his hands, and other surgeons cut the healthy leg at the knee, and the dislocated joint will return quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	And when it is to the point, place the plaster and bind it up, and apply pressure firmly, and then tie the leg to the animal, and guard the nerves that are above the ankle at the back, so the rope does not become too tight.
puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain;	Then leave it for two or three days, and if you apply pressure;
puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors;	Then release it on the third day or the fourth, and continue to guide the patient for three more days;
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And if it goes beyond that time, it's not safe to say it won't dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if pus comes out at the incision site, it is necessary that you soothe it, just as we have said in other places, while it remains clean.
des dois	Of the cautery made with fire, command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the shoulders are dislocated, if they can be properly stretched like in manual work, it's a simple task.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	And if the dislocation is in no corner of the back or foot, it's necessary that you make the patient lie on his full length or flat on a table completely straight, and place your foot where the joint opens. Then press with your foot firmly until he wakes up;
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie;	And when he is straight, and there's nothing open, place a two-shouldered footrest under the sole of his foot, then press firmly, and let him rest three days, then release him.
et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And make them rest until they regain their senses.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	regarding injuries and dislocations together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	When injury accompanies dislocation, and one seeks to restore it, many times it has happened that the patient dies.
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	If you are not presumptuous in your treatment, and if you lack wisdom in the art and have not practiced it for a long time, and if you are not compassionate and merciful and slow, do not be hasty;
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	And at the beginning of treatments aim to alleviate pain and pus, and let the patient be in God's hands, if you do not see hope for improvement;
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	And when you see hope, now reset the limb in its place, so that pus and life follow;
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	And when the limb is in place, administer things that alleviate pus formation, and treat the wound as it should be, with drying ointments;
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	And if there is fracture with the dislocation, and small bones are broken, so treat them as we have instructed in simple diseases.
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	And protect yourself from entering the path of fear, as I have said, for it is according to your creator that you should live, and through knowledge arm yourself and protect your body.
