O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	You, dear children, I have completed this book which is the culmination of the study of medicine combined with its full implementation, and brought to completion through its demonstrations and declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to my mind that I should complete this manual with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the manual work is widespread in our region and has been taken far and wide everywhere, it has lost its knowledge and expertise, and nothing remains from it beyond small descriptions in old books that were done by hand.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And because of this error and vanity, minds are closed off and the knowledge is far away.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	It seems I should revitalize this treatise in its entirety according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and will come together with the forms of the cautery instruments and other tools of work along with their proper exposition and preparation as required.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And due to the reason that no good masters of hands are found in our times, the art of medicine has been prolonged.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary that whoever intervenes promptly in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, until he knows the disposition of the limbs, their forms and connections and separations, have knowledge of the bones and nerves and sinews, and the number of bones, and their movement and of moving veins and resting ones, and the location of their exit.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And thus states Hippocrates that with words we speak little and with deeds even less; indeed, in the art of manual skills.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you at the beginning of this book that whoever does not know what has been said beforehand, is likely to commit errors and deceive people; similarly, I have seen many who interfere in this science and abandon their knowledge and lack of experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	And I have seen a fool who attempted to remove an abscess or neck swelling in a woman, and cut the arteries below the neck; because so much blood flowed out that the woman died from her hands.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And I have seen another fool who treated a stone in an elderly man, and the stone was large; he took with it a piece of the bladder, and the man died after three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I have already been called to extract it, and saw the location of the disease and the size of the stone, and if you had cut him, he would have died.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I saw another case where he treated someone who was in need of care, Duke of our land, who had broken his leg and suffered bruising. The injuries were incorrectly applied to the wound causing unnecessary harm, and the patient was left with pain for an entire month; he was advised not to relieve himself at all during that period; so he remained like this until the leg swelled completely and the feet became infected, leading to death.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was summoned to assist him, and I hurried to relieve his leg. And when I heard that it had been released so smoothly without any pain being felt.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But every path of corruption had already been confirmed in the member or body, and it could not be cured; and the process of decay continued within the member as long as the limb was completely lost.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And there is a second site that collapses an incised abscess and then inflames it due to the wickedness of its lordship.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For the ulcer, when it is pure of melancholic humor, it does not permit one to touch it with iron if it is in such a state that all can be removed which is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And concerning this, dear children, you must know that work of the hands is divided into two sections: that is to say, where there are dangers in multiple conditions; and I will show in each part of this book where there is danger and peril.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	Because you must ensure that no one speaks ill of you if you are careful. Take your weapons in hand, and treat your illnesses lightly yet firmly, using the best path so through the grace of God you achieve salvation and be at peace; and abandon terrible diseases with grieflessness for health. Remove your weapons from those who make you doubt, have faith in yourselves that you can transition from this world to another realm of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Galiens says in some of his admonishments: "Do not treat with remedies any disease that you might be called foolish for.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have composed this treatise according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapters deal with fire cauterizations and medical cauterizations, and organize the chapters from the head down to the stones; and about the forms of instruments, and tools for cauterization, and all that is necessary in the operation.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapters are about cutting and piercing, as well as suction cups and wounds, the extraction of arrows, and similar matters; and these chapters are organized along with the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapters are about restoring dislocations and twists, as well as similar matters; they are organized from the head down to the stones, and include the forms of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Just as we recall our work, it is fitting for me to tell you the quality of each remedy and its harm for every constitution.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the qualities of assistance and damage are the longest speech and most subtle science and secrets in response. And many wise ones spoke about this, agreeing with it. They provided me with little of their words, for I fear lengthiness.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that the fire aid works universally on any constitution where there is matter, because there are two constitutions: these are known as warm constitution with matter and dry constitution with matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In the warm and dry constitution combined with matter, they devised a plan and said that fire cautery is a great aid. And the other ones said otherwise: that fire cautery only works for illnesses originating from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is so hot, and should not be treated with hot diseases by heat or drying; and it contradicts those who say otherwise that the cautery provides great help to hot and dry illnesses that come into the bodies of men.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the body of man and its moisture to the nature of fire, you find that the body is cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this word.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it true on every occasion by experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And every passage, do not interfere with it except that which has been proven, and which a long-time user knows the art of cautery, and the diversity of skin types in humans, and the dispositions and causes of their diseases, and the occurrences and extent over time; we have no fear for other skin types, especially in cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And make all the parts resemble and agree with the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, my children, that a fire cautery contains secrets of healing, and is more beneficial than a burning medical treatment.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and comes out only from the body that is burned, and does not harm another body if you don't name it.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	Hot medicines travel from part to part by dispersion, and bring diseases with healing grief; and by chance, the patient's ailment is due to fire because of its height and the goodness of its substance; but if there isn't excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And I have found this through experimentation and the length of my service and study in the art, and it is true about things. And for this, I apologize for the length of my words, for I do not wish to withhold from you the secret which lies in fire, and the quality of the work, how it removes diseases from bodies, as the philosopher says by demonstrating; now receive it in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, child, that they agreed upon when the cauterizations should be performed, and they prescribed times.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cauterization is suitable in all times, because the evils arising from it occur by help of the fire; and likewise if the cauterizations are for necessary pains beyond and before which cannot wait until greater mischief befall to the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And never think like the foolish ones do, child; for a disease cured by cauterization does not recover. And they say this in this manner; but it is not as they think, for cauterizations are only medicine that changes complexion and dries the fluids that cause pain, valued more than medicine due to their urgency of action and the virtue of its work and authority.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And the ability is that disease comes none other than according to the complexion of the patient and the location of the illness and its virtue; and they are gathered within him the excesses due to the acquisition of meats and similar things, if it is not cauterization given at this point or where there is little excess and moisture, such as cauterizations for pain, and similar things, and that kind of pain does not recur; but this happens seldom.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And no one understands why cautery is considered part of medicine at the end, and that can be seen; but they don't believe that cautery should follow medicine after all, but their understanding is false, and it considers cautery as part of medicine because when we administer methods of treatments in any illness and they do not work, then we administer our cautery, and it works.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Thus clearly the cautery is part of medicine, not according to the understanding of the people who misunderstand it.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The old ones said that gold cauteries are better than iron ones, and they mentioned this only due to the quality of gold and its high substance. They also stated that the metal parts of a cautery don't cause ulcers; however, this is not true as I have proven it myself and found that it can indeed occur in some people; and gold cauteries are better than iron ones, just like they said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And still, when you heat the gold tool, you do not know it is heated by the color of the gold, and it is immediately cooled; and if you heat it too much; then put it on fire; and so there is enough prevention.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this, we use our iron cautery that we have prepared for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Otherwise, I have ordered you to write this chapter up to the thumb, so that it is easier to find the vision.
dou cautere olivaire	with an olive stick
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	A fire cautery works for moisture and cold on the brain, and there are two of them which we do by reason of an illness called 'soda', and due to many humors descending from the head as sweat, and from ears, and through a multitude of dreams, toothache, throat pain, and especially for all diseases originating from cold such as paralysis, soda [possibly meaning heatstroke or fever], apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is that the patient's body is cleansed by a dissolving medicine altering the head. Three or four times, according to how the qualities and the heat and the custom of the illness can bear it; then afterwards cleanse the head from the ill entity.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then hold it between your hands, and place his hands on a hot stone; afterwards put the root of your palm under the root of his nose between his two nostrils; and let where your fingers go bleed, then heat up the cautery called 'olivare', which has this form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it at its natural position with ink, and while descending and restraining your hand gradually, pinch a little and then relax; then lift your hand alone, and check if you see the bone. If you do not see the bone, start using the cautery until you see the bone as I have instructed; afterwards take one part of honey, and apply soft cotton within, place it under the ink, and let it stay for three days; after that place a buttered poultice; leave it on until all scabbing has disappeared; then treat the wound with tetracycline ointment until it heals.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And if they were told by the old ones, that the longer a wound stays open, the more it purges; and for this reason, movement helps.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And they were told that we should leave the cautery on until part of the bone is burned, and then remove what has been burnt from the bone, and treat it afterwards.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And it is said that we should allow the cautery to remain there, and press so hard that we lift out of the bone as wide as a small ring that women put in their earrings because fluids can flow out from this place. And should we let the wound stay open for a long time; afterwards we must clean it and bandage it.
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two methods of using the cautery do not seem to be good for everything, except in those where there is a flow of fear; and I think that I should leave them as they are. For the shoulders become weakened by continuous solutions from nature, as we have shown elsewhere on other limbs; and even when the shoulders are weak due to natural reasons, my first reaction to using cautery is more healing for me, and with this method I work together for health.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	from the old pain in the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When throughout the head comes chronic pain and lasts long, one must use the patient's remedies and pills that are called 'cochie', and treatments for clearing the head and ears and bandages; and if one applies the cautery as we have previously stated to it, it will not help.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take care that the head of the patient is of strong nature, and not too cold; thus apply to it a little from this cautery as we have said above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After you do the cautery on each horn of the head up to the bone, as we have said before, and apply one cautery where the bone is called "vassel"; and apply another method for suction cups; and lift your hand so that you don't touch the bone: patients feel much more pain in this cautery than others, and I will speak about it elsewhere; and it should be known that the cautery on the horns should be gentler than the one used for the middle part of the head, and that has a certain form:
dou cautere dou chief	The use of a hot iron commands the patient to allow hair growth until it is long and even; and if it pricks at its base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When sudden pain occurs in the shoulder part and the disease spreads up to the eye, and the head is purged with mild medications, and we have performed other treatments that I mentioned under the division of diseases, but none of this helps: therefore, I apply cautery according to two ways, namely through a medicine of fever and fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The medicine-based cautery involves taking a spoonful of oil, and using the peel and the re-cooked (a process akin to cooking in broth) for one or two times per joint. Then apply it onto the temple area where the pain is localized so you can place the spoonful of oil on top of the skin; once she's placed there, hold and tighten well and leave like that for 12 hours; then release and remove the garlic paste, leaving the wound in that state for two days or three. Then apply a butter bandage until sweating appears.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the application of ointment until it is clean; and if you see that applying some burning medicines, as I have written or detailed in the second part on burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The iron cautery follows this manner.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cautery which has this form:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And call it "closed" because its tip is shaped like a bell or has .i. point of curvature, and in the middle there's a small appearance; and put it on the painful area, and hold your hand and gently twist the iron until half of the edge of the wound is burned; then lift your hand so that no artery burns, let blood flow abundantly.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After placing sailcloth in the wound area and keeping it for three days; then replace with damp cotton in butter, and treat the wound with ointment until it is clean; and if you wish to cauterize this headache using the iron cautery which is called "cultellare", do so all over but be careful not to cover the artery in this headache that isn't old.
de emigraine	Of the migraine
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you treat migraines as we have mentioned in the divisions of diseases before, and if it doesn't improve, and you observe that the cauterization methods previously discussed in medicine don't work on this individual either, then it is necessary for you to heat up the cauterizer called "cultellare" until it turns white; and do so by placing its tip half a line of about two inches along the spine, and take your hand once, and apply pressure ensuring not to touch an artery or cut until you reach bone; and be cautious with the jaw when one eats, making sure no food is left in it which could lead to choking, and that nothing else besides the silence occurs in the throat, avoiding any spasms that might affect the patient, and guard against bleeding from the artery once cut, or when you experience excessive fear about it, especially those who are not familiar with these procedures; just let me finish my work here for now; but I will tell you how to stop bleeding when the artery is cut, and show you its location in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you notice that these cauterizations do not help the disease and the patient is suffering, apply cauterization to the middle of the head as we have said before, and treat the wound until it heals. And if you observe this, administer the cauterizer we mentioned in the chapter on extracting an artery, along with a double-edged cauterizer; and these are better than others and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	From the pain of the ear from part frost.
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When frosty pain strikes the ear, and remedies have been applied along with other treatments we've discussed in this section, should the pain persist, then apply a heat cautery known as "pains," as follows:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After applying the heat cautery around the entire afflicted ear, or around both if the pain is felt in both ears simultaneously, remove it slightly from the base of the ear after you have marked its position. Place ten points around each ear; continue treating until the area heals properly.
de la torture de la bouche	From the pain of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Pain that should be treated with a cautery isn't removed by those that move due to lymph flow, just like we mentioned in the sections of diseases; and there shouldn't be any cautery for symptoms that come from dryness and irritation of the nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you treat this form of pain that moves due to lymph flow and head discharges and gargling, and it doesn't respond well, then it's necessary for you to apply the cautery at three points: one at the root of the ear, and another slightly outside the temple, and the third in adjusting the two lips; and place the cautery over the healthy part that is exposed, and make it cauterize the area above the ear a bit below the head keratin layer, and another on the temple to the length of about an inch; and leave the cautery there until half the brain is burned; and this is how you should apply the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the form of cuteria we placed earlier, but it's a bit more refined and requires that the knives be slightly thicker; after treating the wound as I said previously until it heals properly, until it is healthy.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When dealing with an apoplectic stroke that is long-lasting and you treat it as we have said, and if it doesn't improve, and the patient has a fever, then do this: make four cauterizations. Two of them on the two horns of the head, and one under the head, and one where the neck is called 'wattles' as we had previously mentioned, and the final cauterization on the mouth of the stomach; and treat it accordingly as we had said before.
de litargie	from Liturgy
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this illness, you should give the patient large grains and powdered pills that purify the brain; afterwards take the scalp of the patient thoroughly, and place the sinapic plaster on the back of their head as written or described in treatments for plasters. And this is how to do the cautery: do it like I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If it is clean like this, well and good; and if not, proceed as follows: make three cautery burns descending from the head to the collarbone, leaving a space of about one finger between each burn. Treat as you would with other cases; should you see them adjusting and the patient tolerating the pain, perform another burn in the middle area. If necessary, do two more on the tips of the remaining two parts, treating until it is clean; among these burns, call those performed in the middle 'olive-shaped' like I've mentioned before.
de la froidor dou chief	of cold from the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary to cleanse the head of lice and what we have discussed beforehand; after treating the head with oil for the patient, then perform a cautery around the scalp and on each horn, and once more at the base and three times along the spine below the neck; and if you need to do more, and the scalp is moist and the patient tolerates it, and the illness continues, then do four more cauterizations along the spine down the back; and leave until the most unpleasant parts are well charred, then lift your hand; afterwards treat until it is clean, and among these cauterizations, call those performed in a way that results in olive-shaped marks as we have mentioned before.
de l’epilempsie	From the treatment of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	The epileptics should only use the cautery for those who are phlegmatic, and first modify their years of treatment and other remedies that we have discussed in the section where the patient is large and suffering from physical ailments.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it's a child who can't endure it, then do gargling and chewing, modifying the brain frequently with good meats; after that he takes his head every three days, and I apply one cautery according to what we said previously, and another one on the jugular vein, and on each horn; and if the patient is weak and suffering, then do cauteries in the way I have said for those who are paralyzed and have a flaccid body, over the spinal column and around the neck, and make olive wood cauteries according to the method I have described.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	And if the patient is a child, then do one delicate cautery in this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When due to the reason of melancholy are excesses or fluids corrupted and thick, then apply the fire cautery from parts as we have said for the one who has paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if due to the reason of melancholy are the excesses declining into melancholy, and the body is damp within the flesh, then they should drink something so that the brain may be purified, according to what was mentioned earlier in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After having the head of the flesh; after make two pieces of linen well made, as one circle, if you place it on the head; and if there are maladies sitting still, they should be held in all directions; afterwards present the liniment, and warm with old goat butter; and heat it over fire at a moderate temperature so that it can be applied without causing discomfort; after drain out the circle through from within by keeping the head covered, and let it cool down; and do this to each part of the body once per week with good governance until it is well.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	Or if you see it being cauterized by making points on all parts of the cautery.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	This way of cauterization moistens the head significantly; and then place wet cotton on butter and animal fat.
de l’awe des eulz	from the power of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the onset comes first with the eyes through the signs I have mentioned in the division, then begin and continue to make the patient consume something that purifies the head, and protects it from all moisture, and make him sweat or take multiple baths while fasting.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After giving him instructions about his head, and make him undergo a cautery on the head, and apply two cauteries on each temple when the weakening due to the illness is in both eyes together, or if it is only in one eye; and seal off all veins and arteries that are around the brain, applying the cautery long according to the width of the temples; and guard against bleeding out, and if you see excessive blood coming out, then stop it as much as you can using a similar method.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	And I will teach you about the extraction of arteries and incisions with cauteries, how to apply them; and in every case where a cautery or hot iron is applied, it must be done between the two bones behind.
dou cors des larmes	of the two paths of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	When the tears from the eyes are old and accustomed, and lie on the veins, or under the arteries that are visible at the neck outward; and one can see that they are cold superfluous phlegm. Therefore, I do as I said at the beginning of this work when descending to the eyes: i.e., apply a cautery to the head, and two cauterizations on the two temples, and two cauterizations where you apply an iron near the two bones; and if there is need for more, carefully cauterize above the eyebrow with one small cautery.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	of the paths of tears within the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you treat according to what we have said in the division, and it does not help, then give three nests of calves to the patient; after this, drink the head, and apply a cautery or mid-way through an olive oil cautery; and perform two cauteries using the 'clavilis' type of cautery on each wrist, a little above the hair; and be careful not to cover the artery.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the shape of the cautery which is called 'clavilis':
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the paper made from oil is softened by illness and moisture, then cauterize it with this cautery which is called "olive".
de coi ci est li forme:	of which the shape is:
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see that they do this twice on the two candles as long as the candle is, and don't let go of your hand until the third part of the paper burns, according to the method I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	of hair that sticks out from the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	No time has it been that the hair of the eyes turns into the gums and touches the eye, and then one performs a cautery according to two methods: namely by fire or with burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let their hair grow long and evenly; and if they are grasped at their root, hold their eyelids so that they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they grow and are even, then set the patient in a state of health; after this on the paper by which there is an eye, draw a figure that shall be as if it were a leaf of myrtle, and mark its beginning by the sign before the hairs; then place wet cotton saturated with quail's egg white and garlic paste over the eye, then warm up the cautery to the shape indicated here.
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterizing at the figure you have marked little by little a few times, until the scars are healed in that place; and the signs of health after the operation is when you see the paper retracting, and the hairs raised to the eye point's level; then lift your hand, and leave it like this for three days, then put wet cotton in butter as long as the scorching disappears; afterwards apply an ointment until it becomes healthy.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And when this comes about and the paper softens, then restart the cautery at that same spot as before; if the hairs have fallen out, then cauterize until the paper is raised to its natural level and evenly matches, not touching the eyes.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The cautery of medical fire commands the patient to let their hairs grow long and even; then shape parchment like a leaf of myrtle. Then take French soap and fresh vinegar, each one part, mix them well; do this quickly so it doesn't cool off, then spread on the form as like a leaf of myrtle, put on paper over the eyes; if the patient is sick for less than an oil (unit), they should open in one place, and if both sides are similarly affected. And fill each hole with moist cotton from an egg; keep your hand on the sick person's body while spreading the medicine, press once every time the patient feels the irritation of the medicine, as it feels like fire also.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for some time, if you apply the medicine to your finger.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And when the mordification has passed, if you lift the head away, and reward it if you see the paper lifted also as it was lifted by constraint of fire or through incision; and if it is like this, then it is well.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If not, it still receives further treatment in its place where the medicine has been applied, until your parts are equal and your eyes adjusted; then put damp cotton in butter until the ears are burnt, after cleanse the area from the ointment known as 'dyafenis' and other substances, until the skin is healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if you need to work on your operation by keeping very good care so that no medicine leaks into the eyes.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if the paper becomes wet afterwards, and the hair pricks into the eye, then restart the medicine on that area which has softened from the clean paper properly; do this as you did before. Afterward, cleanse it until it heals; and this is the form of the leaf of mireth:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	Know that the eyes of people are diverse in size and smallness, and according to this be your constraints; and do not let the right way respond to him who is studying this craft.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	by the treatment of fistula via cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat fistulas as we have instructed under the divisions of diseases, and your treatments are not benefiting, then it is necessary that you apply a cautery in this manner to them.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to place their head in your healthy position; and guide the surgeons' hands on their head so that it does not move or shift from its position under your guidance; after this apply moist cotton in preparation for an egg or garlic juice onto the eye; then heat up the cautery which is prepared: and hold the heated cautery above the head as if it were a feather pen, assembled to be placed on the skin where it will touch. If you can see that its tip moves from one corner of the head to the other, or if you observe that it resembles an umbrella; but in any case, remember this procedure is crucial for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After pressing if the fistula has been opened, and treat the infection by drying it out; and if it is closed, open it again and remove any pus. Afterwards, place the cautery in order, hold your hand on the cautery at the part near the nose above the eye, ensuring your hands do not cause chaos; then insert the cautery into the oil's grease, and let it become impure.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the start of the cautery up to the bone, it would be well.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If not, then continue the cautery once more. And otherwise, if you need to, let it be for three days. After that, place wet cotton and butter on it, and use the ointment cure until it is healed. If thirty days pass without healing, apply corrosive water medicine until the bone is exposed; and follow the protocol as described in his chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a way to cauterize a fistula that none of the old ones mentioned.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	Understand by fistula, and make the cut; afterwards place in the crack a thin piece of wood which has this shape:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	And do it to the size of three inches of wood; and hold your hand or needle firmly, and don't move the body at all, so that the heated wood doesn't sear its oil; and one must put on the oil of the body cotton moistened with egg white or ash: The wood is the source of the fistula, and the body enjoys marvellous healing.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have mentioned, it's good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	But if not, it is necessary to apply pertussis to the child, and to bring the fistula back to the body around the neck according to what should be done in its own proper place.
des crevaices en levres	cuts in lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Over the years, cuts occur on the lips that are referred to as "hairs", and similarly on the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	If the treatment for these cuts, as we have discussed in sections, does not help, then proceed with heating a small surgical knife like this:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place him quickly in those holes until they grow; after that, cleanse the area from wax while it remains healthy.
de l’aposteme de la goule	from the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess comes to the root of the throat or in the lymph node, or on the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, it turns into gangrene and swells up until it hardens and becomes a fistula; you then treat it as we have explained in divisions, but if this treatment doesn't help: then it's necessary that you use one fire cautery according to the size of the fistula; after draining or removing pus from the fistula, hold your hand until the heat penetrates to the bottom of it and wherever else is affected. And do this once or twice, as we have said in treatments, while it remains healthy. If this treatment works, that's good; but if not, you must expose the area and remove the infected bone as you find it in your treatise.
dou movement des dens	movement of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat this with medicines but it doesn't help, then place the patient's head in a healthy position; afterwards heat up the cautery according to its form which will come after this in such a manner that you insert one piece of wood into the tooth; and put within the cautery hot for a short time, hold your hand so much that the pain feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; afterward lift your hand and continue the cautery as you desire it; afterward fill the patient's mouth with salted water, leave it there for an hour and then rinse it out.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this way the moving tooth is stabilized, and the softened gum is restrained, and the moisture is corrupted and dried.
de la dolor des dens	from the pain of the teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When tooth pain comes from coldness, or there is coldness or veins involved, and medical treatments are ineffective, then it needs to use cautery according to two methods: and butter cautery and fire cautery.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Butter cautery if it is such that you take butter from a cow, and the tip in a metal spoon or spider; afterwards take cotton and wrap around the tip of a needle, and let the butter melt, then place this butter against the painful tooth quickly and hold until it has cooled down; do so repeatedly as long as its power reaches to the root of the tooth. And if you see wet wool and cotton in cold butter, and place them against the painful tooth, and place on a hot iron until the heat reaches the nerve of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	The fire cauteries consist such that you take a piece of iron or tin, and it should be large enough so the flame doesn't reach the mouth of the ailment; after heating the cautery, from which the form comes later, place it near your tooth and hold your hand until the cautery cools down; do this often, because the pain will be removed that day or the next.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it is necessary that the patient fills their mouth with good butter in anticipation of this cautery, and then quickly pulls away; and this is the form of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And make a cautery of whatever size you desire, and according to what you have the capability for; this is the form of the rod:
des scrophules	of the scrophula
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the scrophules are of phlegm and cold moisture, and do not respond to digestion through medicines, then ignite the cautery as described later in this text, and make two openings for the fumes to exit at the other side; and place the hot cautery on the abscess once or twice, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, adjust the cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it like that for three days; and apply wet cotton soaked in butter until the pus is extracted; after this, cleanse with ointments and bandages until it heals.
Li forme de la cainne:	The shape of sugar:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	When the moisture invades through the channels of the heart, and especially when it comes from cold constitution, then it is fitting to first empty the body with diuretic medicines; after that apply the cautery at the root of the throat, and make sure you do not go all the way up to the throat, but just a little.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	After I do another cauterization at the joint below the neck to the tip of the spine, and let it be the cauterization called "clavicle", which we have a form for in front; treat the area as previously mentioned until it is well healed.
de la toust	From the cautery tool
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	For when all and the diseases of the womb are caused by cold moisture, and the patients do not have fever or dryness, and if it's an old disease, then apply two cauterizations on their force lines in their veins; and one other cautery between the buttocks, near the nipples; and let the cauterization be called "clavile" according to the form that was previously described.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And if you see this, apply cauterization by pressing on the entire cauterization known as "points" which has its shape described in front for ear diseases; and let there be points up to XXX or beyond that.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After treating the area according to what was said before, apply cauterizations in three rounds according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And for these are lighter cauterizations, because you perform them at three places each time.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	On the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	After that, bandage the wound on his back and ribs; afterwards, gently move the abdomen which is inside the womb with your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated internally, apply the fire cautery which has two points like this:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	And apply the cautery to the abdomen until it reaches the ribs, and let the shape of the cautery combine with four applications; and for this, use the cautery that has three points, because the pattern of application consists of three cauterizations; and place the nerve according to the intricacy of a tent, which is the form of the cautery that has three points:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And never once is it applied to this first nerve, because there are seven cauteries involved.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After placing the cautery on, rub with oil; afterwards let the patient rest, and do not move their limbs for a long time until they are well settled.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated above, which happens rarely, then apply cauterization on the thickness of the cauterization known as "clavicle", or a little cauterization by pressing.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joint is closed, and the moisture is absorbed and the patient's suffering is alleviated.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	For when colds and moisture affect the stomach while it is in its natural state, they increase his catharral conditions. And in his usual ways of treatment he does not benefit, then it must be that the patient's suffering is alleviated with bandages on his back, spreading out his legs and arms.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	From this on, make three cauterizations starting below the heel with a spoon of pus per quantity of two, at each cauterization along the clavicle, and two cauterizations downwards from the second ribs until the pattern of cauterizations forms at three angles, and there is space between each one so that when they develop infection they do not join together; and make the cauterization thoroughly so that it affects both parts of the heel, and make the pattern of cauterizations according to this form without adjustment:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if you see to cauterise with a large cautery in the stomach according to this form; and the one who fears from this cautery, cauterise by pressing and signifying on the stomach at that point according to the quantity that you observe of it. Then cauterise across the whole cautery which is named 'points'.
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment we have undergone, as long as it's clean.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	As for the liver, if it experiences pain due to cold, moisture, and excessive winds, so long as its complexion is disturbed by excesses; and then treat the body according to what we have said in sections regarding these issues. If this doesn't help, it's necessary that the liver be treated with respect to its membrane; and apply three cauterizations across the liver, using this form, figure, and quantity, located under where the stomach pain occurs; leave a space between each cauterization about the size of a coin; have the cauterizations extend from the long edge to the short edge, and don't press your hand too much over the entire cauterization; heat only half of the kidney, and make sure the liver is flat on its back; if it can't do this, place it on its side, extend its legs, and lift its arms; and this is how it should be done.
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	And if you wish to do so, apply these cauteries with the scalpel, if you are skilled and careful in this art. Be cautious that you do not burn all the skin; for you would dry out the whole body. And don't heat it up until boiling, as the skin is very delicate at this point, and you need to know how to see it properly.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	When it has moved to the liver, and you want to determine if it's within the liver tissue or the membrane covering it: If it's within the tissue, the patient will feel moderate pain. And if it's in the membrane, they'll feel intense pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	And when this treatment affects the membranes, it's necessary that the patient be prepared on their head; and then apply pressure to the area where the lesion is located, and afterwards heat the cautery which resembles a reed, as depicted below:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	And apply the cautery until the hair is burnt, and proceed up to the scrotum, until all pus is out; afterwards treat according to the treatment of wounds while they are still healthy; and it should not be that any parts are burned off by this cautery except him who has studied long in the art of medicine, and through these methods diseases have never been cured.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	So he can safely operate, and always I think it would be better to leave things as they are.
dou cautere de pleuresin	of the cautery made from rue
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The old ones said we should do pleurisy-searing iron cauterizations from the roots of aristologe, and in this way: take a long root of aristologe, the largest you can find, let it be dry, and make sure it's as big and long as your thumbs; and put its juice into oil, and set it on fire, then apply iron cauterizations once between the strength and throat, twice smaller ones slightly lower towards the part that is beneath the beard; one cauterization at the fifth rib and another near the sixth, a little behind; one cauterization under the buttocks, one on the stomach, one in-between the two shoulders, then two more across the ribs below the cauterization between the shoulders; don't squeeze your hand, instead perform it openly just as you would when smelling.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And it was said by no old man that any person uses the iron cautery at the navel, and heats it and places it between the ribs, until it reaches that abscess; and when it escapes from the body, as we have mentioned for the liver abscess.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this chapter there is fear or now the patient has died, or a pus-filled tube comes which cannot be cured.
de la mice	"de la mice" seems to be incomplete or written in a non-standard form. It appears there might be a typo or it could be a specific term from a certain context that is unclear here. The phrase could potentially be related to "mice" which, depending on the context of the text, could refer to rodents (possible in pest control advice), or more likely, it's possibly a misinterpretation and should actually be associated with another word that begins similarly but isn't correctly identified. However, without further information or surrounding sentences from this medieval medical treatise, accurate interpretation is challenging. If "mice" was meant by mistake due to similar spelling or pronunciation in the original language (Old French), then it would need to be replaced with the correct term based on the context provided elsewhere in the text.
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the illness of the mouse in those that we have discussed regarding divisions of treatments, and it does not benefit, therefore try three methods of cautery which are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	There is a method thus: you make three or four cauterizations, in line according to the length of the mouse, according to the shape of the liver as we have said before; and do not rush your hand throughout the cauterization, and let the patient remain alive on his back; and another way for cauterization is that you heat the cauterizer which has two points, as we showed it in the dislocation of the shoulder; lift the keur which is located at the mouse, or where the disease's pain comes from the left side, and let the elevations go according to the keur, according to the length of the body, and the cauterizations be according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	After I ignite the two wicks until they are felt from the other side, and then remove the cautery, and so there will be four. And if you see that, completely cauterize with all the cautery at three places.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After healing when it has undergone corruption for a long time, and this is equivalent to using other treatments as previously mentioned.
de ydropisie	Of cautery from fire command the sick person to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	The cautery doesn't work for dropsy, except in the way that is called "asclepiades".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	When you treat according to the methods that we have described in sections, and your treatment is not beneficial, then it is necessary for you to make four cauterizations around the anus, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one under the breasts, and one behind the back on the spine, and one place on the buttocks; and let the cauterizations be very close to the spinal cord near the thigh.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After allow the cautery to remain in place for a long time to burn off pus, and do not stop cleaning after the cautery; and healing would hasten, and the two intentions would come together with God's help.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The shape of the cautery for the belly is like the fork that we have demonstrated before; and for the back it's olive-shaped, according to what was placed here previously.
de l’enfleure des piez	regarding the swelling of joints
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	When the hands swell for someone who is hydroptic and filled with yellow bile, it's necessary that you apply the cautery between the thumb and the index finger on the back of the hand; and move your hand with the cautery without turning.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And don't enter too far in the center, otherwise it would go beyond the yellow bile, and apply the cautery according to this shape:
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After performing on both legs, two cauteries each on the point of the cutticle in every leg; and have the cautery long, one near the knee before and the other behind, centrally in the leg; then leave the cauteries for a long time without treatment until something comes out; after curing other treatments that we have mentioned.
de la menoison	from memory
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	When the belly ache comes from cold and moisture, as long as the retaining and digesting power, which is in the stomach and within the intestines, is being overloaded and cannot be cured by regular treatments; you see that patient suffering a lot with very green symptoms, then make one major cautery on the stomach following how it was described previously or abdominal cautery, at the circulating cautery. And four minor cauteries inside the mouth in all places, making one major thin cautery for each point and two minor cauteries on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see the moisture abundant and the body suffering, make a cautery on the bellybutton, and one cautery on each armpit, and two small cauteries in the stomach beneath the navel, because treatment benefits when there is good assistance.
de la cure des emorroydes	regarding the treatment of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	When there are hematomas or one or more at the base, and they are old, filled with large cold and moist corrupt humors, and if they have been treated as we've said in divisions without benefit, then apply a cautery: three on the spine of the back, that is completely beyond the center line between the ribs and belly button, gradually moving diagonally, and one cautery below the navel; and if you think the stomach has cooled down and the food isn't being digested, and you see swelling in the abdomen, then apply a large cautery on the stomach, as was mentioned before, and another on the liver, and another on the spleen with every part of the cautery. Leave the cautery for an extended period.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treatment until the wound heals.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	Regarding the diseased area which is called "thehlul"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you treat the "thehlul" condition, if it appears as a rough area, and you apply the fire cautery that seems like a razor's edge, then set it fully ablaze over that "thehlul" treated spot; and keep your hand there until the flame reaches the base of the vein from which the blood flows; perform this once or twice, and if there is more "thehlul", cauterize each part as we have said; after the treatment with antiseptic ointments when they are effective; and if you cauterize with a large fire cautery over "alchatim", it will provide greater relief.
de plaie mal curee	Of improperly treated wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot bear surgery or incision, as we will describe in its proper place, if such sickness occurs that can only be cured through cauterization.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	If there is no fistula and it has developed into putrefaction and corrupted moisture, if you need to try with a total test tool, and remember that you must know the size of the tool compared to the opening.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	After shaving the cautery to resemble a rasp, and apply it to the fistula according to how much the tool has entered, and repeat the application of the cautery until the putrid and corrupted parts are burned away, once or twice or three times depending on your needs; and be careful not to burn nerves or large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	If the fistula extends to the bladder and intestine, be aware of these symptoms, and do not perform this outside the body. Do it only during surgery and think that they are not passing away. After treating the wound until it heals, and if there is a discharge and the substances have lasted long, then you know the disease has been completely healed; and if the substances have not lasted, you will know that the disease remains and the bone is corroded at its root; and like one of these things we will mention in their body.
de la maladie des reins	Of kidney disease
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When the pain in the stomach comes from the kidneys and large congestion, it affects women differently, hence you should apply a cautery on both sides of the kidneys with the same cautery we mentioned before; and if we cauterize at the midpoint, there will be three cauterizations in line, and they will provide more assistance.
de la vessie	Of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is full and weak due to heat and moisture so that the patient retains urine, then the practitioner should perform a cautery procedure on the lower part of the bladder, where hair begins near the thumb. On both right and left sides, each cautery should be as long as the span of one's hand; and apply a single cautery behind the back, or two if needed; and make sure the cauteries are in the shape described beforehand.
de la marris	Of the liver
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the liver is cold and moist, and fails to allow conception to occur, and the flowers (likely referring to some medical condition or symptoms) are putrefied with their ends delayed; and when they come in, there is much pain: then it's necessary to perform three cauterizations inside the womb, just as we have said about the cautery for the bladder, and two cauterizations behind the back; and make sure the cauterizations are made in the shape of a claw, as we have said.
de la hainche	From the thigh
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the viscous fluids descend to the crotch area of the thigh, and because of this reason it moves out of its place. The signs are that the leg is longer than the other when measured together; and the limbs are found from the division visible point, then you should cauterize the diseased part on the crotch area of the thigh with one fire cautery resembling a circle, and mark before the limb inside the crotch so that the crotch be within the circle; and let the cauteries be as those used for cauterizing the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you do not have these fire cauteries ready, make three olive-sized fire cauteries instead, and ensure that the cauteries are as large as all your nails; and treat with them until they cool down.
de la dolor de la hainche	Regarding the pain in the thigh
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes in the thigh bone, and this is due to coldness and moisture, and the patient is treated using what we have discussed about treatment for joint disorders, but the cure does not work, and the disease is old: thus, it is necessary that you cleanse the body of its large fluids with putrid pills or other good-looking pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	After performing the cautery; and the method of the cautery is according to two methods: this means combining hot medications, and fire cautery.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Fire cautery can follow many methods, among which one is like this: you apply three triangular cauterizations according to this shape on the buttock, making sure they have good depth and size, leaving space the width of two between each cautery, use olive oil as the cautery. No middle cautery is made in the center of the buttock, since there are four according to this shape:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see that it is cauterized with the circular cautery as we have explained before in the dislocation of the thigh bone; but make it like this so that the circles contain all the thigh bone, and all the points around the wound are heated.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	This is the method used for sciatica, when the pain stays in the buttock and does not reach up to the thigh or down to the leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if it reaches up to the thigh and leg, make two fires at this point or where the patient says it hurts, and make one above the ankle four times, a bit on the left side; then let these be cutler's fires, and burn off any thickening in the blood clot; and if the patient senses that the pain extends up to knee or close to it, cauterize here where he feels the pain three points or four at the fire point called 'points'.
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if more work is required, do it; and should the pain extend from the knee towards the thigh, use cutaneous or circular cauterization, and take great care in all your cauterizations to not let off until you burn both nerves and major arteries, and make no greater harm and contraction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I myself have seen several who had made a cautery on the ankle towards the knee, and they left it until the leg was completely swollen, and even the feet as well, causing all of them to become inflamed and rotten.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a stomach ailment from which he died.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pains are together in two parts, make a cautery on each one, according to this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And the sage said about the cautery of the buttocks, as follows, make it a piece of metal the size of a small bird's claw or slightly smaller, and have it with crosspieces and these crosspieces should span from one to the other across an area equivalent in size to a small rope. And let the crosspieces be divided into two parts, and they should resemble knots, and ensure that the metal part is well made; this is its shape:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And heat it until it becomes entirely toasty red and you smell scents emanating from it, and then place it on the sore area of the hip wound, and rotate it over the healthy side. And apply this cautery once with one piece of iron, leave it for three days; and afterwards cover it in butter, and let the wound remain open long enough; after the ointment treatment until it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasim says that we use a little of this cautery for the fear caused by its application, and we see few who use it; however, all the same, this is good cautery which one can endure, and allows where it happens.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	The cauterizing instruments of medicine are such that you make an instrument with crosspieces in which the edge descends into the opening, and it should be made of steel or long iron, and at its height it has two knots, and between each one is the size of a doig; they are open at both ends and above, and they join together according to this shape:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After placing on the buttock of the lying patient with a clean costium, and quickly place your hand mostly over the buttock; afterwards put between the second circles of the hot embers which are heated in the fire pot for one hour exactly, and allow the patient to endure the heat and burn from it.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it finds biting also like from fire; and when the biting has passed, lift your hand with the instrument and raise the buttocks gently, and leave thus for three days, and apply butter until what is black from the charred remains is turned over; and let it be left for three days until putrefaction had spread; and this would be the last help after the treatment of ointments as long as he's healthy.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And if the pain has spread up to the thigh or even to the leg, you do it with the same instrument as you did for the buttock equally; and this is the way of hot treatment, and I have written it down or treated it about correcting medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take equal parts of salt and live charcoal, as much of one as of the other, grind them together and mix them in a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	So that it has a small notch so that the tip of a razor may be able to enter; and put it in that pot into another well sealed pot, and place salt and charcoal underneath gently until there are two spoonfuls above the powders until you have thoroughly mixed them with your hand; and leave it like this until all the moisture and scum or wax drain out of it then when it is sealed, take all that mixture, and pour it onto charcoal and onto salt in the same manner as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	And then it will be plenty of water and applied in the form of various substances of medicine and as cauterizers for other limbs. For it accomplishes a similar task to fire, and it is used with other medicines when you properly cauterize the buttocks like turpentine, honey, anacardium, and charcoal mixed with soap, all these things combined together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galen tells us about a treatment that some men were treated with for the pain in their hip and sciatic vein, and the back leg, and he says that no other treatment was done, and they became well after this treatment took place. And when it had been done, as he instructs later here, they bathed themselves accordingly.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And they instruct in this manner: take some green and dry verdigris and grind it finely with a bit of fat. Apply the mixture to the hip, thigh, and leg where pain is felt, and bind it there. Leave it on for three hours and ensure that the patient does not feel any burning sensation due to the quantity used.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then let them take a bath until their body is slightly stirred up, and then have them lie down, and the pain will completely go away and they will recover.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And know that no one should use such medicines' cauterizing, if this is after the removal of pus.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And Dioscorides states that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with the fat of a goat, if it helps much; and the cautery should be performed in this manner.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take lanoline and mix it with old oil, then apply it to the depression located between the base of the thumb and the other one called the fossa.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	After taking the fat of a dried goat and heating it until it becomes charcoal, put this on wool, then leave it until it stains. Repeat this process again, not stopping until you think by sense that it will reach to the hip, and the pain is relieved; this method of cauterization is called "goat's cauterizing".
de la dolor dou dos	Of the pain of the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether by fall or from percussion or due to too much evacuation, or through indications of spread of cold matter, none of these appearances warrant cauterization. For it is the one who comes from the infusion of cold matter that deserves cautery.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary that after the body has been emptied of fetid pills or other indications, one performs this on the back where the pain occurs, three lines marked with a cross, and in each line according to the virtue and quantity the body can endure, more than .v. cauterizations; and do the cauterizations according to the cautery called "points"; and if you see fit, perform 3 or 4 cauterizations at the mid clavicle according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	This disease often befalls small children, and the signs of its beginning are that they feel tightness alone when they stand up and faint; and you find in the last spine at the back and upon us the appearance that comes to other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this [condition] and observe its cure, if you treat it with the fire cautery according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	If one applies a heated cautery to each part of the spine, it becomes equal.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see fit, apply the heated cautery to around the spine along the line of the hot instrument for two or three lines, and have the points close together.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After treatment until it is healthy according to what we have said, and be cautious not to apply the cautery in a state of excitement that is near nerve channels.
de la dolor des jointes	of the pain in joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When the pain in joints is due to moisture that spreads throughout each limb, and when pain comes from inside the foot, which they call "gout" properly, and when it's caused by cold and needs medicine to cure it, then it can be treated using cautery in this way: make the shape of the cautery inside the joint of the foot, and apply olive oil to the cautery according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if there is need that you touch at the foot of the cheekbone, if you make it cauterized across the whole instrument saying 'point' when done.
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if the pains extend up to the knees and other joints, when this happens often, you should apply cauterization at each knee for three or four cauterizers from each part, across all olive oil; and if it is necessary for more, do so but don't remove your hand until as soon as the heat of the wound has been heated.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend to the knees and back, then administer the cautery as we have described in our chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	And if the pains are in the hands, then make incisions between the second and third lines on the wrist; and if there remains no pain in the elbows, then make incisions on each joint and at the hair of the hand; and if the pains come up to the wrists or shoulders, then cauterize each part, and give good care to the patient and take medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	And if you give him good care and purge phlegm, then he will recover with God's help.
de la routure dou syfac	Of the rupture of the scrotum
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When rupture happens in anger, and the bowels descend into intestines it's new, so it must be that when you see him being cured, he does not consume anything that day; and he should use things that lighten his stomach, so that his innards descend from his stomach; after have him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to shave off his armpit hair until the intestines are repaired, then pull them with your fingers, and scrape over the rupture on the bone of the finger, and at every sign it should resemble half a circle above the chest; then warm up the cautery as described here:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	Until it is white and sheds pus.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Then remove the boils at their root; and instruct his ministers to scrape his hand so that it doesn't turn back; and work well on the thighs for the patient, and place one piece of charcoal and one sergeant on the thighs, and another under his buttocks where you scrape his hands; then apply the cautery to the sign on your whole hand, and keep your other hand straight until you reach the bone; and if you don't touch it the first time, try again several times until you get to the bone; and be careful not to allow pus to escape when you apply the cautery; do not burn him; and so that the patient doesn't suffer or from other illnesses.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And know that when you do not reach up to the bone with the cautery, your treatments are worthless.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And it must be that the cauteries for children are subtle according to their size, and for the big people too large according to their size; after three days cleanse the wound with the wax of the cautery until the scab is removed; then apply other ointments until they heal properly, and let the patient lie on his back for forty days so that the wound heals well; and it must be that its rest periods are long enough so that the boils do not burst when he wishes to go into chambers.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	And after forty days, when he wants to stand up, get him a well-made girdle and wear it for another forty days; and have good rest, work him little and guard against drinking and eating too much, and don't strain his voice too high; and when he follows this advice, he will be entirely healed.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will say about after the amputation procedure in this chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	regarding the rupture of the abdomen
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	And when it comes to wounds in other abdomens and they are known, and you see that they do not grow anymore, then I will apply the cautery as necessary according to their size, and it should be for three parts of the blood; after treating them according to what we have said; and none of the old ones have said that one must cauterize at the cautery in three angles according to this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	but the first sign is the start of infection and draw a line across the width above the wound, and another below, and guide your hand along the entire length of the bistort (cautery tool).
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cauterizations are lighter and produce more pus.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	from old pain in no limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes to any member, through falling or being struck, and this pain lasts long periods, and medicine does not cure it, then it should be cauterized with the fire cautery called "point", and apply the cautery according to the length of the limb and its smallness and weakness and its virtue and its location of twists and its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If it responds to the first cautery, that's good; if not, reapply another cautery over this one, because these are so designed they should affect the member nearest where you've applied them, thus you must apply the cauteries until the patient has responded.
de meselerie	Of cautery with fire, command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The medicines should be assisted with great help once for each cautery, and similarly the disease that comes from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	Can you see the cautery? Take care that this disease is at its beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, without relapse or lingering. You doubt whether corruption might spread throughout the body; then perform two cauterizations on the head: I place the head at noon, and the other towards the forehead at the end of hair; and II over the two horns, and I behind near the neck; and allow your hand so that the cautery reaches up to the bone, until the scabs come out sufficiently so that the vapors of the excess fluids can escape. And cauterize in secret as what was done beforehand.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	And if the meseil is everywhere spread out; and it becomes apparent that you should cauterize with these cauteries we have said about earlier: on the head, and one cauterization in the nose area, and two cauteries on the spine from neck to shoulder, and six on the spine of the back, and a large one under the chin and another at its center, and two on each shoulder blade; and two over the ribs, and two on the tendons of the feet, and one over each joint of hands and feet, and over the hollows of the hands; be careful not to burn any nerves that are behind the heel, do not burn them. And never make a cauterization above the bone under the nail, and another over the bone of stomach, and another over the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	Know that when I perform more cauterizations, I provide more aid, and it benefits the patient; know that patients do not feel pain during cauterization as healthy people do, because their bodies are already completely corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is necessary that the cauterization be large and small according to the limbs and joints, according to what you will find in the ways of metal tools.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After treatment, wash the wound with flour mixed with honey and other treatments until it becomes clean.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When inflammation appears in any limb and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and it does not become clean, then you make cauterizations on the limb according to its size and the size of the limb; and for each cauterization, let it go slightly into the flesh of the wound; then treat it with ointments until it becomes clean.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And each time one makes a cauterization on the hand and foot and back, at the exit of the nerve that paralyzes the limb, and thus it is removed; and all the while no one should interfere unless they are knowledgeable about the limbs and the exits of the moving nerves in the body.
de albaras	Of cautery with fire, command the sick person to let their hairs grow long and even; and if they poke at their root, hold their eyes still so they don't move until they fully grow.
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the illness referred to as 'albaras' matures and medicine does not help, then cauterize using a small fire cautery according to the quantity of hair on the area. Do this until the boil is removed and its color changes; then cleanse with flour mixed with lentils, rose oil, and plantain leaves, along with colostrum and almond milk from each ingredient in equal parts. Mix all together, wrap with a cloth, and apply to the affected area until it heals.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The treatment for the sore by cautery
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When ulcer begins, and you see it start to stop, if you detect it early, sear it with the cautery that seems like a circle, all around the circumference of the ulcer.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And nevertheless the wise say that one should also cauterize in the middle of the ulcer; and nevertheless I do not think this is good, for fear it might become septic and deteriorate, and I have already decided never to do so; and a more correct practice would be to cauterize around (the circumference), using the cautery that's called 'circular', as we mentioned earlier when discussing different types of cauterizing.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	Of the swelling that cannot die away
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	When someone has a disease called 'adubelati', and it takes time to die due to excessive bleeding or the patient's old age when they are worn out (meaning they're very old) and have little blood, or because of their strength; and you see them dying slowly: then sear around using several small cauterizations. Afterwards, leave them as such.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For she will hasten to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it pierced through completely by the cautery, so heat the cautery as shown below:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And place your hand in the midst of that disease called "adubelati" while the fire is piercing the skin, and make such actions with the fire that the patient feels it outwardly in this manner so that the progress of the infection may be relieved.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the cure as long as it is completely healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	The cure by fire using iron.
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another way of disease is one called "corrodens", and it is nothing else than a member's ulceration, for it eats away at the members as if they were dry branches.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	If you see this disease in them that can bear a mixture of fire cautery, then prepare the fire cauteries very small and large according to what is suitable for the body or where the illness is; after that cauterize all around as long as you rid it of all corruption, leaving nothing behind, ensuring that everything corrupted is removed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	And then leave it for three days, and apply heat to the affected limbs with oil as long as the blisters caused by the fire have healed over, and all infection.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the treatment of wounds that cause pus.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if after three days you see that healthy pus does not appear, it's good; and if this doesn't happen, then reapply the cautery to where it was left on the infected limbs.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	And this method has been treated with medicine instead of the fire cautery at times; but nonetheless, the fire cautery is a greater help. I have already mentioned the treatment for fever medicine in its section: take it when you need to.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	From those who come to the stones
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Sometimes, when bones emerge from the skin, a disease occurs that is called "enclosure" according to our understanding, and it's a large pus-filled lump that irritates the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the medical practices for this disease are done through two methods.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	This means: It is to be known as fire cautery and hot water cautery.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	The fire cautery is that you heat one of the metal points like a feather from a goose until it's very hot, and make them out of good iron to a size that can hold onto nails in all directions, with delicate edges; after this, place the heated point on the nail completely all around until it reaches the end of the nail; then leave it like this for three days until the process starts to produce gangrene; afterwards, prepare an ointment from powdered salve and apply it overnight as a covering over everything. This allows the nail to fall out cleanly along with its root.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the wound by applying salve until it heals.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	And if they are removed through wounds from the chest, and it happens repeatedly in hands and feet, you should bring in a hot cautery for this. And do it as follows: take an arnica stick or iron rod, or a goose feather, place them on a nail and on your thumb, meaning for warts; then put the stick over so that its tip touches all around, then apply some hot water, hold well with your hand, press your hand back until the edge of the stick touches the base of the nail, and then find that the hot water penetrates deeply to the root; and let the patient endure a short burn from the hot water for an hour; then leave it like this, and all will be removed at its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	So treat one after another, until you have healed all within the body, then cleanse of those that generate pus.
li cure dou trembler	The treatment for shaking
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When some shake from cold or nerves, or from the quartan fever or other causes, it is fitting that you apply four or five cauterizations to the spine of the back. Apply one cautery between each vertebra; and one on the chest with an olive oil cautery; if this does not stop the shaking, hasten the recovery of the patient's health from the cold illness.
des pustules puans	The pus-sores
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	None of the times visible through the skin or pus-filled swellings, that come from large corrupted masses.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	When they become visible, it is necessary at the first stage that you apply a small cauterizing tool to each tip of the pustule: a fine stick from myrtle wood, whose point is taken with fire, or from the long root of aristolochia, or on the lens-shaped cauterizer.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	And none of the times they are cauterized at the beginning according to this manner, and they do not grow pus before, but it dispels the superfluities from which they come, and they are cured; but it must be done after blood has been evacuated.
quant li artere est copee	When the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many times there occur great streams of blood from the artery that is cut at the wound when it flows outwards, or during incisions on an abscess, or with the cautery applied to limbs, and similar situations; it is much distressing to hear this.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And yet, when this happens to anyone, if you need to quickly place your index finger on the vein wound and apply pressure until the pain subsides under your finger, and no more drops leak out; then heat various small and large olive oil lamps until they are all red. Then take one (or adjust based on the size of the wound and the location of the artery), and position it over the vein where you hold your finger, and keep the cautery in place as long as the pain is relieved.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it jumps out when you lift your finger from the vein, and the cautery is off the fire, then quickly take another one (.i., meaning 'one') of the cauterizing tools that are on the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not stop doing this one after another until the bone is broken; and be careful that you don't burn the nerve which lies beneath it, nor allow any harm to come upon the patient; and know that when the bone breaks from the artery, you may not properly set it by yourself even if the artery is large, unless done through one of four ways as we have said: by cautery, or extraction when it hasn't been treated yet, or with a strong hold on a thread, or through medicine placed upon it which has power to set blood; and then bind and restrain it immediately afterwards.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Who will administer the setting of a fractured limb by tightly binding it with cloths or placing burning objects upon it, or other similar actions, if they do not benefit when done correctly.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this happens to anyone and they do not have any sight or medicine nearby, then they should place their thumb on the wound of the vein as we have said, and stretch it well until the bone is set both over the wound and over the vein; and do not move the arm but keep it moist with cold water often until it becomes very cold, until the bone is frozen, swollen and set. And make incisions in front of what needs cautery or medicine treatment.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	This begins the second book of treatments for amputations
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have explained in the first chapter all illnesses for which fire cautery or hot medicine is required, including the applications and causes, as well as the instruments and forms of cauterization. I ended that chapter at the knee joint, and now I will proceed through this chapter using the same approach because we find more easily what we want here.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And as I begin this one, it is necessary for you, dear reader, to understand that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first chapter of cauterizations, so more caution is required.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the course of this chapter, there are often instances of blood evacuation when opening veins and incising abscesses, as well as treatment for wounds, extraction of arrows, cutting into stones, and similar matters; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I advise you not to engage in foolishness.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For few people come for treatments.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	if they come from such individuals who barely recover even with their illness and die quickly due to the panic they find in their disease, and because of the severity of their suffering; and one must have fear for these.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	And about these individuals who give their meaning and say: "Wait, I'm scared"; and the disease is cruel.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	It is not right that you consent to those who come to you in this manner, but place more respect for your honor than for your greed, and do not act recklessly but wisely towards those you are certain of and can take care; and use prediction and indication in the treatments of your sick people whose health is restored; and this will help you acquire good reputation, glory, and lasting memory.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Dear child, our Lords grant you good understanding and righteousness, and if you wish to aspire from the holy inspiration of His hand, Amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or I have instructed you this chapter by chapters, according to what is before or the section on cauterization, that I have outlined from head to feet, for you find it more easily of what you will need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	from the head full of water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	Know that this illness comes very often to children at birth, and when the mother presses too hard on the head of the child; and it also happens sometimes due to reasons unknown.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I never see this illness occur except in children, and among all those I have seen, their death came quickly; and because of that, it seems to me that it would be better for me to abandon the task of treating such illnesses partially.
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw two infants of this condition, the shoulder was filled with water, and the head swelled each day until it couldn't bear it anymore; he believed in so much moisture that he died, and this moisture is assembled underneath the bone near the axilla, between the muscle and the bone. And the incisions are such that if there's moisture between the muscle and bone, and the abscesses are small, you cut through the head one wide slit; and it should be as long as two fingers, as long as the moisture flows; and see this form of the spathilium:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	And if there's more moisture, and the abscess is larger, make two cuts in a manner resembling a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is underneath the bone, and you see that the edges of the head open from each part, and water splashes when you press it with your hand on the inside, and this does not respond to your touch: then you must make three cuts in the middle of the head according to this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, remove all moisture completely outwards.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	After holding the cuts of the bandages and powders, then I put wine and oil, and let it remain like this until the fifth day; after that, remove them, treat the wound with dressings and ointments, and let the head heal evenly. Then allow the patient to eat dried meat from a source free of moisture as long as the limb is comfortable and restored.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another way of incision is that you look at where the opening of the abscess lies, and align with the water; for it never stands before; never behind; neither to the right; nor to the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Cut therefore where the abscess opens, and where water fills it, and cut in accordance with what you can do; and be careful not to touch an artery; and watch for a flow of blood, so that the patient dies due to the release of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
de reume	Of cautery treatment instructs to allow hair growth long and even; if they are sharp at their roots, hold tightly so they do not move until fully grown.
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When any disease called 'catarrh' affects the eyes or anus, and it's an old ailment, and medical remedies don't help, then the last resort treatment is to use a cautery with cutting off of both arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	Therefore, when you see them able to do so, let the patients take off their head covers; after that, rub their heads with a rough cloth until the veins are visible. Then remove their hair from all around up to the neck. Next, look where the pulse is taken and examine both sides of each ear after the hair has been removed there as well, ensuring the ears have fully recovered. Then mark the ears with charcoal, then shave both ears with a sharp knife until the flesh is exposed at the bone, doing this while considering the size of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see it, block the spur off of the artery and vein above, by cutting as well as two inches through.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is severed, make sure that the heart continues to pump blood upwards constantly outside.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery doesn't open upon feeling, it is necessary that you measure the size of the space to be three fingers wide. Then gently press and continue until you reach the bone; and what needs to come out for blood is six cubic centimeters, and by chance a little more or less depending on how the patient can tolerate it, as well as the filling of the artery. Then look at the wound: if there remains just at the edge of the bone pointy like the tip of a lance, if the pus from the abscess doesn't ascend, then press down and seal the wound, and apply ointment until it heals completely.
de emigrainne	Of the cautery treatment,
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When old age comes and acute coughing occur, because of the moisture in tears and body heat around the temples and elsewhere for many years, it's a condition that can be treated with methods of medical cures and all this doesn't help. We extract veins from the temples and apply hot cauterization techniques as we have detailed.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	The method of extracting them is such that the patient feels on their temple's hairs, and you can hear the artery emerging from the temple, for it opens well with its pulsation, and responds only in some people who are too cold; and if it does respond, you guide the patient using a strip of cloth, then rub their head against a rough cloth, and heat it up with hot water until the artery clearly appears. Then take the silver cup that's shaped as follows:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	Then lightly scrape the skin until you feel the artery, then raise it using forceps and remove all the tissues that are beneath each part; and if the artery is thin, pierce it at the tip of the little finger, then clamp that section according to the size of two fingers.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it isn't cut, then neither escapes all its pain completely.
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And guide the blood from seven cuts up to three; and if the artery is large, it's necessary that you tie it with two threads of a strong silk line for seven lengths, so that putrefaction doesn't occur in front of the welding of the wound, nor repeatedly bleed; then cut off the excess between those two threads at that moment. And then, if you see fit, apply the cautery gently up to the bone as long as the joints are covered; and this is the rough work, if the patient doesn't have fever and has a warm complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For the cauterizations assist in finishing off moisture: for this is more assistance against moisture.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	When it comes to extracting arteries, one must fill the arm with old cotton and place well-made bandages on it; and when they are released, apply dry medicinal substances that produce pus and bandages until the wound heals. And if there's no artery bleeding, do your best with cautering tools or use the space filled with vitriol in your hand to ensure the wound is sealed; and if you don't have this on hand, place ice inside it until the bleeding stops, then rinse with cold water until the bleeding ceases, ensuring a proper seal. When the artery extracted is softer and lighter during extraction of the artery, you should cauterize the vein from that cautering tool cutting down two parts but ensure the cuts are well-spaced to preserve heat for longer periods.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the tools become too tight, they retain less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And there should be about one finger's width between the two knives, and then when you have heated them up to touch bone, place the hot iron until it reaches the bone, cauterize the vein in two places; and keep them apart by a distance of about one finger for this cautery tool doesn't fuse completely throughout; and this is the shape of the cautery.
des larmes	Of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears from the eyes are flowing from veins that are above the test of the head's main part, and medicine treatments do not benefit, you see the face turn red, and feel or sense like trembles; and if they stay there moist such that the paper's hair falls, and the papers heat up, and burn due to the burning tears, it requires this treatment.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	And they named the old "wound healer", and when you treat someone with this illness, have them grow hair on their head or forehead, then make three cuts evenly across the forehead according to its length; and make one of the cuts halfway down the entire forehead in an upwards direction until it reaches the nose, and the other two cuts about twice as long at each side above the eyebrows, and be careful not to cut the arteries which are located above the eyebrows; keep your hand away from the continuation of the two lower jaws, and make each wound three inches wide across; have a piece of sponge and some cloths ready to wipe off any blood, then use a sharp tool from one side as shown here for treatment:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	From the incision that is made near the temple up to the second incision; and burn everything in the channel that is between the two gaps right up to the sinew which lies above the bone. Then make another cut from halfway through this incision up to the other second gap, and then extract that pus-filled area.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	Place the tool called a "cultellaire" in the first gap; it is very sharp on one side and blunt on the other, not sharp, and its shape is:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And make the cut towards the flesh at the heart, and the cut goes towards the bone at the knee, and stop the blade until it feels in the middle crack.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And pierce all the veins that descend from the head at the eyes until the incision is continuous up to the one that opens at the knee, and then continue elsewhere in the middle crack up to the other opening; and then remove equal blood, and express the eye for the blood taken; then place a cotton tent in each crack, and cover with soaked cloths in wine and oil and garlic, and make sure abscesses don't appear; and on the third day release the bandage, and apply strong washings of water, then take care with the ointment of basil with oil rose, and other treatments for wounds, until it heals.
dou reume des eulz	of the eyes
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When it comes to persistent catarrh and common colds, and you see small eyes and eyelashes, and weakening of vision, and burned paper; and the man's hair turns gray, and his head is full of ague pain, and the patient sneezes. So recognize through these events that those materials and this catarrh come from many veins, and the cure used, if it is such a thing.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And indeed you must command the patient behind his forehead, then make a large incision within the forehead, and another one quite wide below it.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And start from the temple on the left side to the temple on the right side with your incision; and make sure that no nerves of the temples are disturbed during eating; and when the bone is revealed, bleed it completely using a sponge. Then clean between the two lips of the incision, put old cotton in there, and use linen bandages; then wet these cloths in wine and oil. Avoid removing any pus; once the bone is exposed, you should rub it until the bone begins to grow back, then treat it with dry substances that promote bone growth.
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this manner: take two parts of the flower of wheat and four parts of clove oil, and make them into a paste; and apply this to these wounds to encourage flesh growth everywhere.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of the cauterization with fire,
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	Everything that chokes in the ears is one of the four things: or grains, or animal, or mine stone or similar objects such as iron; or seeds, such as beans, peas; or flowing substances like water and oils and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When it comes to piercings in the ear or any other similar issue that doesn't fit with the ear and doesn't grow in the ear, place the ear under the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	If you see the stone, if it exudes any drop of dark oil or wormwood oil, then prepare for extraction; and guide them to sneeze with consideration, and block their noses when the sneezing begins, and place pieces of cloth or wool inside the ear; and keep the ear above.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	It often happens through this treatment; and if it does not happen naturally, then he proceeds with the extraction using fine forceps, which is described like this:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it jumps as if under pressure, that's good; if not, proceed with the extraction using small, sharp tweezers; and if it doesn't jump like that, use an arachnid's claw and pinch the tip of the claw or the ear fur. And when you are at the part covered by wax, stick in a piece of beeswax so that the needle cannot enter with the claw; then press the forceps into place for forming, as often happens according to what we have said; and if it doesn't come out forcibly like that, take glut from one end and pinch its fleshy part, insert an instrument suitable for this task at one point, and put a bit of cotton in between; then press the glut onto the stone or anything else, and pull forcefully.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it doesn't jump like that from all these things we've said, hurry to pierce the ear in such a way that pus and chalz come out with spasms; and the way of piercing is as follows: you make an incision first in the head vein, and remove blood according to its size. Then place the patient's hand between your hands and turn their ear up, and make a small cut at the base of the ear by the fat or what hangs down; and let the cut be like a crescent moon as you go towards the stone, then break the bone according to your ability, and suck it quickly into your mouth; and treat until it's clean.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it's grains that are inside and they swell, proceed with extraction; and if it cannot come out, use this small spatula according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	And proceed with cutting that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But do not do this when you think that the grains are moist due to the moisture of the ear, until you have done many pieces; then remove it with fine forceps and the suction cup, just as we said, so that the removal is easy.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In an earache therefore when a child has ear wax, then the patient should use ejection of hot steam first, and fully clean out the ear with old cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And be let standing near that same ear where the ache is located.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If it jumps up in the sky, that's good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	If the sky does not do it, take many stones according to their length and lightness, and heat them slightly on fire; then place one or several of these heated stones into your ear, and move them from under his foot from another side, and heat another stone against the stone that is in the ear; and continue doing this from one stone to another until all the ache leaves completely, and only then will she leave completely; and if you see it, take a rush, and place one of the heads into your ear, and the other head on fire until the hottest part of the rush is burnt; then make other rushes in the same way until all the ache has left, just as we have explained with stones.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the removal of the beast, if it's of small size, like fleas and similar things, treat it as we have said in division; but if there is something large enough to be felt, then perform extraction with pincers; this is the easiest thing to remove that might be inside the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of worms from the ears, when you are curing it as we have said in the division and treatment of distillations, if the cure does not help, then you should look at the ear by sunlight: if no worm is open, treat it with subtle prickings, and if nothing appears, take a matchstick that matches this form:
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And make it narrow below and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	And place the most delicate part in the ear according to the amount of pain the patient can endure, then apply it all around the wound; do this repeatedly until all the pus has come out.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if they don't start coming out, stuff the cotton into the wound as I have said in the case of cuts; and if they do not protrude like we have said, administer distillations that the old ones have proven effective for worm cuts, and you will find them or consult on distillations; and if you distill your oils and medicines in the ear with this tool, as shown here is its form as you see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And make it of silver or an animal ear narrow at the bottom to half a small spoon, and wide at the top for distillation; and in order to press within the distillation use one well-made tool from an animal ear suitable for this. If you see one rasp and wrap around the tip with cotton; then pour your oil or juice, and whatever you see of your medicines in the cotton, and let it be inside the ear; then place the rasp throughout all the cotton and press your hand appropriately until the oil is distilled or to the point of the ear; and sense the illness within, and let this distillation simmer for a moment as one would when distilling into the ear; and keep in mind that it should not be too cold, because medicine would not be as good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of the cauterization with fire,
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born without any remnants in their ears; and this very thing happens to people due to the pinching of wounds, or dead flesh within the ear canal, and these pinchings enter the ear on no account if one cannot see them; and not once does a single piece escape being seen by all.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	That which enters the ear and cannot be seen is due to pus in various dispositions, and you should understand that it is appropriate for you to place the ear of the patient towards the sun; and look inside: if you see the superficial pustulation, if the operation has completed this formation:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And indeed, and cutting in front and behind completely flatly so it doesn't hurt the ear; if the swelling is of a newborn or a part of the ear, if you have delicate pincers, gently scrape it off, until that bone is fully removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the wicks are inside the ear, take a delicate small thread and heat it slightly on fire, then place or stick it in the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	If you feel the thickening that causes the ears to feel irritated when heard, gently prick it and ensure you do not damage the nerves of the ear. Then place a tent in the ear according to its size at the opening, and insert some paste into the Egyptian ointment in the wound.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do this every day until the wound is healed, or take a tent and fill it with rose water and powdered vitriol; and if you see swelling in the ear, you should replace the tent and use another one filled with a wad made from rose oil and beeswax, until that swelling bone is removed; then continue to treat until it is clean.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if bleeding occurs, one dips an sponge and wraps it in cold water, placing it on the ear, and uses other treatments that help to stop the bleeding which are akin to those of distillation methods.
de la char des papieres	From the flesh of papers
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	If the hairs come out in papers when they are moist and dry, it is necessary that you spread them with forceps and tweezers, and apply a poultice made from the roots of a spatumile; then place it on the affected area with vitriol powder.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if it's not removed by peeling, cauterize with a thin lens cautery and then cauterization after incision is effective; and repeatedly apply, since nothing remains from their roots. And when they are cauterized by fire, those roots burn completely and do not return.
de la gresle	From the stone
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Many times, papers bring things that seem to be grit in their shape and consistency. Because of this, there is a disease called 'hail', which is a mass of large moisture on the paper both above and below it; the actions are like this: take care when hail remains on one side and the other, and it's a matter to know easily; then make it wide afterwards, then scrape each part lightly, then take them with tweezers, and treat.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	If you can't cover it without piercing a bit of the paper, and it doesn't harm the patient; and if it's a large tear, then sew it up with stitches, and treat until it heals. And if it's small, don't apply any force, because the ointment will heal it quickly and encourage new tissue growth.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if hail falls into the ear towards the upper part, turn the paper and have hail at some tweezers, cover and press from both sides; and if the paper is moved away by the cut, it doesn't hurt anything; and when hail is covered, rinse with salty water, treat the area where flesh nourishes until the patient becomes healthy.
de la graisse des eulz	from the oil of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	Exinach is a grease that soaks through the paper it's placed on, and this happens more often in children than adults, causing little pain to their eyes. It causes weeping in the early hours of night for them, and they can't look at the sun because tears rush down to their eyes; due to this, they sleep right where they are, lying down, and sleep with it on, making the paper underneath their foreheads moist as the scent and appearance become covered by the exinach which opens in the eye.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press on his arm with your fingers and feel the pulsation between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the way of treatment is that when someone with Exina puts their head on a healthy place; and then take one linen cloth, and set up a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity of Exina contained by each part, then put it there; press your fingers from both sides so that all the Exina gathers inside the circle; then make a cut in the middle of the moist area diagonally, not wider than the wound you would make when opening a vein; and let the leather cover completely until you see the Exina through it; and multiple times the Exina comes out from the slit according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Take it out then, in one piece, the thick cloth strip between your fingers at the front, and turn your hand right and left until it is spread; and be sure not to adjust in the crack, do not come to the whole pus-filled area up to the eye, do not prick it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if it exits through the start of the crack, widen it gently slightly until it opens; then take it out as we have said, then moisten with a cloth and water, and place on the affected area, then remove by bending.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if there are such men who pound salt and put it up to corrupt that moisture which has been left behind.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the treatment should be applied as long as he is sound.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there's pus in the wound causing concern, then the treatment with plaster dressings continues until he is sound.
des poilz des papieres	Of the hairs of papers
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When papers grow hairs in an altered manner and they age, these affect the eyes and cause maladies such as habitual watering and paper yellowing and swelling, all of which are consequences of eye damage; and one treats according to four methods: or by applying a cautery together with fire, or with medicine according to what is mentioned before in the chapter on the cautery, and it's done either through incision and suturing or with bandages, depending on what I will explain.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	It is necessary for you to place the eye's head in its healthy state, then turn the paper of the eye with your left hand; if it turns, that is good; if not, if you stick a needle with one thread on it at both ends. And do this either within the edge of the paper or beneath where the hairs grow from these altered hairs, and pull the thread across the entire length of the paper, then turn it using scissors. Then cut in the area under the paper, under the grown hairs, up to the root for the large tear all the way to the small one; then remove the thread, place a small cotton tent and lace over the paper, then on the paper make an engraving, like the leaf of myrtle, and remember that the design should correspond to the amount you see raised above the paper.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	And if there's something that requires using large quantities of paper according to how the paper is softened; then do all treatments on this paper pattern up to two lines that you've indicated, and start with a large needle until it becomes smaller; and make sure there are fissures near the natural hairs in the growth of a root, then place an ounce in one of the two corners near the nose, then burn everything. Then gather both edges together using fine wool thread on just one needle, remove the blood, and trim the excess threads up to each corner where any glue-like substance might stick; if you perform this action correctly; but if not, don't worry about it, then leave the suture and threads for three or four days. Then treat the wound without stitches using dried and restraining substances, because the paper heals due to the bonding of the wound and its assembly, but the suture would be altered (as the old men said), and this is work without fear; and there's another method: you should mark the paper in a shape that resembles the leaves of myrtle as we've described it, with three ounces cut according to the form shown here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	Then cut those that are above evenly with small forces according to the shape shown here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	And if you don't have the strength to hold the forceps, and it's not of equal size, take a needle or where there is thread, and insert it in the middle of the figure; and place another thread below the large incision, and the second thread below the small one. Then join both threads equally between your fingers. Lift your hand evenly, and lift all the skin above which you have incised, as we have described, then stitch together the two edges of the wound seam by seam, and take care that it heals properly; and if pus comes to your incision, soothe it with tallow and other soothing ointments. And whenever the hair on the paper turns, make sure you use what we have said about cutting; but the stitches in one place and another are more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The treatment of the eyes follows this form: and you should invert the paper and make a hole inside according to what I have said, and then create two canes by art, and two thin strings as long as the paper is wide; and shape each eye out of one half of the sheet; then carefully join them both together above the part of the paper that covers the eye, and stretch the two canes from each side in a formed manner; and leave it like this for several days, and the skin which has been stretched will shrink and harden and fit well, until it falls off by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If he delays, should one have strength, then treat him as long as he is sane; and when the wound has healed, and if lifting of the paper occurs, and no more hair will grow; and this is the form of the two lines that you must follow according to this figure, and in accordance with this length and width.
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	The procedures are as follows: you should take a delicate needle, and tie two pieces of fine silk thread together; then join the threads and skillfully knot them both finely. The length of each thread should be about a palm's width. Then place another short piece of fine silk thread in the chase and knot it at both ends. Next, place the patient's end on your healthy part; and when the light shines upon it so that you can see clearly, this is due to its subtlety and minuteness. Then insert the needle into the root of the hair where you've adjusted the silk thread, and pierce through the paper swiftly as you pull up from natural hair. Next, remove all hair until it is out of the chase along with the natural hair; then knot in the chase any remaining hair if there are two, three or more. Finally, remove your hand once the hair has come out of the chase together with the natural hair throughout.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the chase has been treated and no hair comes out with it, pull out the chase from underneath all the thread that you have ordered in place until the chase is removed beyond the tip and you can see this through your vision; then pull out the chase and thread, and apply oil to them for two or three days. Wait until the hair hardens in its place and the hair grows back; and if the hair is small, accompany it with one long strand of a natural cow's hair, raise it along with that or leave it hanging down until it becomes longer, then lift it up.
de la porriture de l’oil	Regarding the decay of the eye
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	When it comes to this disease known as "aleacrati" or the rot that affects the eye, there are two ways it can occur: one naturally, and the other unnaturally.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	It happens suddenly from wounds, or from surgery, or from cauterization, and by similar means.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	The method for treating this is that you break down the oozing, and open up those lips, and insert linen wads inside, and keep it in until the wound heals; and it must not be used in his treatment anything that dries out and restricts.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	For if you do this, the illness returns worse than the first one; but apply treatments that soften things, such as fenugreek; and soak the herbs in water or broth and linseed oil, and use garlic oil on any of the oils, and make a covering like a tent, and cure it with these.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasures of your treatment are that you must take care not to have it heal in a manner that conforms to its original form; and these treatments which we have mentioned here do nothing but address this illness, so that it does not recur according to its original form.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	The material that comes to the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease that is due to an excess, which is truly called "axacrati," and it is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	Accidents come from wounds, tears and cauterizations, as well as similar occurrences; regarding the work of this case, it is like this: you take an arrow, in which there are two threads, insert it into the flesh, causing it to pierce on the left side where it can reach the right eye, so that the thread runs through two limbs of the flesh. Then, the flesh is above everything at the end of the arrow and the cut is made wide at the spasmile.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the figure on the paper comes back according to what is necessary, it's good; if this doesn't happen, take a ruler and place it in the cut, then turn the paper, and make two cuts inside the paper. And have the joints of these two cuts at the corners of your made incision, and make angles such that when they are assembled, the figure is as similar to the figure of a letter which has the form 'I griesche'; then remove this flesh according to its thicknesses around, starting from where the paper was placed. Then adjust the two parts removed, and sew them with thread; then treat the part we told you about using mollifying medicines and plasters until it heals.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the disease comes from a wound or stitch or cautery, then it is necessary that you cut a full crease along the hairs of the papers, and according to what was said before; then cut between the two flaps of a tent, as I have said; and must do the work according to the shape of the disease, for she is very diverse in shape, and the surgeons prepare equipment everywhere so that they can know how to return the figure to its natural form; and the patients themselves, according to what it requires from work and tools in various positions.
dou soudement de la papiere	quickly of the paper
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this stitch occurs with people in such a way that the paper above is bound by the white of the egg, and cannot move or do its natural tasks, then it follows that you must pierce the corner of a pairer under the paper, and lift it up; and place it on tweezers, until you feel the fine spatula, which should not be too sharp nor too deep, so that the patient does not suffer from the sharp spatula cutting their eye or causing redness in the eye; make your incision, and burn this assembled part lightly, so that the paper heals according to its natural form; and it is cured throughout this whole thing, and do not put any salty water into the eye once, then take it out with cool water and a bandage; then place between the paper and the eye a linen tent, and cover the eye with wet wool; and after a few days use a colander and other tight things until it is fully healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	From the eyelid of the eye
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	Know that the nail is in two ways: it is nervous and resembles one hard bone, and another which is not nervous, but resembles white moist congealed, that when touched with iron and cared for like with needle pricks, you cannot do; and both appearances begin near the major lacrimal duct, and grow slowly and slowly until it covers all of the eye and all light and movement of the eye.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of the incision is such that one removes the mucus from the eyes and then opens the eyelid; lift the lid with your hand, and then stretch the nail using small pliers, and place it above. Then take a needle, and insert two horse hairs or calf hairs or beef hair into it, along with a sturdy thread; and double up the needle tip slightly and poke through the nail, piercing all of it completely, and bind the nail with the thread and place it above, then scrape across the entire length of the hair follicle on both sides of the pupil until you reach the root near the lacrimal duct, leaving only a fine trace of the spatum (secretion) and small forces below; and leave nature in the lacrimal area, so that the body does not perceive any change in the habit of tears through this incision; and simply stretch the nail to its original position as well as the thread, just as we have said; then scrape off all of the spatum from this side until you reach this form:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And make sure that the cautery does not touch the flesh and tear it, and that the tip of the needle doesn't puncture; and after cutting, pour a little rosin into the incision hole and place an amalgam collar there, and leave it until another day; then treat him as needed when he is well again.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail is not purely nervous and you cannot push the needle in, many times this issue of a nail-like thing can be treated with medicines; and it will grow just as I have described in the division part, and if you see that it has turned red, operate the eye with the disease, take the cautery tip to a sharp point according to this form.
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	Cut the nail carefully from above, and if you see that it doesn't diminish at all and presses the reason (presumably a term for a vein or nerve), then let there be distillation from your mouth into the eye, make an amalgam collar and a red collar with rosin, and immerse the eye until another day; then restart this next work according to the same operation, until it is completely extracted.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If there is nothing against your sight, such as pus-filled blisters, then let it proceed, and first treat the pus-filled blister until it is clean. Then continue with the work process as described previously, until it becomes clean.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the tissue under the eyelid causes harm to your eye, suspend its use and take a portion but not all at once, ensuring no tears occur. Then apply red balm made from litharge to your eye.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	Of the flesh that grows over the pupil
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	Some individuals may not produce red flesh once, and cover the skin, remaining on papers to be turned outside, appearing like a candle flame; and as for opening wounds, when organs are such that the body places its head in your health, then you work on these parts, and do so until that entire part of flesh can be sewed up according to what is needed, and holds it with strength. Then remove the first layer of flesh all the way down until you reach the end, making sure not to hurt the eye during this process; and ensure the incision is deep as previously mentioned in the nail incision and small forces that allow extraction of the sebum, like what the figure after this chapter demonstrates; and when the incision has been fully completed and all flesh removed, apply oil from thyme or distill it into red-coloured poultices with corrosive medicines, putting cotton soaked in egg white on top of the eye to ensure there is no abscess formation. If nothing remains and there's no pus, if you suspect heat abscesses, leave the eye and treat the abscess with soothing remedies for abscesses; then return to your work until it heals, doing so by assembling flesh through this process.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	However, it must be that you attend to the treatment of each weak oil in its natural passage; and through accidents as well; in ironwork tasks too. And do not thrust your hand into any of these operations until you see that this member is enduring this operation.
des voines des eulz	of veins and eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	When the veins are red that cover at the eye, and tolerate their work on sight and weaken the eyes for several days.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	Thus, at the beginning, when you look to see where the oil is, and the disturbance lies, apart from that there is no other disease; then apply it in this manner: instruct the patient to place their head on your healthy side, then suspend all those veins according to his wisdom up to each inch, and let the inches be fine and doubled according to this form.
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And let them be one inch by stages in two sections according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then perform this operation by gently moving those veins, and after each removal of blood for an hour, continue until you see the veins being removed from around the eye; and make sure not to cut into the eye with the points of the instruments, and do this procedure at noon in front of the sun, and be very meticulous in your work so as not to remove more than just those veins; and once you have done this, apply a collar of green and red cologne to disperse what remains due to the inflammation.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you do not have the strength to perform all this in that hour, then make a plaster with substances that soothe the pain of the eyes, and leave it for some days until the eye pain is soothed and assured without any pus coming out. Then resume according to this method which was mentioned previously until it becomes healthy; and this is the form of applying force:
de la fistule de l’oil	of the tear duct of the eye
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The treatment for what's called "arissati" fistula: when you cure it with a cautery and hot water according to what I've said previously, and if it doesn't heal, then there's no choice but in the area where you cut into the pus sac, at the place where it should die out, remove all the moisture that is present, until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is revealed and you see corruption and blackness, if you retrieve it with all the tool used as described; and call it 'rough head', and make it of iron in the shape of a head reon for one inch, and sharpen it like a file as it is in this present form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And place on it the portion of the corrupted bone, then hold your hands over it and press them a bit until you know that this corruption has been removed; and do this one time, then replace the area with medicines that have been dried out.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the veins are fused, and if hair starts to grow, and the belly of the womb is also fused, and remains like this for forty days, and does not heal or become abscessed, and no bad events occur, know that it is healthy; if not, then there is only another method: to bring back the fistula to near the knuckle of the little finger according to this form. And once you expose the bone the second time with a knife and with medicines, and when exposed, take the wood according to this form, and let the iron head have three angles, and the shaft be thinned until it reaches the knuckle as shown here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then place it on the lower edge of the eye socket, and keep your hand away from the nostril slightly. Then return to pushing straight ahead until it pierces the bone and feels pain in the patient as you perform this action if you hold your hand over their nose; then restore the head with dry medicines as I have instructed you. When the child is born and the limbs harden, then move the matter towards the nose; if something lighter comes out to the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	from the exit of the eye
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the eyelids open completely and nothing comes from disturbing the heart or diminution, it is necessary that you bind the patient; then heal him, then apply suction cups or a hat without piercing in order to draw out impurities, then place on the eye (the mixture made of myrrh and aloe and incense and sarcorrhaphia), and then strain the eye, and plaster it with bandages and cloths; and the method for the cloths should be that you take cloths that are sufficiently soft and double each one in half, and then place them one on top of another according to the amount that the eyelids need; then strain from above with a hard cloth formed into strips, and repeat the suction cups without piercing; then remove the suction cups and let the eye strain day and night, and if the bandages loosen, it is necessary that you strain as much; then remove the bandage after the day and night, and if you see the eye healing, it's good; if not, continue with plastering and cloths and the bandage and suction cups until it heals.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	from the bursting of an ovarian囊肿
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When disruptions occur in the ovarian囊肿, then opened and filled with pieces like a resin grain, it's observable as dust; thus, if you see that coated, the organs are such that you pierce one side of the sac down to almost halfway up, then pierce another place with a double thread from below the uterus; and do this piercing, leave the first needle according to its position; then pinch the part of the double thread and tie it around some part inside the囊肿, firmly hold it, then remove the needle and put moistened linen on the eye above an egg; and let that be until the thread is separated with the囊肿, then treat the eye with comforting substances until the wound heals; and without fail, the wound is contained by the囊肿 each part of a circular piece of cloth until it heals.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the囊肿 has a large appearance, if it is pierced through the delicate part under the eye and blood comes out from beneath the eye, correct the moisture into albumen and let it descend in the囊肿, start doing this immediately; then remove until it becomes healthy.
de la bowe de l’oil	From the socket of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	This disease called "alcunnati" only comes from water that accumulates in the ear, resembling descending fluid, and it's not real fluid; and how this condition appears is by having the patient sit upright with their head straight, then grab the back of the head with both hands and move it until you see the fluid come up to your nostrils; then remove it, don't let it fall again and clear out any light, and see what the patient sees; and if it doesn't come down suddenly, know that it's real fluid, and if the movement from the water isn't as described.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you instruct the patient to sit between your hands, then take the subtle spatula and perform on the corneous surface an incision starting from the junction with the corneal surface and the crown, until the bow comes out; and when it has come out, let its distillation be into the hot sharp water mixed with honey, or hot water that has boiled with fenugreek, then after it has healed further apply another treatment.
des aigues de l’oil	Of the waters of the eye
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	We have the indications for performing incisions, and what needs to be pierced; we perform this according to health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	It is necessary that you make the patient lie between your hands in the shade away from sunlight, and tie the healthy eye tightly; then place the paper of the eye on your left hand where its eyes are close together, or on your right hand where they are apart. Then take with your right hand (if they're close together), insert an instrument called 'almagda' onto the paper held by your left hand, or vice versa. Place the tip of the tool beneath the crown through a width of about one finger across the corneal surface to the area slightly below the inner corner of the eye, then push the 'almagda' tool in a forceful manner and rotate your hand until it punctures into the corneal surface, feeling that 'almagda' has reached the empty part. The measure of the path of 'almagda' should match the size of the space from the pupil to the edge of darkness; this is the crown of the eye. If you see bone through the transparency of the cornea in this paper, then place your tool until it reaches where water is or the exit point, then expel debris bit by bit afterwards.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	Let the patient feel this now, if he sees his ailment before him and the tool in his eye.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	After I have rested for a while, and when the pain ascends to the second eye path, use force with the tool, and when it is firmly placed and does not ascend further, gently pull out the sand lightly as you turn your hand back and forth. And then add a little sand in the water again, and remove the sand from within the eye.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then place the oil-soaked wick or wet wool in plenty of water and eggs, and bind it with healthy oil.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	And for those that belong to our time, place them on common broil with plenty of eggs.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if almagda cannot enter the eye through its hardness, because there are people who have too hard eyes, it is necessary for you to take the tool which is called 'alberit', having this form:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And pierce the conjunctiva only, do not go too far down, but make it subtle. Then pour out the sand as we have said; and upon completion of the work, let the patient rest in a bedroom, on their back in a dark position; and avoid all movements, eat light meats, do not move their head to either side, and tie them according to their disposition until three days; then release them within that same dark room, check their vision, have them see everything, and then after three more days, remount the bandage. It is not advisable to perform this during or after the current treatment period, but you should proceed with it because the pain will ascend quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	For the treatment of abscesses that burst, you should release the eye before the seventh day and apply the remedy for abscesses; when it has calmed down, then release the vision and place an edge on its face immediately or cover it for one day, and be in this dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	And then leaves the house step by step, and adapts to its circumstances; know that no disciples should intervene in this situation.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one person came to us who was from the Yrach region, who told us that in their land they would pierce the alum (a type of herb), allowing the water [of the body] to drain out, but still, I never saw anyone like this in our land, nor did I ever find it described in old books; perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the appearances of the forms of mercury, for those who do not know them can see them; and they are properly of the earth:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And there is the head of these from this same subtlety, and the last one in three angular points.
de la char sor le neis	from the flesh to the nose
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	None of the times give birth to or produce various tied creatures, from which some seem like scorpions with the foot of a hen; and if there are such things or if there is a worm with an orange color, and if it has fat with good color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	In that respect of these worms that are swollen but not fat, it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands against the sun; work on their nostrils, and pour honey onto those worms, and drive them out; proceed as long as you can bear the sharp subtle smell from one side until you know that this worm has entirely left.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if there is any part that cannot be cured, when opening the entire body with small and gentle instruments, making sure nothing remains; and if without causing pain or forming pus, in case of abscesses, cut them according to need; and if it's malignant ulcers, quickly treat and cauterize until all pus has drained out, and all the wounds are healed; then let the patient bathe with cold water or use vinegar.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	Let the patient perform actions, and moisture comes up to their mouth till it reaches the palate; know that there is blood present. And if the moisture does not break properly as it should, know that a new growth has formed inside the bone, which prevents its instruments from cutting: then you must take a thread of linen somewhat thick, tie your hands around it, and leave a space between each knot equivalent to one or less; place the patient's nose against the end of the thread at their nostril, and pull it gently until it comes out through the nostril into their mouth; many times this is done by children in school, and it is an easy task for someone who wishes to perform it. Hold the head that comes out from the nostril with one hand, and the other head coming out of the mouth with the other hand, and distinguish them one after another as we are working with a string attached to each end.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	Do this until you know that the novice has spoiled that flesh. Then take out the child, drain the blood, and smear the wound with an Egyptian ointment, then put it back in its original place as before; do this for three days or more, until the ointment dissolves all of the remaining impurities. And then leave it covered with oil from poppy for some more days until it heals, and if necessary use dried medicines, use them; this is how to use a tool to cleanse the brain, which one distills oils and medicines in the nose:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And use silver or sulfur, resembling an open lamp like a stick, and guide it this way; and if you see the need, make a closed stick, and let these tools be full for purifying the head; and hold one part of the head when heating oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	from the flesh to the nose
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times a disease is born under the nose which is called "telul" and grows to become large until it can be seen; and for this reason you should cut at its beginning, remove all bone, then place the cautery or burning medicine there; and if you delay cutting until it becomes large, take care not to let it be hard, change color, lose sensation: do not touch it with iron as it's a trapped abscess; because once you cut it even once, it causes great mischief to the patient; and if the abscess is due to soft pressure rather than changing color, and you see that it can all be cut, let the patient bleed without fear, and treat the area with dried and restricting substances.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	When the nose is cut and stitched.
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Know that when solutions for continuation come into one of these venous chapters, it doesn't profit much, because in some people.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, when this happens to no one, if you see that the wound is fresh at all its blood; then adjust the two lips with stitches and treat it until it heals. And if the lips have dried out on both sides, it's necessary to burn off every part of their tissue until they heal, then join the two lips with stitches and tighten them, and sprinkle with dragon's blood powder and incense. Then place a piece of plaster over the powders, either of a strong or another welding plaster, and leave it until it discharges on its own, then treat it with oil until it heals.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The method of stitching is as follows: you join the cut: either with needles, as we said in stomach stitch; or with thread, as I have informed you.
des apostemes des levres	from the abscesses of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	In the hands of the surgeon within the wound abscess firm, resembling grains sometimes, and smaller and larger; therefore it must be that you close the mouth, cut into each nodule, and take it with forceps and remove in each part; then use the hand after the vitriol incision until the pus is drained; and then drain the fluid quickly, and clean the wound from dry things until it heals.
de la char des gencives	from the flesh of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times it forms on the attached gum flesh, which the old ones called "albulus"; it must be held with forceps and cut at its root, allowing for bleeding or blood. Then place under the vitriol (sulphuric acid) or other drying and retarding powders; and if that flesh returns after incision, and many times happens, if it is cut a second time, then cauterize it: if it does not return after cauterization; these are the forms for cutting.
des sordens	Of cautery by fire, command to the diseased person to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they pierce at their origin, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Many times they are assembled at the head of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, and ugly and hard scabs; and it happens many times that a black tooth and citrine and worms exist until corruption reaches the gum, and then the tooth becomes stinky. So when you need to have them seen by the diseased person with your hands, and their teeth are in front of yours, remove all until there's nothing left; and do this for the darkness, greenness, yellowing, and other tints, until they're completely gone; if what is removed on the first try is enough, it is good; but if not, you should start again on the second day and third, until you have everything removed. Remember that teeth require different kinds of instruments to be cleaned depending on how their work demonstrates, because the rasp used for removing teeth between them has different forms than those for teeth protruding outwards. These forms and others are prepared with you in mind.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is necessary when you are treating a tooth for pain that you continue the extraction as long as possible, because it should not be done hastily. This is due to its position so high up in the mouth where one might have an excuse for rushing the procedure.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Therefore, when the patient is forced to cough, it's necessary for you to be certain of the location of the pain.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Many times the pain will lead you to cough, and be aware of whether it is tooth pain or not. When the tooth needs to be extracted, make sure you pull out the good tooth; but until the bad tooth has been removed, do not leave the pain behind because we have already told this to our doctors. And when you are certain about which tooth hurts, it's necessary that you sear around the tooth with a heated instrument for at least one or two seconds so as to prevent gum irritation everywhere. Then move your hand or use the fine forceps directly towards the first part of the tooth extraction procedure until it is properly dislodged, then firmly hold onto the forceps; and let the patient cough in the middle of his body between your knees, and keep your hands still so that they don't move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After extracting the right tooth correctly without breaking it, and if it does not jump out, take none of these instruments and place them inside each segment lightly, and move it as you did initially.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	And if the tooth is pierced and fractured, it is necessary for you to fill it with cloths, where the fracture occurred; and if you gently squeeze it between the tongs while pulling, without breaking it during the pull; and it must be very carefully opened under the gum to extract the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And be sure to guard that you do not break it and leave a part, and warn the patient of greater pain from the root's malice than at first.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And remember not to do as the ignorant doctors do, who break the tooth once due to their haste and boldness, without applying what we have mentioned; but let this disease take its course through the roots where they remain or through the tooth itself that they break, just like we often suggest. And when the tooth is pulled out, wash the area with wine or vinegar and water; and if bleeding occurs, which happens quite often, apply vinegar to the wound; and if it doesn't work, cauterize.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The shapes of the tools, by which you make your teeth first, should be with long points and large handles, so they do not bend when you pull the tooth; these are the shapes:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And let them have large parts that do not bend upon pulling, and be made of well-forged iron, and have teeth for gripping.
de la racine des dens	from the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	When the root stays during bleeding, it is necessary that you place wet cotton with butter on the wound for a day or two.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	As long as the legs are bent, and you hold the tongs that are called "algefri", making it seem like a well-tended mouth; they should also be done in such a way as a file would be, this is their shape.
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to emerge through all these clamps, it is necessary that you uncover the entire flesh up to the root, and place the instrument called "althali", which is known as palmache, as follows:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And let it be smooth and substantial so that it doesn't break at all, and if the root jumps out through this, it's good; if not, use all the instruments you have, as their forms come next:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if assistance is taken with this tool which has two spouts, as shown below:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other tools that are in front according to the order of teeth, and this tool which seems like large pliers, as depicted below:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And let this instrument not be able to break it, and know that many tools of bone exist; and also other tools, which are not listed; and the wise surgeons find their own tool through themselves, according to what their operations and diseases show them. For there are parts of diseases where the old did not teach any instrument because of the diversity in some and if they break from the carriage or from other bones, or if it decays, then when he searches for the tools that he needs, that I have told you about, and helps with gestures, which is shown here, this is the form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And let them be large and well holding so as to hold the bone without it escaping, but able to hold and remove it; and then restore in its place the medicine suitable for this, and if there is decay in the bone, and it is small, then seek all that instrument.
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the teeth appear not according to their natural form, and the shape is ugly, even in virgin women if it's necessary that you know whether the teeth are grown after the tooth, and they are not in their rightful position, and one cannot pull or file them: then remove them; and if they adhere with the tooth, take this instrument as depicted here, and resembles two small beaks, and should be made of sharp iron at its tip.
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the edge is thin and thin in my hands by the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the others, and if it appears that one can be filed, so I file with a single file as it is shown here:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	and it is also like the file used for making needles; and in filing I make the tooth thin and thin in my hands gently, so that you do not move it until it finishes cutting; then smooth out at the end with any smoother, and if its edge is too sharp and hurts the tongue, it's necessary to file down the roughness until it becomes flat, so that it doesn't hurt the tongue or damage speech.
quant li dent lochent	when the tooth rots
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	When the tooth is before the gum, or through percussion or impact, and when the patient cannot press upon what they eat that it doesn't cause bleeding, and you have treated them with restricting medicines, if this does not work; then you should restrict them with a thread of gold, as silver threads turn green and rot, but gold never changes. And use threads neither too thin nor too thick, according to the size of the space between the teeth; and if you see the teeth spreading outwards, take the thread and bend it in half between the healthy teeth, then place the dislocated teeth between the toothless spaces, if there is one or more, until you can feel the healthy tooth on the other side. Then restart the covering process up to the area where you had covered before, and move your hand skillfully and carefully, not allowing it to move at all; and bind your tie tightly around the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	Then bind the teeth with thread using tweezers, and join them together, then place them between a healthy tooth and the tongue, and position it so as not to irritate the tongue; and then let it stay in this tightness as much as possible, if they dislocate or the threads come off, you should replace with another thread; if it stays in this condition and serves for all its duration, and this is how the teeth are shaped and how the position of the two healthy back teeth and the two front ones works, as you can see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth gets dislodged, if you return it to its place, step by step, just as we have said; and don't interfere with anything that isn't suitable or can withstand it, and never make a shape of an ox bone tooth, and put it in the place where the defect is, and tighten it as we have said, and stays and serves this long duration.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	covering the thread of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	None of the threads come from under the tongue or are natural as we are born with them; or by accident in sewn wounds; and the procedures should be performed when you work on the mouth for the patient, have your head above a healthy tooth, and lift the tongue; then cut out the nerve thread as wide as possible until the tongue is removed from its position, and if there's stiffness or swelling, it's due to a wound healing quickly, so bend the hook and cut the thread; and remember not to make the incision too deep because there is an artery underneath; and once you're done, lift the upper part back to pinkish color and cool water, then put a linen tent under the tongue; and wash your hands each night, ensuring the teeth cannot adhere.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	And if bleeding occurs, put sulfur on the wound; and if it doesn't stop, apply gentle cauterization using a slow-burning cautery, which is good for this purpose; then treat with other remedies until the patient recovers.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see that it's of rust color or black or hard, but your patient doesn't feel pain, do not touch it as it is an ulcer; and if it begins to turn yellow and there's moisture, then pinch the hook and drain with a subtle spasm, and release from both sides; and if your tongue fails to come back in your treatment, apply vinegar until it dries out, then return to your work until you have used all force; then lift the head from cool water and salty water, and cure him with other remedies until he is healed.
des apostemes de la gorge	from throat abscesses
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	None of the nodes in the throat that are called 'godath' come inside, and they're properly referred to as the second pair. When you treat them, as we've mentioned earlier during division, if they don't heal, then take care: If these are hard swellings with small sensitivity and a reddish color, then do not touch them with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if they are red and the root is large, do not touch them with iron for bleeding purposes; but let them heal until they fester. Then you may remove them, or they might burst on their own. If they have a whitish color and the root is slender, prepare your instrument to cover them, but first check if the swelling has calmed down and healed completely.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Then have the patient sit in front of the sun, and place his limbs on your healthy side, and have him open his mouth and the attendant press his tongue completely onto all the instrument, as this is how it's done; and use silver or finely crafted iron tools just like knives.
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	Can't you press the tongue to all this tool, and you see the pus-filled lump, take the tincture and put it into the almond, then pull it up more than you can; and don't remove anything from the layers with it, then push against the tool in a way that resembles pressing something strong; and the head is tied together, one part after another, and they're very sharp, made of silver or copper:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you don't have this tool available now, just use tweezers, like this form:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	And make cuts on one side and the other; and when you have made a cut in one of the cheeks, then make the same cut on the other according to this same manner, and after the incision gargle with the hot sick patient's saliva, or gargle with both hot and mild water, and when bleeding occurs, then gargle again with hot water, or use cooked green grape pits, or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until all of the pus is cleared; then proceed with the treatment until it has healed; and no new abscesses form in the throat other than the two cheeks, so treat them accordingly.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And I treated a woman with an abscess that was inside her throat, to be specific the small abscess; and had well sealed off the entire throat so much that the woman could not breathe due to the blocked passage way, and she could neither eat nor drink, thus dying if she continued like this for one or two days.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscesses were so high that they had caused two streams of pus to be released through both nostrils.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	I immediately proceeded quickly, inserting one into the first lymph node, then pulling it out, and removing a large portion of pus. Then I made another incision in the other area near the nose, and I had his mouth open and pressed his tongue; afterwards, I inserted the needle into this abscess, and took out some of it, only leaving a little blood to escape; and thus he was drained of his throat channel, and began now to drink water and then wine, and did not stop cutting from this wound for a long time; and the abscesses were growing again immediately, filling the place I had emptied, until it became quite large; then I closed him up and cauterized inside his throat: thus he remained without growing. And I left those parts, only God made of him after me.
de l’uve	Regarding the eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	When it descends into the uterus, and it swells and becomes long, this is called "perpendicular"; and if it is offside large and round, this is called "ovum".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	When it is treated as we have said in the division, and the cure doesn't help, and you see that the abscess has calmed down and is subtle, then it's necessary to handle it; and if it's round when assembled and not long, and it's blood-red or reddish-brown or black, then it's necessary to avoid making an incision.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger for the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	Therefore, when you see it, according to the way I have said before regarding its blueness and length, you should have the patient stand in front of the sun and press their tongue with the instrument we mentioned previously. Then insert the onion into the eye ball, pull it off, and then handle it like the second tool I spoke about during incisions on the two almonds.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And it is necessary that you do not cut more than the excess which is beyond the natural limit; for if you cut too much, you injure the voice and speech. And after incision, use what we have instructed regarding incisions to the two amandros (i.e., ducts), and treat until the wound heals.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if their organs give off a fowl smell due to cutting, it is necessary that you apply the means of cautery for the sense organ.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the way of cautery is like hot iron.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And it is that the organs make their head into your health, and then press the tongue to the tool that we have mentioned or chapter of cautery, and mix with sharp vinegar, so that it is not too thick nor too clear; and you will use the force of this instrument, as follows:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let my head have a hair or where we put the medicine, like movements of a spoon, and place the tool with all the medicine on top of the ovule; and make sure the disease stays within its own limit, so that saliva and mucus flow from its mouth into the medicine inside, not descending to the throat or causing inflammation; then keep your hand on all the medicine and press it onto the ovule for half an hour's worth of quantity, until you see it absorbed and the reactions to the medicine are calmed down; and if you see this happening, take cotton and wrap it around any tool, moisten the cotton with the medicine, and place the tool on top of the cotton in the wick above, until the cotton is heated by the ovule; and repeat this often, until the cautery is perfect, then leave it to dry, and cleanse after four or five days. And if you need to start the medicine cautery again, do so, and after the cautery, clean around the ovule with cotton soaked in butter; and rinse from cold water, and gargle until it's healed completely.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This treatment is safer than incision or using the cautery; if it's treated with steam according to this method, take calamus, myrrh, and thyme along with rue and chamomile and parsley and similar herbs, and combine all of them or any of these in one pot, put them inside and let it boil; make sure the pot is filled tightly with strong earth, and in the middle of the pot place a hairpin according to this method:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	And whether it be of silver or lead, and whether one of the shoulder joints is placed in the mouth against the wound until the vapor ascends to the eye through the nose, until the eye becomes inflamed; after that you repeat often, until the eye dries out, and make sure not to do this at the beginning of pus discharge, for many things occur; and do not perform this action as the pus starts to drain.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And if this instrument is not present, take a stick and place an eggshell in the chief's mouth, so that the wound does not become too hot; for the eggshell does not allow the steam to affect the mouth, and it is a good treatment together with salvation.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times one finds in the throat bone or spinal part of a fish without anything; therefore, it is necessary that you remove what you can see and press your tongue to the sun with all the instrument until you see movement; and whatever does not open up and remains in the throat, it is appropriate for you to induce vomiting so that the malady leaves as if the meat was cooked in the stomach; by chance if the thing escapes through vomiting; or if the malady swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a root of lettuce, or a small chunk of dry bread; and tie a thread to the sponge and then swallow it; and when she comes up to your mouth, if she breathes out, and then pull forcefully; and if this does not come out as what we have said, take one tool of thorn according to this shape:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And let the forceps be applied to the head so that it can more easily enter the throat, and have the head elevated high above; and beware not to touch the epiglottis, lest anything go wrong, nor push any bone inside; and move when the patient pushes the instrument back out, because if it's moved or the thing is slippery; if it pulls down, or if it drags with equal force on all parts of the instrument until it can drag fully.
de la sansue de la gorge	from the lumen of the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	Never is the bile treated with medicine alone, as I have said in the division, through medical treatment; and when this does not help, then look into the throat of the patient towards the sun, then you squeeze the tongue against the instrument that I told you.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the blood, guide it out entirely with small fractions, or with delicate pincers suitable for this task.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if this doesn't work, take a thread-covered rod and guide it into the patient's throat, then force out any blood that has collected in the thread until you hear the thread snap, and perform this often.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if you bathe the patient with water every day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Then take a full jug of cold water and pour it into the patient's mouth, then guide it until they swallow it, and move their hands often; and as soon as the blood senses the water, they will defecate.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	And if they do not defecate as we have said, then fumigate the patient with asafetida using the instrument I mentioned for the fumigation of the eye; perform this several times, because it will pass without obstruction.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And the way of fumigation is like this: you take a pot where there are charcoal fires and place it covered with a perforated shield in the middle, and inside that, so close to the fire, are placed the parts of the instrument. Then pour your fumigation into this. Have the patient put the tip of the stick into their mouth, and seal their mouth shut so no smoke can escape but goes right up to their nostrils; then blood will now flow out through them if it doesn't already; and if it doesn't come out, start the fumigation repeatedly several times. And let the patient be thirsty and eat salty things, etc., don't drink water; and then they must leave this way out with this method.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the shape of the instrument used to clear mucus is such that when it can be seen, it resembles hooked tweezers for pulling out in the throat; and has a resemblance at the tip as if for trimming, and it has roughness like sandpaper, so what she takes cannot be left behind. And here is the form:
li chapistres des apostemes	The chapter on abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	There are various kinds of abscess discharges, according to what memory suggests from one and the other in this book, and they differ in perforation and size; and there are two ways about this where one is in its own appearance, and concerning which it holds moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second method is for those limbs which are inside the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	For the abscesses in the head are different from those on the foundation, and the abscesses in the inner thigh differ from those that come to joints, and each has its judgment in action.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And with abscesses one should not pierce them until the body has completed its development; and for those that must be pierced when they are fully formed and do not complete their development, such as abscesses located near joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscesses come near joints, and it remains until it is rotten internally, by chance if the ligament and nerve of the joint are corrupted, this causes a contraction in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	If the abscess is located within the main limb, and you delay the puncturing until it's completely dead, it will harm the main limb. If it's located at the root, if you pierce or do so even when it's dead; it should not that you perforate a crustous abscess without digestion completed, except for those which are situated at the root and might spread downward, inside, causing fistula; and it cannot heal properly in large quantities.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	It is necessary that you know the time of abscess perforation which occurs according to maturation, and this is when the pain has subsided, and departure of fever, and diminution of pain and heat, and from movement and firmness of the head of the abscess, and other signs; it should be that the perforation stays above or at the level of the abscess, where it opens outwards. And make the perforation long across the body, and if the abscess is near hands or feet, or joints and nerves and arteries, and everywhere where there is no fold.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	When these fold, according to that limb.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when abscesses are in the raw meat, it's better to let the puncturing continue until digestion is fully completed, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	But if you pierce it before that, it allows the poison of him to spread through his body and fills with many kinds of dirt; and by chance harden the skin and its underlying parts.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if there are no ulcers pierced through the width of the backbone, according to what the body needs.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And it is necessary that you introduce small ulcers, small cuts; and in large ulcers, large cuts, and many incisions according to the appearance of the size of the ulcer; and if such ulcers require the use of a knife, and covering; when they have become as hard as wooden planks, and are softening, then it is necessary to do it like what's done on babies: and if there are those that split into three angles, and if there are those that are covered similarly to the leaves of bay trees, such as ulcers from angles; and if there are those where you make a round cut, and other cuts and shapes are covered.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	Those without a head, such as superficial ulcers, it must be that you pierce them completely through. And when the ulcer is large and has gathered much pus, it needs to be punctured, but do not drain all the pus at once in this moment, but drain only part of it; then boil the ulcer until the other side heals, then leave no substance inside; perform this process gradually from larger to smaller sizes, until the pus drains completely. Similarly, if the body is weak or pregnant women, or small children, or elderly and decrepit people.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For whenever it experiences shaking once with the exit of the bowe, that perhaps kills the patient, and you don't realize this.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, be cautious in this chapter. When you have incised your abscess, if there is a wound, look to see if the incision from the abscess is small; and if it's a simple cut, you may use linen or old cotton cloths; and if it's large with much pus, then it would be necessary for you to place a wad in each one so that they press against each other. And if you have cut into the abscess part of the skin, and sewed it together internally, then you should fill it with old cotton or shredded linen without moisture, and bind it up to the third day; then set it, and treat with ointment until it heals.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if bleeding occurs in your operation, cool it down with cold and ease, and apply moisture until you cover the site repeatedly.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the bleeding persists, then manage and treat it properly, and use the powders I've mentioned in this book. If it's ice-related, or where your hand or an abscess is very inflamed, you should place wet cloths and blankets in wine and hot oil repeatedly; if it's in a swollen state, and your hand or that lesion is flesh-heavy, you should cover with wet cloths in water and oil, or cold wine and oil, for three days as we have said; then remove the pus and clean it, following how it should be done until it heals.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And it is necessary to know completely in the treatments of abscesses: or I have told you how one should act before treatments of abscesses, and here comes this chapter.
des soros	of the womb
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	Little ulcers come from the nose, and they are of us that appear in bandages, like a necklace on a cat's head, and many have similar appearances.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	There are some that are fatty and others with moisture just like peas; and there are some that are hard and stony to the knife, and there is no doubt that they contain blood and do not act otherwise.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the operations of cutting so is that you must try with every tool called "the introducer", from which the form comes afterwards, whatever it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, you perform it from above for its full length.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And when the moisture has drained out, you scorch so that nothing is left of the skin containing that moisture; for it returns if one leaves nothing behind. Then dip a cotton in Egyptian ointment if available; if not, in water and vinegar, and apply it to the wound, leaving it until another day; and this heals what remains from night.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And repeat the cotton as before, on the second day, and the third, until you know that it does not linger through the night; then treat the wound with ointment suitable for the task, while it remains healthy.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the abscess holds in the gut not fat, cut it according to this shape, long; and squeeze out its fats, and scrape it from all sides, and apply your entire treatment force onto the cloth where it is; and if the blood flows against you, do as I have told you after.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And similarly handle the abscess if it is due to a stone, and cut and treat with what I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And when it comes to cutting on the stone-abscess and the wetness, it is more delicate, because there is little blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if in any of these abscesses or head or there is no moisture, and of these newly-formed abscesses that I observed or the head of an elderly woman; and found the abscess like a hard stone, rough and white, and could not break it; and even if one had pierced none, it would have been just as well to make incisions on it as on a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	In other abscesses coming or around the head, it was that those which come from children and the roots of the ears, the opening should be for as long days as possible depending on the individual, so that the pus may emerge; and treat them according to how they should be treated.
des scrophules	of the scrophula
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times such abscesses occur in the throat, and around the necks, and during attacks, and not once come elsewhere or on any part of the body, they are small, and they intertwine with each other.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And each scab is properly inside its coat, like the ear and the abscess on the head, as we have said; and the appearances of these scabs are many.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some that contain moisture, and there are others that do not want to obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	In those where you see a good condition in the throat, and it resembles the color of blood, silent on each side and not penetrating under the neck or near the artery or ducts, and not deeply; you should take care to handle it from above, and shave off each part, and make cuts along both lips of the heart if necessary, as we have described in abscesses on the head; and do it slowly, making sure you don't cut the nerve or blood vessel, nor let out too much fluid, that your hands do not escape, and do not go too far ahead, so as not to remove more than what is required.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	And if you cut the vein or artery, and it doesn't allow you to open [it], put in the wound vitriol broil, or any powders that stop blood flow, and restrain the wound; and leave it until the abscesses are calmed, and the wound is softened, and starts to decompose.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	And when the blood has been absorbed [after bleeding], return to your work until it is completed; then according to your skill's measure, if there are any small nodules remaining, remove and clean them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if there is a large vein at the root of the nodule, it should not be that you remove that nodule from its root but rather bind it with a double thread tightly and let it fall out through that part without harm; then dress the wound with old cotton dipped in Egyptian ointment, then continue treatment.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you cure the entire boil, it is necessary that you bring together the two lips of the wound, and stitch them now, then there should be no excess left due to the size of the boil.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	And it is necessary that you treat its root, and drain it, and stitch it up as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Those boils that contain excess fluid, pierce wherever it opens up; and pierce in such a way as was mentioned before, while depending, then administer ointment and similar things to it, so that the corruption destroys what is left of its decay; and when the wound has been well cleaned, apply ointment until it is solid, as long as it remains healthy.
de squinance	"De squinance" refers to medical practices concerning deformities or abnormalities related to angles or positioning. It could be associated with conditions affecting bones, joints, muscles, or other bodily structures where the natural alignment is disrupted. This term might cover a variety of scenarios from anatomical malformations due to birth defects, injuries sustained over time, or diseases that alter body parts' normal orientation and function. In medieval contexts, such knowledge would have been part of the extensive medical and surgical practices aimed at diagnosing, treating, and sometimes correcting these abnormalities.
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The old ones spoke and wrote about neck surgery; but I never saw anyone do it in our land, and this is the inscription of their speech.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	For those with squint, it is necessary that the incision of the throat known as "epiglottis" be made; and one should not help this, because all the veins and lungs are near in the body for those who have abscesses deep within their mouth, or in their throat or between two bones.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the illness is within the bronchial channel, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to prevent loss due to strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	Therefore, when we wish to cut the epiglottis, it is necessary that we cut across three circles or four small slits through, between two of them. By the amount of the slit in this way, not in the cartilage; and let this be sufficient for sectioning the epiglottis so that there is no meat, and the vessels are long enough to prevent it from being too short.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	And if the masters are fearful, it is necessary that they extend the skin of the throat to all oncine, then cut through the keur until it reaches the cheneil; and avoid any blood vessels, if you see anything, and then cut down the syfac, as we have said; and this is demonstrated by the section of the stream from the cheneil which jumps out through the one who is broken, and due to lack of voice; and leave the wound open for a piece.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour has passed in which one doubts strangulation, gather the two mouths of the wound as cleanly as possible, and all along the line without touching the cartilage; then administer medicines that produce flesh until it is sound.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasim insists that one should not perform such operations until the throat is completely swollen, and the patient's organs are deemed dead, and the deficiency has been achieved.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	Then cut on the epiglottis because the organs can't evacuate, and he breathes through the wound, and so he is protected from death; and to command the old men to leave the wound open until the malady's illness has passed, and it has passed in three or four days. And then they commanded to stitch up the wound and clean it, as long as it was treated; and I will tell you what I observed.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I saw that a maiden took the knife and stabbed it in her throat, cutting part of the windpipe. And I was called to heal her, and found her as if dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound, and found where the blood was issuing from it, and indeed she had no cut veins or conduits other than her throat, and the wind went in through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I quickly tended to the wound and treated her until she was healed; and only left her voice hoarse for so long as she lived, and then returned to her usual state afterwards. This is why I say that when cutting the epiglottis, there should be no fear.
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	These abscesses are called "glossopharyngeal hernia," and they are large abscesses in the color of a raisin, and occur mostly in women. They can occur in two ways: naturally or by accident; natural ones do not involve any effort.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And accidents occur in two ways. One resembles fat from us, and the other way resembles an abscess coming from our artery; there is fear involved, and it's not advisable to apply a cauterizing substance elsewhere but only on small ones, with proof and careful inspection of every intervention: if you find it just like fat we have, and cannot reach any vein, cut it out similarly to how we cut fat, and remove all its covering tissue; if there is none; search well and treat it accordingly until it's completely healed.
des nous	From our
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	Many ways exist for us, so I will mention all similarities; and it is fitting that I explain the entire distinction between us and its outcome.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that in the state of fever and illness, it lasts as long as the boiling (of bodily processes) has not passed, and is accompanied by putrefaction; thus, once the fever and heat have subsided.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	In the case of the healthy one, there is no fever, no pain and it contains lymph, which is its own sac and is along the body's color, starts also like a boil, and becomes swollen; and they are according to two appearances, oily or moist, and most of the colors are as I have said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	When you come to treating the new, you should first inspect and inquire about all the instrument which is called 'entromissory', according to its shape or chapter that comes after.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	And the method of incising abscesses in us is that you take or more moist than what you find in the abscess, and twist your fingers a little at a time, until you know that the instruments have reached the core, then according to the size of the abscess; then remove the pus, and be careful not to rupture.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	If the wound is moist, whatever its color might be, if you cut it as I said for other abscesses; and if after the incision moisture does not come out, know that it is fatty, then cut it crosswise, take hold of it with pincers, and lightly scrape it from all sides and keep the bandage where it lies. And if you cannot remove the wound clean, then pull it in pieces so nothing remains stuck inside.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	For if there is nothing stuck inside, the wound will repeatedly return over many times; and if it sticks a bit but doesn't bother you, fill the wound with some corrosive powders and water, hold the wound in place, and apply soothing substances to treat abscesses hotly, and continue other treatments until it becomes clean; and if the wound is large, then cover the edges of the wound with two layers of material, and treat the infection that causes discharges.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	And if the vein is too small or another issue arises causing urgency, use the left over vitriol from the process and let it sit for two days or three, as long as the wound is healing, then rest the body with blood baths; then return to the treatment that has been paused due to a new situation.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	Look at these instruments for internal discharge and there are three kinds: large, medium-sized, and small. There are four of them known as 'albaret' and one called 'breb'. These have also three types: large, medium, and small to fit the pus-filled fistulas. They're similar to needles used for threading which are yellow in color and made better with black wax when fitting into the curves of a fistula. There are again three kinds: large, medium-sized, and small according to the width of the holes involved.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	The forms of the clamps are as follows: large, medium-sized, and small. They come in two varieties with three types each based on the number of bends; there are also those that have three bends which come in three kinds too; there are also clamps with two bends, and some just one bend, all these too come in three variations. All of them are necessary according to their size.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	The head of this is made to be cut off and for those who do not cut through with force but from one side only, they burn the skin because in such cases one does not cut the vein or nerve; and these penetrating tools are then held in the hands so that the patient does not feel any pain at the opening of abscesses; and there are three ways: large, small, and medium, just as you see; and none of these use force except when cutting fat areas, like legs, arms, nipples, ankles, and alike; and every time another small tool is used, resembling the shears of a barber, according to this shape, on which one stops the bleeding.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	And let it remain one time in its healthy position where all veins are properly connected and the arteries too, never once conforming to this grand form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	None of the times do the breasts of some men swell when they begin to be corrupted, until they seem like breasts of women; and they remain swollen and inflated, and whoever wishes to treat them should follow this form from this line .b. up to .g:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	Trim the fat, then treat the wound with healing medicine. Then align the two wound edges for stitching and continue treatment until it is healed. If the nipple slants downwards due to its size as in women, cut it into two parts above, by two similar incisions; so one stitch attaches to another at the end of each, ensuring the larger line contains the smaller according to this shape, from this line .b. up to line .g.; then trim the skin between the two edges, remove fat, and apply what we have said about stitching and powders, and that which is necessary in treatment until it's healed. If not healed or if the incision isn't fully completed due to the difficulty of healing for the patients or blood leakage, it's necessary to fill the wound with moist cotton wadding in corrosive ointment; leave it until the drainage stops and fat can be removed, then treat until it is fully healed.
des apostemes des asselles	remove abscesses from the armpits
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	Abscesses that come from the axillae are methods of hard scrofula or when there are nodules, and if they contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those who contain moisture must be cut according to this form, from line .b. up to line .g:.
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the pus from the abscess is drained out, fill the wound with much cotton, and leave it for another day, then remove all the cotton, and apply ointment to the area until it heals.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess seems like a lymph node, cut it as we said in incisions for lymph nodes, and if there is pus, apply heat cautery as we said previously.
de la routure de l’artere	regarding the rupture of an artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	When the artery is being opened and the skin above it is sewn together, many times pus collections occur, and this also happens with veins and abscesses; and if one knows how to do this properly when it's an artery situation, then the pus collections are long extending downwards. And when you feel resistance with your fingers, that indicates it needs to be grasped firmly; and when it's about a vein opening, it appears with a red appearance above the abscess; and it is foolishness to cut these pus collections, and especially in situations of lacerations and wounds on other parts like neck and body, where they are numerous, and are very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	It follows that one must avoid iron surgery. For the head it must be avoided as well. And in those cases where the artery is inflamed, do work over the skin along its entire length; then proceed with the incision on the vein, and properly remove the artery from the tissues until it's completely exposed; after this, place a needle underneath and pierce through to the other side, then tie up the artery with double thread in two places as I taught you when extracting two arteries from temples. Then pull out the tissue that is between these two lines with an introducer tool till all the pus comes out, and release the pus collection; after this apply the necessary wound care until it heals over. If the pus collection is due to a vein issue, then coat your hand holding the pus area with the pus throughout the entire skin, place a needle underneath the tissue that you are holding in your hand, pierce through, and use double thread, pulling from the other side; tie up the pus area as I taught previously, or by joining one part of two parts of thread to each shoulder. If you doubt if the threads will pass properly, then insert another needle throughout all layers of the pus with the first needle's thread, and tie off all four ends tightly; after this cut away any excess pus, leaving what is bound; then place a moist cloth with wine and oil on top and apply dressing and ointments until it fully heals.
des apostemes des ners	from abscesses of nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	So, just like abscesses occur in arteries and veins, abscesses of nerves happen when nerves are cut, or due to too much labor, and similar conditions.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	This happens more often with shoulders and elbows as well as in all places where joints are present, this is the issue of abscesses, and its color resembles the color of flesh, appearing in many positions without pain; and when it's restrained firmly, one feels pain inside the patient, not within the flesh but below the skin; and moves entirely from every direction, neither forward nor backward, neither above nor below, and someone with joints doesn't suit covering with metal: an accident could cause constriction; and that which is on head or forehead makes the skin go slack.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the abscesses are small, take them out with your tweezers and apply pressure on their base; and if they're large, lift them using an incision down to the wrist, then scrape them, cut out part of the bone, suture up the wound, and treat until it heals properly.
des grosses boces pendans	Of large warts hanging down
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	No occurrence happens within the belly and nowhere else either; it's a disease called "fungus" by its resemblance. Its root is subtle and its fruits are large; there are some small and many of various sizes. I knew a person who had two bellies that resembled fungi more than anything else, with no difference, were white, had a slight root, were slightly split, and corroded from moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	I copied and found them in the first one weighing 18 ounces, and in the second six. The incisions from the cut are such that when you look, you see if the malaides (likely referring to organs or tissues) are moist, and the color of the artelul (presumably a specific medical term) is white and moist with a subtle root; if they take it in large pus-like patches, then apply the fire cautery.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	For in surgery there are often great disturbances of blood, and if it doesn't recede, then you should quickly use the cautery; and if you see that the patient is frightened and fearful from the incision made by the iron tool, then take a well-made plumb line thread and tie it around the point as we said, and leave it for two days; and then secure it again, never stopping to pull on the plumb line thread until it catches the point, and nothing moves; and if the roots are large, it will give fear because of its thickness in relation to the stomach, but you can well only catch half of them, then cauterize it so that it doesn't swell back; then treat the wound, and ensure not to pull on the thread which is pale in color and lacks feeling and milk appearance.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For it is an abscess inside, and I will come to the treatment of the sore afterwards.
quant li boude ist fuer	When the bladder burns.
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	When the appearance comes due to wound cautery or crack in the uterus and is on the belly and there are some of the worms, as it happens in other ruptures, or blood that leaks from veins or arteries according to what was mentioned before, or due to windiness; and if this is through the rupture of the uterus and by the exit of the womb, then the color of the pus resembles the color of blood, and is a mild thing with little pain, opening from various sources.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it's due to the issue of the intestine, then it's more varied. And when you press on it with your fingers, it tends to straighten up and then comes back, and by chance if it is squeezed, it gets bigger much at the entrance of the bath and because of strong work.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it's due to moisture, it's a simple matter, and opens up well when you press it with your hand, not restraining at all; and if it's due to blood, it opens by these signs - the abscesses are large and hard, and located according to their size; and if it's due to windiness, it sounds hollow in the ear, and you inspect as its appearance is for the blood of the artery, or veins, or windiness.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	It is necessary that you allow the treatment to proceed.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear with it, just as I told you in the chapter about abscesses, for the artery and for the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And if its appearance is due to an intestine or stomach issue, it's necessary that you have the patient bleed their urine, and let it flow completely straight down, then cut all around the wound; then command for vinegar to be applied in between your hands, then proceed within the area you've indicated until you reach most of the abscess, then remove half of the abscess above the large curve; then bind it firmly with a strong thread or a strand of thick silk, and secure that connection tightly; then expose the other half of the abscess above the binding, and bend your index finger, pulling out the intestine; if you find it caught in the binding, release it, and pull the intestine towards the front of the abdomen; and if you find the stomach, take hold at its curve and remove any excess; and if the artery causes difficulty or the vein does not flow well, proceed smoothly through them, then return to your task and take two needles, then tie two strings firmly on what you've pierced as a cross; then stretch the abscess over three of the needles, and if you see that it has healed properly, remove the needles, let the wound heal by itself, and cleanse out any dead flesh with vinegar; or cut it when it becomes refined and scabbed-over, then treat accordingly for what needs to be done, and cleanse the wound as we've described; and remove any blood or moisture you find, then treat the wound according to its condition, and sew up the wound.
dou chancre	and the sore
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have discussed the appearances of a sore in division and how to address it with medicine and how to avoid iron treatment. Let us discuss an ingrowing sore, and there is great caution needed in its treatment; the old say that when sores are found on skin or can be scraped off such as under breasts and in cooking areas, and those common places, they should all be removed at their beginning; but for large and old ones, it's not suitable to approach them, because I have never known anyone to recover from such cases; no one has ever recovered from these types of sores before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And in the case of ingrowing sores, when they can be scraped off as we have said, it is that you cleanse the diseased area of black scabs once. Then let the surgeon know if there's visible swelling, then prepare the diseased area to be open - that means making sure it's clean and clear skin ready for opening; then remove your warts or sores from all around, and scrape everything off without leaving anything behind; and leave no wound open, press well on the wound with your hand or any object, and if the bleeding stops opposite the cut of the artery or vein, cauterize until there's no more bleeding; then treat it further until it heals.
de ydropisie	Of cautery from fire command the sick person to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	We have mentioned in the section about epidemics, and how the assembly of water is carried out, and the signs for each appearance, and the treatment that is done through medicine, and the one treated by iron: it's all well-detailed; and it does not require touching with iron in these two appearances: this refers to tympanites and yposarche because it can be deadly. Therefore, when you treat the appearance of epidemics called 'flares' using medicine, and the treatment fails, if you notice that the patient is weak or has another disease besides epidemics, like stomach pain and similar conditions; then do not touch iron for it, as there's doubt involved. And if you see the patient's condition very green, and they only have epidemics without other illness, and they're neither too young nor too old, in that case follow this procedure: raise the patient's body straight onto your hands, and the attendants press the abdomen from above while pouring water at the lowest part of the backside, then take the thin thorn-like instrument according to this shape.
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And let it be divided into two parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	A point and yet it should not be so deep that one can reach the intestines when you insert it, nor should there be bleeding; then look if there is peritonitis spreading towards the intestines: in this case, cut three inches above on the belly side of the wound. If peritonitis stems from liver disease, your incision should be on the left side of the belly three inches above the navel; and if it's due to gallbladder issues, then do so on the right side, but you must not let the infection lie over the cut lest excess fluids flow into that weak part. Then pierce all the skin with your tool, pull it out, and lift your hand through the whole fatty layer between the skin and the abdominal wall as much as you would when roasting to the size of a fingernail or slightly more; then pierce the abdominal wall until the fatty layer reaches up to eight inches, this is the place where fluid collects, then apply pressure, and remove that tool which is described in detail here.
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	And it resembles a slender silver cane, or a small feather from an eagle, and it is found near the end of the lower part; and on one side, three feathers; and on another side, two, and on another side, one; and the shoulder is cut as if it were a pen, and this is the form of the incision that the writer has made in cutting the pen.
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	At the top is the navel; when the instruments reach the water, they now descend upon the instrument; empty it then leave half or a third of it, because if you remove too much at this time by chance, the patient might die from the release of their spirit to the weapon, or they might faint or approach death. But empty according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue signal in the patient's pulse; then draw the instrument and hold back the water, and it is held back now for the swelling that is above the scapula, as I have spoken about, where you pierce following this manner; then resume using the instrument on another day, if you see the patient suffering from this, and draw out a small amount of water. Do this for no more than one day, and refrain from using too much water but just a little bit.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	And if you doubt the patient's condition, and let water stay on it for a while, when the burial or sand is hot, through some sweat or bath and in the sun, and it tans from drinking; and treat with drying medicines until it heals, then cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and spleen after extracting the water, as I said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	On circumcision
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	No child is born without faults in the penis, or if the faults are small, or it doesn't stay in its place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If it suits to pierce immediately when there's an excessive amount of pus very subtle according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	Then place or adjust the small hole in the penis and keep it like this for three to four days, or until it feels like urinating. If it needs to be done, remove the closed part of the urine, allow urination, and then put it back. And sometimes it doesn't need to be done because the urine coming out doesn't stop the closing of the opening.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	These are the things for which his ears droop, if there is a medicine akin to the shell of a horse chestnut, as we have said, and it will expand.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those who lack the ear in their head are blind, for no one is born with an ear at the tip of his penis, so they cannot urinate before lifting their penis upwards; and they cannot bear children because the matter cannot reach the anus, and this is a terrible disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the method for opening is that the patient lies on his back, and holds the tip of the penis and its surrounding area at the size of a feather's width, so that the hair is in the middle, as it should be; and beware of bleeding that occurs repeatedly, and if it does happen, stop it using someone who can handle blood, and treat the wound until it heals.
des pustules de la verge	The blisters of the foreskin
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times ulcers appear in the foreskin, and there is an ugly appearance; and among them are benign and non-benign ones; it should be that you take .i. ounce of this subtle thing, mix and cleanse them all, then place on cotton soaked with Egyptian ointment; then cure with diafinicon ointment until it heals.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if bathing is malignant, characterized by foul smell and pus, it is necessary that you apply the cautery to it.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	When you have done this, and if bathing is within the penis and part inside the skin and part outside, it is necessary that you remove the bathing which is inside first; and when it is healed, then treat from the outside.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you treat them together, make sure the head of the penis is not pierced, and comes darkness and corruption in his penis and anus; so it's necessary to remove everything that is black and corrupted, then apply a poultice made from honey and flour which is made from apricot shell, and do other treatments until it has healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And when blood flow is stopped, if you apply the lunar cautery according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	The cauteries should be placed in two positions: that is to say, at blood flow and corruption; if the head of the penis becomes corrupted and retracted, then it's necessary to insert or guide a stick of opium into the penis, and let the patient urinate between them; when the hair is stretched over the head of the penis which has come to these who have never been circumcised, or due to injury or abscess, it's necessary that you burn this with a hot instrument until all the ties are undone, and liberate the head of the penis from all sides; if this is a difficult thing to explain, then you should burn this under the frenulum nowhere on the head of the penis and the skin; then cut cleanly between two, and place a small linen band soaked in cold water between them, so that it doesn't come back up.
de la circoncision	Of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not an alteration of the body like other injuries; nonetheless, when we perform this act voluntarily and on children, it's necessary that we do the best possible job and cause the least harm for their health.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the old ones did not mention circumcision of their children, for they do not use it in their law, and we only have what we have acquired through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	But I wanted the majority of masters and surgeons who performed circumcision before one day old, and during infancy, and for all male infants; if there were any errors because there are two layers, and by chance this was done above and that remained below.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Otherwise they receive two layers, and the pain is doubled, and in the circumcision which happens at one day old, the point of the member isn't securely made; and during the shaping of nails by chance it escapes the blade, and penetrates the work, and many times they are born like this without needing circumcision, and I have desired this.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	From the shaping done forcefully on all the thread line, I have found the benefit of experience, for the force cuts them just as well above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you apply pressure, cut it evenly as I; but let the thread be tightly wrapped around the skin. And do the first step in your technique as if to make an infant think that you are only tightening the thread around the shaft of the object completely, and then let it relax using all the techniques you can. Then hold the object straight between your hands, and use force or support under your feet so the child doesn't see or any instruments; then push your hand down on the object and blow or breathe steadily until the head of the object is enclosed; then clean well with dirt that has gathered there, then secure it firmly at the top using a double thread, and secure further threads one by one. And hold these two threads halfway to the pocket and index finger with the second layer, cut in between them, then quickly lift off your hand from above until you pull the head of the object; then let the blood flow little by little because that is how it should be, apply powder and on top of the powder place a glue made from a bit of cooked egg mixed with rose water, confected with good fresh oil, and leave this for another day, then continue other treatments until it heals completely.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of forces at the creation if thus: let there be two shoulders be together and intersecting each other, and let them be equally large as hands in equal manner:
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error in creation is when the knees inside move at incision; hence it's necessary that you extend them to your angle, so that they make an incision; and cut equally, and if you can't hold them to your angle, take them with pliers, then cut.
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if they protrude for three days, and the one beneath the foreskin is swollen, let it be until you are able to make an incision there, and gently scrape; cut as much as you can, and guard against the part of the foreskin, it will not harm him.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore treat the rest of things related to the disease with powder, as we have said or treated about powders, and if you cut too much at your hand, and it goes above, it will do no harm; therefore treat it accordingly, as we have said, until it's healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	The retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	The retention of urine results from stone formation, or blood congealing, or blockage due to a bone or an unborn baby, or similar occurrences as we have mentioned in the section; and if the urine is not relieved and you see the retention due to stones in its bladder or neck of the bladder, it is necessary that the patient be supported by their knees. And they should be placed with their feet behind them on the back, and extend their belly under the back part, and restrain the patient so that they cannot move; and then force must be applied to the neck of the bladder towards the expression of the stone above, due to which urine is relieved. And if it does not come out as we have said, and the patient feels intense pain, it is necessary that you administer extraction with all the tool called 'syringe', here its form: made from fine delicate silver hair, like a bird's feather; and let it be the length of half a palm long and a half, and should be fine at the end.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And the method for the passage of urine is as follows: take a double thread and tie it to the small end of hair or cotton at the head of it. Then put the head of the thread inside the syringe; remove any excess fiber up to the head of the syringe, then smear the syringe with oil or butter and yolk of egg, place the patient on their seat, make them stand and release urine in a slightly moistened oil state and olive oil, then gently insert the syringe into the penis until it reaches the root of the penis. Then bend the penis upwards towards the anus; then push the syringe forward until it is at the bladder, and feel the pain reaching the empty thing. This action does not follow this order strictly because for whoever directs it goes twisted; then pull the thread slowly through all the fiber and urine follows with it, then squeeze out and adjust the urine flow; and repeat the process until the bladder is emptied, and straighten the patient's condition afterward.
des maladies de la vessie	Of bladder diseases
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When burns or blood arrive in the bladder, or putrefaction is assembled, and you see distilled waters and medicines within it, then prepare with every tool that's called 'clepsis' (a type of water clock), and its form is such:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	It is sealed off, and if it has three parts: two on one side, and one on the other, as you see; and the legs through this point where medicine can be applied so that it numbs the penis well without addition, if it might possibly drain out moisture, and push when necessary; and when you see your medicines draining into the bladder, place the tip of the catheter in the moisture, and lead to the one leading; if you draw the moisture from the catheter and then reattach strongly the leading end; if the moisture enters then goes back, now coming to the bladder, so that the patient feels it; this is the form of a subtle cyst through which we catheterize the bladder: here it continues.
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And it can be made of silver or iron. The shoulder is positioned higher up; and just below the breastbone where the kidneys are; then take a sheep's bladder and place the moisture you want to catheterize into it, then connect between the two breasts with a strong double thread, and heat one end of this moisture on fire; then place the tip of the catheter in the penis, then stretch your hand over the bladder until all the moisture is gone, so that the patient feels that moisture has come to the bladder; and if you don't have a bladder, take a piece of parchment, make a circle out of it, and pierce it roundly inward; then sew this thread firmly in these places, then join the circle as one joins a loop, and put inside what you see of moisture and water, and tie it into an instrument; do it like you did with the bladder, squeezing with your hand until the moisture arrives at the bladder.
de la piere	of the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have discussed the methods for dealing with stones in division, and their extraction along with medications; we also explained the differences between hard stones that cause pain and others, as well as all the signs, and which stone requires cutting into size; regarding bladder and penis; and I will clearly and briefly tell you about them.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I state that the stone inside the bladder often occurs in children, and this is a sign that the kidney infection jumps into the bladder like an acute illness; one should cut open here, and rub the painful parts of his penis, it will happen many times, and then heal; and at these jumping points; and the healing process for children lasts up until they are four years old, and causes much pain in the elderly, and is in between in those who are in their middle age; and the treatment is more gentle for those with large stones than for those with small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to treatment, it is first necessary to cleanse the patient by purging, in order to extract all the toxins that are in the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it impedes at every attempt to cut into the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	Then hold the patient by their elbows, and lift them up and move them backwards, so that the stone descends to the bladder's base and exits nowhere from its upper part; then have them sit between your hands with their buttocks down; ensure the bladder is fully tilted downwards. Then press into it and touch internally; if you feel the stone in space, proceed now to cut above the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	And if it doesn't urinate with every touch, moisten your left hand's index finger where the stone might be located, if the patient is young or its stone is mature; then press down into its base and feel the stone, and when you sense it on your finger, take hold of the neck of the bladder; then apply pressure upwards onto your finger, and push out the area you see to cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And command the surgeon to press the bladder with his hand, and tell him to extend both his hands above in front of him, placing the skin over his pubic area at the location where the cut will be made; then he should push out the bladder smoothly, as this is its form:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	And make the cut between those who are between the coions and the foundation, not in the middle but on the left side of the spongy mass; and be straight on the stone, and your hands should be at the foundation or against it, and be of sufficient size so that it goes wide outside and narrow inside according to the quantity of the stone, not too large; if you accidentally press your hand against the foundation, it can leap out without effort; know that there is a part of the stone where there are angles and margins: if it's irritated it will leak; and in parts which are under the surface, resembling a walnut, round, from which output is easy.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	And in places where it has angles and margins, make the cut larger; and if she doesn't leap out, then you should tighten with the tongs which are like a file at their ends, to force the stone so that it doesn't escape; or you insert a small rounded tool underneath near the edge; and if you can't engage it this way, then simply enlarge it slightly beyond its usual limit, and if left alone, force it out with vitriol; and if there is more than one stone, then first cut into the larger one at the neck of the bladder, then dig upwards, and push forcefully, and the smaller ones after if there are any more.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if she is very large, you should seek it out, and make a larger wound.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	For two things happen to the patient: or he dies, or his urine starts to come out immediately when his legs cannot be stitched up; but still strive for extraction, or removal with tweezers, as long as you extract it piece by piece. And once you have completed your work, fill the wound with incense and aloes and dragon's blood, then apply pressure, and place an oily and vinegar-soaked bandage on top. Or use oil and pink water and cold water instead for soothing the inflamed area; then bind the patient to their neck and do not untie the knot until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you undo it, make sure to wash the area with oil and water thoroughly, then apply a daifinicon ointment and a basilicon ointment until it heals well.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And if abscesses are present in the wound and decays in blood occur in the bladder, and it is due to this that urine retention happens, as known to be done in certain ways without urination: thus you must drain your tools in the wound, and remove that blood, for if it remains, it corrodes the bladder and spoils it; then wash the wound with water and vinegar and honey, and support him in every way that you see fit until he is healed. And when you heal him, tie his two legs together, and gather all your medications on his head.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	And if the stone is small, and it's located where the penis goes, stuck inside, and urine can't come out; then you need to treat as I have described, by cutting multiple times, and forgive any losses from that treatment.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I already have this experience like this.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take one piece of iron according to this form, and have it pierced at three points on one point.
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	Then take a thread and tie it around the penis near the stone, so that it cannot come back into the bladder. Then push the rod into the penis gently, until it reaches the stone; then twist the rod in your hand on the stone little by little, until you can pierce the stone from the other side; if urine starts coming out, then press your hand against what is stuck inside the stone that is within the penis.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it breaks suddenly, and urine starts flowing, then relieve the pain; and if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, then tie a thread around the stone and another one on top, then make the penis fit in between the two threads, then pull strongly, and remove the thread, and cleanse all the congealed blood from the wound; and treat until there is no longer pain.
de la piere des femmes	of the stone in women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	Sometimes a stone occurs in women, and if it happens even once, this is treated with the utmost care, and precautions are taken against three things: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a woman who knows how to conduct herself properly when looking into mirrors, even if she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	And the third method is that by chance one may not find a woman well knowing this art of hands; and the fourth method is that the stone in the woman's body is more protruded than the stone in man, because it requires deeper cutting, and there is great fear involved. And if necessity dictates such action, then you should seek out a skilled assistant, and place your fingers upon her; and if you do not find any, take no notice of anyone else; and present to him or her someone well acquainted with the life of women, or a woman who knows part of this art, and command her to do as you instruct about the removal of the stone; and watch very closely that the woman is a virgin: then she should press on her stomach until she finds the stone; and if she does find it, force it out from under her fingers, and instruct her that she must push down with her left hand upon the bladder while pressing it.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	If she finds it, then it is necessary that she moves it gradually from the entrance of the bladder until beneath, up to the root of the thigh; until it reaches to the knee bone on either side of its middle line, where it makes a small opening and feels the bone in this part; and move her hand only over or above the bone, and make cuts at first as small as possible. Then press the rib into the cut, if you feel the bone increase the wound until the bone can emerge forceful, and know that many kinds of stones exist: meaning, small and large and rough and smooth, long and round, and those that have grooves.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	If you understand the symptoms to know the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if it doesn't hurt him, then put vitriol on the wound and keep it there for an hour until the pain subsides; then return to your work, as long as the stone is still in the body and has not been removed. And use the tools I have taught you about in the extraction of stones to help you in your task; and if it doesn't hurt him, and it's from the artery that's cut off, then sprinkle powder on the wound and compress with cloths and bandages, and don't repeat this again, let the stone stay and don't remove it accidentally, for fear of harming the patient. Then treat the wound afterwards.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of blood has been calmed and the wounds have healed, then return to your work until the stone is removed.
de hernie carnouse	regarding fatty hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Of watery phlegm is nothing other than a gathering of moisture or white sputum, which resides within the folds of the testicles, contained in the egg; and it is called 'sputum', and has no proper place within the fabric of the egg, should one think it's another kind; and this is the skin under the testicle where we have spoken; and this does not have a pore.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the production of such phlegm is so weak that it comes to the testicles, and spreads this material.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And never does it come from percussion on the kidneys, and this moisture has many colors: or it is yellowing color declining to jaundice, or it is without redness, or black, or aqueous white, and this happens more; and these are signs to recognize this collection. For if it is white like we have said, then there is pus present, I that is not long as the figure of an egg, and does not open on the kidneys, for it has moisture throughout.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if there is moisture in the proper tissue, then pus comes with part of an egg, and we think it's another egg; and if the moisture is between the skin of the kidneys and the white that we've said, then you can smell it well; therefore when you see to know the color of the moisture, try all the inner surface quite thoroughly, as shown previously.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	Following this, as those who come after the initial introduction, judge according to what is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when we treat it with iron, it is necessary that the patient be treated according to our ability and the filling of their body; then sit on his back, somewhat high up, and put down some pieces of cloth under him; then sit on his left side, and command the minister to sit on the right, extending his arm to one of the two ribs beneath the heart region; then take the spit iron, and scrape off the skin of the heart between the long stretch until below the knife, and make the cut entirely straight down from scraping off the skin of the heart up to white fat, and shave it subtly according to our ability; then pierce the white fat fully with water, drain all the water out, and then place his pieces, and extend the fat upwards; and do not touch the rib region but only let the white fat alone; scrape everything or in parts as finely over his side that if you do not do it carefully enough, it will come back to the water again; and if your egg jumps into your work, reset it in its place when you have completed the work from the fat; then join the two edges of the heart rib together with a stitch, then treat them like other wounds until they are healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the egg corrupted by another disease, it is necessary that you tie the ligaments that are suspended, fearing the bleeding; then cut through the scrotum up to the suspension point, remove the egg, and treat it as we have said before.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	And if the wound is assembled in two parts together, know that these are two branches; so cut the other part as you did the first equally, then drain the blood, and place wet wool in oil rose inside the wound; and put on the outside another wet wool soaked in wine and oil, and place it above both cuts, and cover it with double cloths, and bind it all around according to this shape:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take II cloths, and fold them with torn wool according to this pattern and have them joined by sewing in the trouser gusset, and one of the shoulder pieces is laid at the bottom up to the back, and the other on the part near the wrist; and another piece of cloth over both elbows, and make sure it's all sewn together with the tightening around the garter; and every time the cautery medicine has healed this branch in place of iron trimming, and you take the fine cutting cautery, and cut the skin at the joints, and heat it as we have said, so that the white substance inside the liquid is revealed; then take the cautery according to this form, and pierce that opening with oncines, and cauterize with that subtle hot cautery until the white part of the pus is exposed; if you take the cautery in this way, and pierce that opening with oncines, and scrape it off with that subtle hot cautery until the whiteness of the pus becomes visible:
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And the cure in all ways that you can, as long as you are rich enough; and ensure that the fire doesn't touch the egg; know that this work is more beneficial; and maintain no leakage of blood, and take care for the size of your cuts; and if any obstacle prevents what you're doing, or pus formation or bleeding or anything else, then treat according to what hinders you, as stated previously.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And if the pus is frightening and cannot bear this operation due to its horror, then perform a puncture, as I told you, and know that when you are well sure by the meanings we said that the watery branch is there, make the patient sit on the raised seat; then pierce the abscess in the part below at all large surface area, and place the puncture from long to the middle; and if the wounds are wide, so that all liquid comes out; then put cotton on the wound, bind it, and leave for the drainage of the liquid, then treat until the wound is healed; and when white tissue does not let water come out through the mouth of the wound, then you should apply a feather or an instrument used to treat watery dropsy, whose shape was described before; and enlarge the wound area, and know that the pus returns, it assembles after six months or more, and when it is assembled like before, then passes this illness its days.
de l’aposteme des coions	from the abscess of the glands
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	Know that in the treatment of this branch of the disease there are multiple strategies, for which I believe it is better to leave them as they are; and I will tell you about the work involved and the characteristics of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	So I say that many abscesses come from thorns or even within the body; and it happens by chance.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	This is to know by excess of bitter and fever, which spreads among friends or from tapping; and the color of the abscess according to the body's color; and you won't find any pain, it's an abscess with grief; and by chance there are grievous and stony abscesses with a fugitive color, and it never comes from a blood vessel, or inflames the vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	When it's due to blood vessel, you can recognize an abscess by its warmth when pressed between your fingers; and it is not recommended that you touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	Those made from venous swelling are known by their position in the display of feeling upon touch with two fingers, and can very well do measurements based on this resemblance, and for other parts; and it is that you measure the thickness of the ears first, then they rise at the top, and the white thread runs down from beneath them, and release the suspension from all sides around the egg.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	If the egg is bound with these strings already, then you must extract the egg and do this; and if it's near the white thread or within blood vessels, you should release all that tension, and roundly measure.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the place of birth of the child is at his rear, it must be that you take all of it, and remove the egg, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your tasks are completed, apply the wound with moistened wool in oil and wine, then continue other treatments until it is clean.
de l’aposteme des coions	from the abscess of the glands
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	This is an abscess enveloped with a resemblance to the scrotum, with the softening of the testicles, and it hurts the patient when it's about to rupture; and the treatment for this disease is very similar like that one before, yet we will still tell you the procedure, according to what the old ones did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	It is necessary for you to have the patient sit on an elevated stool, then apply pressure at the root of the penis with your thumbs on all vessels close to it, and hold the masters tightly, and stretch them properly; then cut deeply through each vessel while they are exposed, and then cauterize from every side as we've said during the extraction of arteries in temples. Then insert a needle where there is double thread and tie it at the first place where the blood came out, and tie it tightly next to the other end; then cut through the middle straightly according to the length of the body, and pull out all corrupted moisture; then treat the wound as with others or apply bandages such that no vessel escapes under any of the coital organs; because this does not cause harm, and if every vessel has blood going into them, you should drain both ends through incisions in the vessels; so that the body does not lose its fertility due to incision in the vessels, and dry out without being able to aid each other.
de la routure dou syfac	Of the rupture of the scrotum
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	Events of this nature occur through the section that comes about when it collapses or extends on the belly in the area of the ribs; because the intestines descend into this passage towards one of the kidneys. And this passage is where the collapse occurs, or from the extension of this (process), and these two ways of causing events: by percussion, or jumping, or barking, or the lifting of a load, and through similar actions; and the signs when it's due to extension of the collapse, if they occur gradually over time, in lengthened duration, and do not come suddenly; and the abscesses are equal until towards the front, because the collapse pushes the intestine.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it comes to cutting across the gland, causing a sudden onset of pain at the beginning, and abscesses appear in various forms, near the skin area, because of the exit route from the intestine and the body beyond the gland.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And it happens that the lymph nodes descend with the intestine, and are retained therein, causing great suffering to the patient, especially when pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these times of fear and anxiety, it's advisable to avoid them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	The method of this operation is such that you instruct the assistant to massage the intestine in its passage through the wound with his hand from within, if he can manage it; then cover it around the neck. Between your hands, lift up the cheeks; then elevate the abdomen above and cut off all the skin over the kidneys along its length; then insert into this the lips of the waist according to how you need to open the wound, in such a way that they might be able to emerge; then scrape away the collapsed part of the intestine down to when it turns white, because the collapse pushes on the intestine. Then insert your index finger where it meets the kidney, between the white collapsed part which is under the egg skin, and between the second kidney, and detach the one behind the egg and between the second kidney; then move with your right hand within the kidney area, lift up the white collapsed part above to your left hand, and lift the egg towards the waist completely. Instruct the doctor to extend the egg upwards, and loosen that which is beyond the ligament; and check with your fingers if there's any piece of intestine or white collapsed part left over and if you don't find anything, then remove it from within; then take a needle made of thick thread, perhaps woven of ten threads, and insert it into the rear section of the collapse, which is after the skin area around the kidneys. After this, cut off the knots that appear among the threads until there are four threads left; then join them together in an X-shaped manner, sewing down the collapsed part, as we said earlier was under the egg skin with a strong stitch of two parts long; then wrap up the threads and join it firmly by two parts, so that no thread can enter from within; that way abscess doesn't occur. Then place this stitch in line according to the first longitudinal stitch, followed by these two stitches, leave off the collapsed part near the kidney area which is about the length of one finger; then follow its circular contour as per the egg's shape. Finally, after cutting away from where it touches the skin and the bowels as we said before, apply wet woolen paste to cover the wounds, and place this stitch over them.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And afterwards burn the white syfac that we have said, after the incision, due to concern for blood escape.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	For this happens many times, and let the bandage stay until it weeps for him; and if he fails to weep, then heat water from a hot source, and apply what we have said onto that part, until it weeps; then after it has wept, cure the wound with other treatments, until it heals completely.
de hernie carnouse	regarding fatty hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this case, I never find anyone who dares to undergo the iron treatment.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the old ones said that it is done like a branch tied together with twine, in such a way that you tie the veins after trimming them slightly from below. Then cut out half and heal the abscess of the one who works on it, until the veins weep; and then treat it as we have said, until it heals completely.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	No illness ever happens in anger as we have said, and once he opens the wounds; and no intestinal contents should exit through them as well, if they do, it is insignificant and needs to be attended continuously; and all the while, if he stays too long at this point, then the wound becomes infected or syphilis, until the intestine exits; and this happens due to the extension of syphilis which resides in anger, as we have said, because it extends, then makes the wounds soft and swollen open; and treat it with a cautery, as we've previously mentioned; and never heal it using iron in such manner: and if the sick lies with his back resting against your hands, then cut the swelling from around the wound according to the size of three fists; and after removing the syphilis which is under the skin that follows, take this membrane and place it on the outward part of the syphilis; and press it fully towards the stomach, then cut the two parts visible of the syphilis at the end of the membrane, and cut both; then remove the tip from the membrane, neither applying pressure to the syphilis nor stretching out the egg or any other thing, as I have informed you in treating a branch of intestines; then heal it using wound treatment.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you have treated the children, if the world approves and heals the wound, until it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The syphilitic must be constrained, and does not show any appearance in the routure (syphilis), and the cauterizations are hardened in this area, and closer to salvation.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	From the softening of the skin of the nipples
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the skin of the breasts becomes soft in some men, because what is inside gets softened and it can be seen; when one wants to treat this condition, they should let the ailment heal on their back and cut off the soft skin above the natural skin. Then join the two edges at a seam, and if you wish, sew the first excess of soft skin with three or four seams securely. Then cut between the seams, then treat the wound as other wounds until it heals, and remove the thread.
dou chastrement	Regarding sexual restraint
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	You know that punishments are excused in our law, and because of this I would prefer not to mention them in this book; they are necessary only for two reasons: one is that someone must be able to respond when asked about the punishment and its cure; and the other is because we often need to punish some animals to help us, such as goats, sheep, cattle, and others.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	So I say that punishments are carried out in two ways: either through attraction or by making an incision.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	In the way that we do this through attraction, we place the beast in hot water until its horns soften and remain there. Then we take them with our hand while they recover and you no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	In the discipline of tail clipping: it is necessary to mark out the beast and press its coat on your left hand, then tie up the suspensory, and care for each hoof individually as you go through them after they have been well burned; and leave no small, round burn that's within the vessels; and this way of discipline differs from that which is done by attraction, because in attraction there might possibly remain something of the coat, causing the beast to desire lust; then treat the wound until it heals.
des hermofrodites	Of those who are hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	Hermaphroditism can occur in two ways, according to nature: one way is when between the two openings they resemble the shape of a woman's body, or if hair grows there, and sometimes this affects how urine is excreted.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	The other way occurs in women, and there's a protrusion at the navel like a penis and two openings.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	And the treatment for ulcers and gangrene is that you treat all the affixed maggots, and treat them as other wounds; in the second method, for those who have urine spilling from their genital area, there's no treatment.
de la tentigene	Of the measles
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	Tetragene is an affixed maggot in the natural part, as long as it's too ugly to see; and some women have also had ones as large as a hand, that's what needs treatment.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	It is necessary that you dye the excess of the tetragene with your hand or tongs, and handle it gently; don't go too far forward, lest blood flow out, then treat another treatment until it's healed; and for another maggot that emerges from the mouth of the anus, and the bladder, and perhaps forcefully jumps forth, and is according to the resemblance of a mouse, and thus they called this old illness 'mouse disease'.
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If it is necessary for you to handle it, as we said about the cutaneous treatment, and the cure until it heals.
de erratique	The fire cautery commands the patient to allow the hairs to grow long and even; if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they fully grow.
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	Erratic, if the nature of the woman is not clearly understood, or if there are deficiencies that are small; and these are naturally present by birth, or accidents brought about by disease that have occurred; or due to injuries sustained from a lover, or due to subtle or dense fluids, which are produced internally in the belly, or in the back, or underneath, wherever they may be; and it's important to comprehend how conception occurs, childbirth follows, and sometimes involves miscarriages; and understanding this comes through observation of pregnancy.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the injuries are visible, one should look at your hands or on the road.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	If it is due to subtle syphilis and the symptoms are near the breasts, if you hurry, do this: place your two index fingers together, and have the woman on her back, spreading her legs; then form both breasts as long as the subtle syphilis remains in them and covers the injuries. Then take wax and oil, mix them, and apply them to the belly, and let the woman lie there each day until it binds over.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if it is firm and dense, you must apply heat to its appearance like that of a leaf of myrtle.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is a hole from childbirth, lift the wound and apply pressure; and have止血药物 on hand, such as comfrey, dragon's blood, incense, mixed abundantly with egg whites; then administer a strip of poplar that's wide enough so that the wound cannot heal together; and do this for an extended period, and cover it with a linen tent; then proceed with other treatments until healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when it comes to sores from childbirth, if it's necessary to apply treatment according to this method, assuming they are abscesses that need draining.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For the draining of an abscess in childbirth, one should not use fire to touch it.
des emorroides	Regarding hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	Surgical incisions are openings of veins which require no special technique. And when the surgical incisions age they become thrombosed; and we have discussed similar examples in division and their symptoms, and I will mention here those that respond to treatment.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that hemorrhoids and thromboses, when they occur in the anus, do not show up by touch alone, except for the treatment with iron.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those that are at the opening of the anus can be felt, and those that can be treated are these.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	Therefore, you must put the woman in a cool house, then place her on an altar with tongs, and keep the roots of marjoram covered. Then apply powder made from restaining medicine such as senna, dragon's blood, and frankincense, and similar remedies; then soak her feet for an hour, after which she is placed in cold water; if bleeding persists, give her a decoction of sumac, apple peel, and walnut shells among other things. Then take oat flour, mix it with honey and garlic, and use this as plaster on her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if it stops bleeding, that's good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	If not, make her suck on suction cups on the back and nipples without piercing them; then take wool, and the mucus in the juice of plantain or in the juice of agrimony with old wine, and have her suckle at the breast.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the abscess rests, treat the area with ointment until it heals; and that which is called "albathir" is red, resembling a hard head, if you should need to cover it as I have said for the tallow; and then treat it until it heals.
des apostemes de la marris	The contents of the marron (large bowel)
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many forms of abscess occur in the mare (uterus), such as gangrene and pimply abscesses and herpes and ulcers and sinuses and hemorrhoids and itchy abscesses, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in the division.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	Therefore, it is necessary that I explain in this treatise the abscess to be removed from the armpit, which is not an abscess that clings to hair; and if you know how to work with iron, then observe whether the pus-forming mass is swollen at the beginning of its appearance, and filled with heat and fever, and if it turns red when you can see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	So don't hurry to pierce it immediately but keep it until the pain is alleviated; and then have the patient sit on a bench, and two small stools where they can lean forward, supporting their back and having their legs assembled towards parts below the knee; and spread his buttocks apart, and place his arms under his knees, binding them well with a firm bandage; then let the opening be directed towards the right side of the body, and bring in the instrument used on the armpit which comes afterwards as a shape; it is necessary that when you see this instrument being brought into position to observe the depth of the armpit, so that what enters inside the instrument does not go deeper than it should and does not hurt the patient. If the instruments are larger, cover the depth of the armpit with cloths so the instrument does not cause discomfort; and it is necessary that he place the funnel of the instrument above and shave off any hair obstruction.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	And when the abscess has opened, and if one lets it be handled gently with the hand, then it should be covered on top, covering the oil gland; and when the wound is drained, it's necessary to put moistened wicks in the oil rose or in uncooked green oil; place the wick length of the wound at the end of the garlic, and place over the garlic and on the clean blade that was moistened with water or cooked berries; then after two days from applying ointment suitable for this, until it is healed; and each time lift out the garlic and the wound using an infusion of water and honey, and then a water or roots of lilies and long aristolochia should be cooked; then revive with the ointment.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound has returned to the garlic, it is necessary that you do not heat iron, but treat it as we have said in the previous section.
de l’enfantement	Regarding childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	The profession begins with understanding the natural birth figure and its signs. When you see a woman in labor who is panting heavily, eager to breathe deeply, wanting to smell salt: then knows that the fetus is about to forcefully emerge; thus you learn that this birth occurs naturally according to the natural figure, emerges solely from his head, and follows him immediately; and when you notice these signs, it befittingly press gently on her abdomen, so that the fetus will soon come out; for when he descends through his head, he brings with him the second part, freed of his surplus by proper cleaning. And what comes otherwise does not occur naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	For it comes nowhere through his feet, and it leaves the body or shoulder, or the hands, but it descends through his abdomen, or back, and is transformed by chance under his neck, and in other bad forms; thus it befitting for a midwife that she should be prudent and subtle in these matters, and aware of error and deception. I will show you all the shapes how one must help them.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	When the child comes through its head by natural exit, and the woman is in great pain during childbirth, and her strength is weak, she should sit on a stool, or have women hold her; then let her draw out from where orfenic (possibly meaning 'her own nature') or fenugreek be cooked, and then place the midwife between her hands with a small sparrow, whose form is as follows:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	And cut the second part, and remove up to his moisture which is inside him until it leaves; and press her abdomen as long as the child descends; if it does not descend, then it is necessary to administer castor oil with fenugreek seed oil to the woman; afterwards make her drink a decoction of condisi, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: now the child will come out.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And if her two hands leave him, it is necessary that you gently remove them; and if they can't enter, place the woman on a chair, lift her feet upwards; then push the chair to the ground, and cut on the woman so she doesn't defecate during childbirth; and if her hands cannot enter, and the child has died, then cut her hands with the knife that was placed here before, remove the child, and apply the same method of removal.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	From the birth of the child on its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	When the child is born on its feet, it should be lifted up straight away. And then turn them gradually and gently, until they are even; then hold their feet and stretch them out gradually.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	Can it jump up to the thighs, if you command it, and make it snort in consideration; if it jumps, may God will it.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it doesn't move as we have said, if he twists a little bit by a little bit, until it follows the natural figure.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	Therefore, he should be gently handled.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	And if it doesn't jump as we have described, say that you take a muscillage of altitude, and oil of sesame, and powdered gum, and grind everything in a mortar; then apply this ointment inside and outside the woman's body, after which she should lie in warm water up to her ribs; and when she is moistened up to her backbones, have her wear a myrrh collar, and place it on her, and leave it for an hour; then make her sit on a stool, then have her snort and keep her mouth and nose restrained, and gently rub her stomach, because the child now jumps.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	From the issue of the child on its knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	When the child comes in this form, if you put your hands gently on it; then hold its neck firm, and let its feet hang down towards below, and lay it so that its head is lower than its body; and bend its arms softly and softly, then take its hands onto its belly, and lift up her knees until she is ready to give birth below; and if the child does not jump, grab its feet and forcefully move them, then move its head towards the belly, then push your hands; and gently guide the child along; and instruct the woman to bear down as long as the child comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	From the birth of the child that emerges with one hand during
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	It is necessary to engineer to bring back the hand: if you cannot bring it back, then make the woman stand up and move; if she cannot move, then lay her down on the bed and spread out her legs forcefully; then apply the muscle massage I have described. And if no child comes forth, then make her sit on a chair, then study how to bring back the hand; and guide the child according to its natural form, making her sneeze, and instructing her to bear down as long as the child comes out forcefully.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	From the birth of the child at its neck, and it spreads its hands, and its face turned towards its mother's back
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	It is necessary for the person to guide their hand, then turn it gradually and gradually, and gently lift them; when they are even, place them on the natural muscular motion of elevation and oil, as we have said, and then command that they move gradually. And when you have achieved this, make her sit down, and command that she pray; and make her sneeze.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	In this same manner for all the rest
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	When it proceeds in this manner through the entirety of the second stage, if there is an opening in the second stage up to her fingernail, until all moisture has drained; and if the baby's head can be felt both on her face and on her neck, then when you reach her mouth, ensure she is not obstructed, and let the baby go; then pull the child inside as far as necessary, while making sure it is positioned correctly, and command that the woman prays once: then gently ease.
de l’issue des gemelz	about the birth of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes three or four at a time; and this is not an uncommon thing, it simply happens.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	Two things are extracted and do not live, if you ask me; I know this, that they multiply and are removed by the syphilitic who devises them, which is bound to the blood; and no time come out as naturally as one underneath all, just as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And if they come out painfully, as the treatment as we have said, and makes the bed tricky, do what she does quickly and gently; and do so in such a way that it results in salvation.
de plusors enfans	Of several children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	None of them are formed in the first, second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth or seventh month, and so on up to fifteen, they are all shaped like children according to the glorious measurement, and it is necessary that the baby knows all this because something similar has happened; do it according to what should be done.
de l’enfant mort	From the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	When you are curing the woman of dead child or belly, as I have said in the division section, and if it does not come out, and your hands force is needed for the operation; you need to know if the woman has healthy vital strength, and whether she is afraid of death or experiences pain due to death; ensure that the woman stands tall on her back, and her shoulders are inclined downwards, and her legs are lifted; then place her head at an angle of II parts from horizontal position when laying flat on a bed; after this, gently massage the woman’s mouth with moist oiled almond and fenugreek paste and linseed powder; apply these oils to her hands as well; then gently place everything back in order; take care that the child is properly dressed for descent onto its head; should it descend through the belly button, or throat or mouth or palate, or under beard or collar bone, or near ribs, if the process occurs on feet, use a knife and at half body width positions; when tying the string to her waist, ensure it is adjustable as needed by your assessment, and that the child is dressed appropriately for its descent onto head; then insert the string into any of these passages that we have described, until the point where nothing remains; this is the shape of the string:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	Then find another bone, or the third if you need it, so that the extractions are equal; and then move them equally from one side to the other, so as to be able to extract them easily, and make sure the bones have teeth for holding in place, just like this is done:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if there remains a part, if you cut off some of its roots from which it is attached and remove those parts, then hold the other part in place; and if nothing is left at all, set that bone or higher up than before, and continue doing this until it comes out completely.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	And if one hand comes in front of the other and cannot be pulled back due to squeezing, then you should wrap it around the stump until it exits completely; then cut at the joint on the heel or blade part, and do this accordingly with the other hand. And for both feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	And if the child's head is large and it is squeezed at the exit, or if it has an acute head assembled together, then you should poke the spiny spatula between your fingers, and remove that sharp head; or take it out with the tool called 'almidach', which comes along with surgical instruments or chapters after this one; and in a similar manner treat children with large natural heads. Then pull force on the bones with tongs, and if the head jumps away and remains tight under pressure until fluids are out; and if they cannot exit, you must cut piece by piece as you can; and if it is swollen in abdomen or below ribs, then puncture until the fluids have flowed out.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the baby is on its feet, there is a slight attraction, and the connection to the mouth of the mother is slight.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	And if it is squeezed at the belly or teats, then you should remove to the extent of unfolding the skin envelope on the hand; and treat the belly or teats until fluids have flowed out. And if any other limbs are osteitic, and the child remains, then poke her hand right up to the armpit, and treat until she reaches the opening of the milk ducts; then poke her fingers once or twice, and pull with strength; and if the opening of the milk ducts is constricted due to a newborn obstruction that came in, it's not suitable for manual work, instead, moist and fatty things should be used. And administer ointments and dressings, and soak with softening and moisturizing substances.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if the fetus is within his ribs, and you can make him level, then apply what we have said about live childbirth; and if it cannot be done, then pull it out piece by piece, making sure not to leave anything of the second part.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And once this is done, follow what we have said about applying remedies to abscesses that come with the measles; and if bleeding occurs, then use water baths and restrain it, and apply other treatments.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman who had lost an unborn child in her belly, and later recovered for another one, and the other gave birth to it again.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, an abscess came in his belly, and swelled so much that he had to open it, and started causing severe pain.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called for the treatment, and I thought for a long time, and couldn't manage the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I placed them under a strong magnet, and out came one bone, followed by others after some days.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was very surprised, for it seems that this person's abdomen lacks bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I took the wound, and handled its bones as well, until the woman was in her best condition; and I dressed the woman for a long time like this, and it became just a bit swollen around her hand; and I remember this chapter being done only because when the masters find an unusual thing, they need to know how to provide help.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to bring back the married one to their place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	After this comes the form of the presser, to which books are attributed; and for two forms each of four limbs.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	In every case, the horns should be more delicate than the restrictor, and made of ebony or boxwood; and the mouth should be as wide as half a finger, and the margin of the trees must be so, and long one palm and a half; and in the middle of the two handles there should be two adjustments of this same pipe, which should be tight in both directions, about half a palm from each end or somewhat more; and these two adjustments are fixed inside the mouth of the mortar to open when you turn the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Another variant, which seems more subtle and lighter in proportion to its size, can be made from a pipe of ebony or boxwood, according to the resemblance of tongs. It should have two horns, as you see, each one palm long, and two fingers wide; and when you see the mortar open completely with all the tool, place the woman on her bed, her legs hanging down and her feet spread apart, then position both adjustments fastened together inside the mortar, hold the tool's handle between her buttocks. Then work your hand over the entire tool in a similar manner to how you would use tongs, depending on what you can see opening the mouth of the mortar, until the child is delivered as she desires.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	All these instruments are arranged at the top and multiplied in their forms; and when you have them set up, your work will be faster, and you'll reach higher positions for their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	Do not despair of the tool until you have set it up, because its necessity is not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	When the secondine is retained at birth, it requires that you instruct the mother to retain her urine, and then have her sniff condisi, and hold your hands on her mouth and nose. And if she jumps from this, all will be well.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	If this does not work, take I pot and place a lid or cover on it, and put in herbs that can open the mouth of garlic, such as garlic mustard, rue, anise, chamomile, cinnamon, and hyssop; all these herbs, or any of them, should be cooked or covered with water on the fire. Then place a handle or cover over the pot, and the other end in the mouth of garlic, and force it until the vapors go inside the garlic; then have her sniff, as we said before.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If it leaps ahead quickly.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	And if it remains after this treatment and lacks strength, command her to moisten her left hand in seed oil or musk oil, and then use the brush in its natural state, preparing for the second one. And when she finds it, take hold of it gradually and straighten it out slowly, so that no part resists extraction; but should gently move it from right to left and then pull; if this comes and is released.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	And if the stomach of the pregnant woman is troubled by nausea, we have said the cure for sneezing and herb fumigation; and if she does not find relief from all that we have said, then do not force her to be emptied during bleeding; but it should be that whoever is at the mouth of the pregnant woman ties her to the bed of the woman, then applies a tetra-formulation ointment enema; and she will empty herself and recover strength. But still, when she starts to, if it brings bad smell to the stomach and head, and burns the skin, all the while being careful not to cause harm.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	So then it is necessary to use applicable fumigations for this: none of the old ones have proven effective in fumigation with mustard and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the instrument used to fumigate the woman during the retention of flowers and the second stage is this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And there's the appearance of a cane, and set the subtle head in its place, and lay the shoulders wide on the fire; and let the smoking occur over the coals, and continue until it's burned out, then begin anew.
de percier lou fondement	To pierce the base
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And infants are born who have not reached the point of understanding, but rather they are confused by a subtle idea. So it is necessary for the nurse to ensure that this idea penetrates properly according to its place, and does not pierce through with sharp edges, and guards against disturbing it; then she should apply a wet woolen cloth soaked in wine and oil, then continue theointment until the baby's health improves.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt whether it will remain, then place or insert a thorn stick, and let the patient keep it for days, and remove it when the child wishes to move about in chambers.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And there are no sudden complications from the wound or abscess; it is necessary to treat this sudden condition: if you can heal it, as we have said about the thorn stick.
de la fistule dou fondement	from the sinus with its foundation
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	Fistulas originating from the foundation are nodules, and increase in size those that originate within or beyond the foundation depth, or within two parts of the body; if there is one fistula or several. And when this nodule is old and produces pus, and appears whitish or subtle yellow, and these kinds of fistulas tend to be persistent; they can be identified by whether there's an expulsion or windiness when the disease causes loss of appetite, and sometimes a change in behavior.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if there are fistulas that reach up to the bladder, and halfway down the penis; and they can reach up to the joint of the leg, and even to the root of the testicles.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And thus one knows the fistula persists at the foundation, and does not persist: it is that you bend your index finger or foundation, and insert a slender needle or spider pin into the fistula when there is no winding.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	And if it has winding passages, when you insert a thin plug or the hair of a horse, as long as you feel the plug or the hair on your index finger; and if you do not feel it, and there is neither moisture nor wind nor worm nearby, just like we have said: know that it does not pass through; so hasten to treat.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula is situated right up to the bladder or all the way along where urine leads, if the urine jumps there, and cannot be joined by medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	If it has passed up to the joint of the ankle, then the plug comes up to the knee; if there is no winding and pain inside, then he will have a hard bow, and it is not worth medicine or immediate treatment by ointment; and in these persistent fistulas there is no cure but labor and the vain efforts of foolish people who interfere.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	In the method that is neither purely Persian nor ancient, there is hope for healing through iron, as I have proven it. And in this manner, you lay your hands upon him on his back; and lift his legs up to his thighs, and bend his thighs towards his belly. Then place a snare or a snout, whichever suits the situation, until you know where the snare comes from.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If the patient feels pain deeper within the body, it is necessary for you to place your index finger at this point. If then you feel that the snare or hook has pierced him, and if you can discover or feel something between your fingers like sycamore bark or flesh, then you know she is Persian; if there's no substance moving beneath the fingers, one might not be able to heal her.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	One should be able to heal many without difficulty, but this happens rarely; and when aid must be given, one uses the fine cautery according to the size of the fistula, as was mentioned before; and he applies all of it hot inside the fistula until it comes from beneath the foundation; and perform this twice or three times, until you know that those dried pieces need to be burned, which resemble a feather of an owl; and then treat with ointments moistened in butter, until those dried pieces come out, then apply balm ointment over the wound and ensure it adheres.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If it is done like this, that is well.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	If it is done as such, it cannot be done differently. And if one tries to insert and does not pierce up to the root which is or becomes the foundation, then you place a thick layer of flesh or fat inside your finger between your thumb and the tent, and you see the fistula at that point where the covering overlaps the wound. If there's congestion in the beginning of the fistula, apply the cautery before the tent, and then use it after, until it reaches the tip of the tent; and he will release the tent, and it will come out. Then remove those dried pieces which resemble a feather of a bird, and don't leave any behind.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the wound does not heal, cut between you and the tissue, then apply fire or medicinal alcohol to it.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	For the fire cauteries combine two good things: this being to say, burning of these dried and well prepared materials, and the sucking out of blood and the drying off from moisture; then treat moist wounds with butter or ground up ingredients until they drain and smoke from where the bones are burned in that process; then care for the wound with the use of tight bandages and hard leather strips which remain in place until the burnt bones have cooled down. Then attend to the injury with tightly bound dressings made of long hard leather, and these dry remedies work too.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is healed, if it heals completely and does not recur.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a sinus comes up just to the full depth of the foundation, and is distant from the body, you should plug its root or foundation, and inquire about it.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If you feel the tentacle, and within it is there either the membrane or the cartilage or bone, or it's about to pierce through, assuming there are only blood vessels and hope of a cure left inside, follow one of three methods: or you cauterize it as we have said, or you take out the roots until you reach the bottom, or if possible you use bandages and treatment as we mentioned first; and don't go too far beyond what is necessary, so that you do not remove the structure holding the foundation, causing natural discharges to escape unwillingly; then treat it following our previous instructions; perhaps it will heal properly, or you remove that covering and cleanse it once it has been cut off from beneath the foundation, or by removing the tentacle or another instrument aimed there; then wash out the burnt matter inside the wound as much as possible; then study to heal the wound and stop the fistula in the lower part of the foundation: if it's a more straightforward issue for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And no time are fistulas made in this manner: and when you puncture the tent at the fistula, and it is on the side touching the root beneath the skin above, then take a tent pierced through the head according to this form:
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And tie two twisted threads together, and place the tent at both ends of the thread within the tube until it reaches the head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	If it's Persian in the margin under the root inside, then extract that thread of that twisted one, just as you puncture its base; and pull out the head from the thread, and join the two ends together, and bind them to each other, and leave them for a day or two; and hold them back none of these times, until the threads fit those parts that are between two, and stick together; then treat the wound until it is healed and cleaned.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not puncture, make an incision in all possible ways that you can, as long as it is not too deep.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Indeed, it is not fitting to puncture through the placement so deeply, and then treat it, as we have said, until it is sanitized.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	The shape of the spiny surface that we make into a fistula is quite different in both parts and cutting them; and on another side it's not so much because you either don't fit or shouldn't even try to fit, as you can see here:
des emorroydes	from bleeding wounds
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	Disorders occur in two ways: or they are inside the foundation, such as a seed of resin, and if there are small and large ones, and when one or more are inside, and it's beyond the foundation and at its main part; but those which are beyond have little moisture, and still have some drops of citrine water or even a bit of blood, and they have the color of red. And for treating those who have them inside the foundation, you should instruct the patient to spread out through channels until the foundations come free, and you see the threads; if it hastens, and picks with tongs, or you hold it with your nail, then removes in its roots; and if the seed cannot stay due to its moisture, then pinch under a sheet, or on cotton, or from camel wool; then remove them with your hands, then cut, and powder with any hot powders that are for the cautery; or you cauterize them as it's said or chapter of cautery, because their treatment should be through other cures until it is clean. And if the foundations cannot come out, then force the patient to take a catheter sharp and abrasive to wash what is at the foundation, so that it can come out freely; when the patients start taking them in, and if the threads are beyond the foundation, then the treatment should be easy; and you pinch with your nail or tongs, then cut, and treat as we said until it is clean, and they fear the incision by iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is necessary that you stitch according to this manner: take twisted thread, and fit it into a needle, then pull the thread upwards and make the needle pierce from another side, then wind the two ends of thread over the needle twice, and do so wide; and tighten the thread properly, then tie off the thread, and remove the needle, then do this for all others, and leave some to drain excess blood; afterwards place on the bottom a moist cloth in oil rose or in poultice, and place it back on the wound bed, and instruct the patient to rest; and then let them stay until they defecate, once they are settled, treat with ointment and other care until they heal.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	do the drying slowly in the ashes or on the ground.
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times, there has been drying in the intestines, and due to the nature's constraint, and when the illness is old and medication no longer helps.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is necessary that you shave to the tip of a spasmile or above your nail the skin, which does not allow moistening; then treat until they become hard as required; and if they cannot become hard, you begin the shaving again more forcefully than before, until many are cured, and the skin has been burned off; then treat until they fully heal.
dou fremit	The tremble
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	A small appearance emerges before the body, and goes all around it; and whenever the veins cool, and one feels this like a death shudder, and it comes throughout the body, and more in the hands than anywhere else.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	And the treatment is that you take a stick made from a goose feather or a strong vulture's feather, and place this stick over the shudder, until the purple circle encompasses the entire shudder; then move your hand to the whole stick while collecting all of it under the shudder, and place it around completely, and spread it outwards, thereby uprooting the shudder from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see it, do this with an arachnid or iron cane in the form as described, and make it slender everywhere and smooth above and below:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	nor should it be pierced, for you must hold onto both ends and squeeze. And if you see any trembling, cauterize the tremor, just as it is shown in the section on cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	in the form of a bladder
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	No silver or hot iron, or molten spider or lead should ever be used. And these small and large instruments should not be employed according to who they are intended for.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Therefore, when treating children and those who are weak and painful, use small tools.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The shape of the tool being small and large as described above, or how you tie the belly according to this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	And if there's a need where the belly is bound, just as you see, and the head is pierced inside; and let it be that at one side are two holes, and on the other one. And have the belly with medicines placed in a skin or parchment bag, and pierce all around with small holes. Have each hole approximately one digit apart from its neighbor. Then place one strong, twisted thread through each of these holes, threading them as if to bind a goat; when the medicine is inside, tie it at the front using another thick thread before performing enemas; this creates a circular shape:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And let the medicine neither be too hot nor too cold, and smear the head with oil or chicken yolk or something similar, then gently rub it in. Then instruct your attendants to hold their two hands together while watching him closely until he loses consciousness, then remove the pustule, lift his limbs onto the bed, and if the medicine is seen leaving, pull it out as much as possible; and if he sleeps through a whole night, this will be greater help.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you use the enema in a case of belly discomfort, and the medicine hastens to come out, then repeat it as long as he feels well.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And if the hemorrhage is from their source or from an abscess, or if the pustule is as delicate as for a child; and this is the shape of the delicate pustule on which the skin is restrained:
des plaies	of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have discussed the treatment of wounds in the division; now we will discuss treatments for hands and medicine, according to their completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse depending on how they are made, and depending on where the wounds are located, and for what reason they were caused.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	The reasons for wounds are due to the injury of bones, the size of a sword and knife cuts, or from spears, clubs, arrows or any similar things; they can also be caused according to what is in the body like wounds on the neck, head, stomach, abdomen, liver, etc., and I will explain how each wound should be treated, beginning with simple head wounds because my memory will come to that part.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	I say that when a simple wound appears or the head is affected, and if no bones are broken, be careful whether it's due to stone or similar issues, and the skin has been completely torn away from the wound, which is large. And you slightly doubt the presence of pus: if there is little blood coming from the wound, then cleanse the scalp immediately, even if a small amount of blood appears, and otherwise, cleanse in opposition to the affected part; and ensure that the body is full of wine and large meats after this procedure.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if they do not wish to cleanse with me, reduce their meat intake, and do not drink wine or eat large meats; and place on the wound, should pus appear, use moist cotton in rose oil, or in astringent wine; and if there is no pus present, apply to the wound, if it's fresh with all its blood, and isn't disturbed by air, then powder that I will mention later; and if it has been disturbed, apply some ointments until it heals.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large like that of a sword or similar, and the lips cannot be brought together by stitches, then join them through suture, as I will explain for wounds on the belly, from the suture.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	If the wound exposes bone, and can bleed but stays there for just a little bit if you press; then treat the wound with medicine, restore tough tissue instead of skin, and instruct the patient to consume large meats, such as testicles and cooked wheat like bread, also things similar.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if you find or discover rotten skin, and it doesn't reach the bone, then remove the rot completely, and let out pus, then treat the wound; and if there's an artery in the wound or vein, cut without hesitation, and cannot stop bleeding with medicines, so remove the artery, and if you find dislocation, tie it with a thread; and if this doesn't help, then cauterize.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light: and you should put on this powder which sticks together in such a way that when the heat of the fire has applied it.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And the method of applying the powder is as follows: take one part of frankincense; dragon's blood two parts; living charcoal three parts, and finely ground it all, then apply this mixture to the wound and press it firmly until it soaks well and joins with all its blood; and then bind it tightly, leaving it undisturbed if it doesn't swell; because you remove the medicine only when it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And one does not do this using charcoal alone, when one lacks the incense or the blood of dragon, but only when the surgeon has cleansed the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the stomach has healed the wound, indeed in that state, one must not apply this powder at all; but apply certain ointments or powders, such as flour of barley mixed with water and honey until it starts to drain; then continue other treatments until it is cured.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And if bone bruising comes with the wound and it's small, pinch it gently; and I will tell you about the fractures of the head later.
de la plaie dou col	from the wound on the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	This wound occurs in the neck and it is simple, if there is no difference between it and those of the head, but if it affects the collarbone or the artery, then it is different.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	If it's the nerves, leave no cure and don't apply any restraining thing, as it harms the nerves and makes them recede; don't put anything cold on the wound because the substance of the nerves is cold and continues with the brain which is the highest member; but use medicine under that way, such as oil rinsed in gentle water and mixed with rose oil, and wet linen also in gentle water, and other earthy substances according to this manner, and moist ointments.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, then treat it by binding with cloths.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wounds are deep and filled with pus, one should pierce them or lower; and if an artery is severed, bleeding follows - then one must open it, stitch it back together and cauterize. And if a nerve from the throat is cut, or blood vessels and tubes that lead to flesh must be kept in mind - through which meat goes. If a bone spur is cut near the throat hole, do not touch the throat but put it according to its natural shape; then keep it there for some days before treating with drying ointments until it heals properly. And if pressure has been made on the bone, take action accordingly; and if pieces of bone exist that you can remove, do so while those you cannot reach should be left alone until the wound heals and discharges properly; and if the wound is fresh, apply a powder as I've mentioned previously to it.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there are bones and an opening in the wound, treat it as described in my chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	from the wound of a spear or a knife
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	If it's from a lance or knife and the wound is deep, when you observe that wind blows around the wound without disturbing the patient: then you know the wound is fatal. If it's not deep and it's fresh with all its blood, don't apply any powder in the first hour, nor bind it due to the blood not draining completely from under, and returning into the heart, and making the patient dizzy; instead apply an attractive ointment, and bind it twice a day. And if you have no ointment, put old cotton into the wound for absorbing moisture, and make the patient sleep on the wound for 3 days, or 4, or more; so if there's no seizure, nor trembling in the heart, without any strain happening all alone; and when you see good results, knowing that the wound has been saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	Treat then with various remedies until it becomes healed; and if it cannot heal or work, know that there is a fistula; proceed with the treatment as one should.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And if the wound is from a sword or knife cut, and it's simple or more severe or at the back, based on the treatment of the person before. If it's large, stitch it; and if it's small, use powder, and if it's infected inside the bone with fragments removed, if you treat the wound and remove the foreign objects; and if they are not removed, leave the wound to heal naturally, helping with extraction procedures; and for other wounds on other limbs, make judgments similarly as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	about the rupture of the abdomen
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	The operations on the belly are large, medium, and small; for a big wound there might be no instance of an intestine tear or damage to its lining, through which foreign objects could enter. Stitching is more troublesome, and it's never worse than smaller wounds as when larger ones you have to repeatedly bring back the intestines in place until properly done; because if they feel cold and swell immediately afterwards, they do not fit back into their original places easily, thus making small wounds preferable. Knowing that the rupture of the belly can occur in four ways: The common two types of stitches happen during a stitch in the abdominal area, and the stitches for other body part injuries are usually shared with those other injuries; however, these still tend to be more efficient when compared to the abdominal injury repair operation, which I will explain further.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	I say that when the wound is small and no part of the intestine has been involved, and if there are things to be removed, this can be done by one of two methods: either because of the size of the wound, as we have said, or due to the fact that the intestine is swollen from cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And when it is cold, heat him in this manner: soak a sponge or dip a cloth into hot water just, or you may cook it in hot water with vinegar and pepper, and raise the intestine until the swelling disappears; and do this again after making that wine restorative to reduce swelling.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	And when you see the swelling depart, moisten the intestine with water or steam that has been well cooked, for through this the entry of small things is facilitated; and if it cannot enter, make a little incision in the wound using the tool used to remove stitches; and your first cure is to ensure smoothness rather than excessive cutting; unless there's great necessity, we should not cut more than necessary. And these are the tools for this purpose: you cut inside along the curve and outwards not too much, and thus you have this shape.
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines have escaped, if you can place it back according to its natural shape in its proper location, do so because this is better than having left them out.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	When the wound is extensive, and it's in the abdominal region, it should be that you make the patient lie on their back, and place their legs higher than their head. And if it's in the part below the abdomen, then position their head and buttocks above the lower parts; similarly, when there is an abdominal rupture in one of the two halves, adjust so that the removed part is higher than the other; and thus, you should follow my instructions for large and medium wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	For small wounds use what is at hand, then take the necessary surgical instruments to clean out the entire wound, stitch it up and close it; this is a common method of suturing. Use needles or multiple needles according to the size of the wound. Leave two inches from the edge of the wound before starting your stitches, then place one needle with strong thread at that point. Insert the needles through both layers of skin at the points of each suture, and continue to pierce as far down into the flesh as needed. Then join the tips of the siphac (appendices) on either side three times together; sew them back tightly from two opposite directions using a double thread. Sew up any remaining edges of the wound in the same manner as you did with your first stitches, ensuring continuity throughout the entire process. The size and sharpness of needles matter; thinner ones cut through flesh, while thick ones may not fit well. Avoid placing needle holes too close to the flesh and skin edge which could widen the wound, causing pain when sleeping at night. Cover each needle hole with a piece of cloth or bandage for support, leaving them in place until the wound heals completely. This suturing technique works particularly well on small wounds; in such cases, one additional stitch might be required every second time you stitch together skin and appendices at a single needle point. After piercing all four sides three times each, pull out the needle from where you started, as if sewing cloth. Leave an inch between each stitch, which helps heal properly. This kind of healing enabled me to stitch a wound that someone had suffered with an open belly due to a knife cut; the wound was more than a palm in size and contained well two palms worth of intestines, and it was located in the middle of the abdomen.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I brought back the intestine, then after it had been out for twenty-four hours, and the wound healed up to fifteen days. I treated it and it recovered, becoming healthy.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And when they had decided that he was going to die, it was a miracle; and I didn't treat him with ointment, because I was in the middle of nowhere where no such thing could be found, nor any medicine. Instead, I changed old cotton twice a day over the wound, washing it with honey water until he recovered.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	Or I will tell you two proper sewing methods: take the needle and start from the outer part down to inside; when it pierces the flesh straight in and out, place your finger at the siphon or where the wound is being sewn, or the point where you have pierced with the needle, and then make another piercing on the inner side of the wound starting from inside until reaching the outer side. And the understanding of this sewing technique is that you sew it as a mink does with its fur, leaving the siphon open on one side and then picking it up again from the other side, until all the sewing is complete.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	The second method of suturing, as Galen precisely described, is such that when no one does it, they join the two parts together naturally. They then place one end of the thread near another and pierce only the wound. They leave both ends of the suture intact. Then they turn the needle back and pierce from the outer side until inside up to where the sutures meet. Next, they pierce each of them from the outer side up to where it is inside, using two more threads near the other end which are on the opposite side. This method of suturing is basic and most commonly used.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	Galen said this, and no one denies it, that we should stitch the belly with two needles or thread in each; and must pierce one needle from one side and the other from the other, like those who sew corroies; know that when the cut is in the middle of the belly, then the stitching is more grievous than most others on their bellies.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	The judgment of the wound is like that for other wounds: and thus, when you find the fresh wound completely bleeding as the surgeon has made it, in this way, you set the intestines back inside, and close the cut. Then put on a stimulating powder, and if the surgeon has made it properly, apply no ointment at all until the wound stops bleeding; then stitch up with the thread, ensure the suture is done well, and the incision heals. Proceed to treat the wound like others until it heals completely; and should you lack medicines, when it begins to stop bleeding with some cotton, old cotton, and stir this two times a day until it fully heals.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	For you need no other medicine except in various preparations for simple wounds. And if you doubt whether the wound might cause interaction with main members, you should wet it lightly in oil that has been heated slightly or in clear oil, and apply this inside the angles, and soak them out afterwards; and if there is pain or gangrene in the bowels, and these occur repeatedly, then give it enemas of black wine, and equally so if gangrene spreads up to the intestines; and pierce through from within. And know that when it's large intestine, it heals more easily than small intestine.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestine which is called 'juvenile' cannot heal when it is injured, and this is due to the arrangement of the veins that are there, and due to the subtlety of all the body, and the approach of its nature towards nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	And if the knot jumps out of the wound, then reset it back in the same way as the intestine when it is fresh; and if it has aged and become dark or black, then it is necessary that you tie the dark part, so no bleeding occurs, because there are veins and arteries present; then cut through what is between them, and hang both heads under the wound area up to beyond for easing extraction when the knot pops out, and the wound heals.
de la routure dou boueil	from the rupture of the bladder
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	When the intestine is torn and the wound is small, one can restore it in some ways, for I saw that a soldier was injured or had an abdominal stab from a lance; and there was a wound on the right side of the stomach, which became a fistula, and caused loss of contents and wind. I treated it according to what I knew how, and did not stop refining until it was healed, then sewed the cuts together.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	And when I saw it melded together, I was uncertain whether the patients had pain in their abdomen; there was no ill health but remained in better states and eating, drinking; and reported by some experimenters that should a small wound occur within the intestine, it must be handled like this: take large fir cones then join the edges of the wound, and when the fir cone has opened its mouth, place it on the two edges if she constrains her mouth above; and then pinch the cone at its head and holds such that it cannot unravel, then place another fir cone in the same manner as before until the entire wound is covered; and with this treatment the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	Of these which are inflamed in the intestine, and do no harm to the patient, and one can join the intestine with a thin thread cut from the intestine of an animal like this: take the end of that intestinal thread that is mostly desiccated, then tie it to the other end of that thin linen thread, then knot the thread onto the needle and sew through the intestine, and suture it in the wound; and this method of sewing with fir cones is only according to the art and hope; and if the wound is large and broad, especially when it's within one of the larger intestines, if there are no injuries or illnesses, because of its delicacy.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	Of a fistula, or if it be one
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Know that every wound or abscess, when it matures, is universally called 'fistula', and even when hair grows over it and becomes hard.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	A fistula is according to its hard and white nodular condition, where one does not feel pain, and it's also covered like the feathers of a bird; and sometimes within it there's a clear opening, and other times it's thick; sometimes small, and other times large enough; and I have discussed all this in the division of wounds, that every wound that is not healed, and where there is no flesh, can only be cured through one of the eight causes: namely, due to the weakness of blood or pus; or because of its malice; or because there's hard flesh inside, which does not allow new flesh to grow; or there's too much pus; or the veins are weakened, and the material is of bad quality; or the medicine isn't good in treatment; or because corruption is akin to pestilence; or due to the body's natural digestion being slow and thus affecting its health and causing it to be sluggish; or when there are veins or bones involved: and I have already shown all these causes, along with their symptoms, and treatments through medicine in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Or it is necessary that I inform you about the treatment of fistulas which is done by manual work.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	You should know that fistula occurs in all body members; because there are fistulas that come from major veins, and arteries, and nerves, either within the chest cavity or intestines, or bladder, or any rib area, or spine of back, or any joint of hands or feet. And if it affects the primary function of the main limb, and mimics its characteristics.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And all the fistulas of this manner are due to difficulty in healing and lack of knowledge; except for digging and ignorance; if there's no fistula that doesn't extend till I've mentioned it before, and you're familiar with its cure, when you see it clearly, take an arachnid or iron tool. If the fistula is straight, use this; and if the fistula is bent, search using a very subtle plunger tool, as the plunger conforms to the bendiness of the passage; and should you not be able to find the fistula properly with tools due to its twists, flush it by one of those twists through catheterization since moisture spreads from one twist to another and cleanse it. Then carefully remove it according to your ability so that you understand if there is bone or nerve passing through it fully, ask for pain the patient feels when pressed on by your hand, and where he/she senses it; once you truly know its location, and whether it's far off from joints, nerves, arteries, veins, or any areas I've mentioned before, treat it according to what I've said. Remove pus and corrupted matter inside; and then continue the treatment till it heals. Should the fistula be deeply embedded in a straight position, you should remove it fully as much as possible. Then apply wet dressings soaked in herbal medicine up to the tip of the fistula until the medicine corrodes the excess left at its bottom; after which put on healing ointments for a while till it heals. Should it not heal through this method, cauterize it like we've said before, and should the bone be corrupted by the fistula, remove it.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If a vein or nerves are not obstructed or main limbs, as we have said; and if the bone is exposed, and there's decay and darkness, then remove the king until the decay is all removed, then clean with substances that purify flesh until it becomes healthy; and if it doesn't become healthy, return again just like before. Know you are not finished until this point: so uncover and treat thoroughly until you reach the bottom, and remove all the decay, then restore the limb; and if it is thus healthy, it's well done.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	If it isn't so, know that the corruption is too deep within, you cannot restore it; if there's no other way than to leave it to nature. And if there's only a small corrupted bone, and you can pull it with pliers, take it out with an appropriate tool for this task. And if there are multiple bones, remove them all at once, don't leave any behind. And if moisture obstructs you and there's no fear or concern, manage moisture, bone, and flesh, then release the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	And if you cannot remove them within an hour, place something stimulating pus formation over the wound, and leave it until the flesh is completely rotten inside the bone, then they will break more easily; and if it's a large bone like in the leg or thigh, only allow the decomposition as long as all the black has been removed, then heal the wound. And if there's a large part of putrefaction and it reaches to the bone; you should clean and cover right up to the putrefaction, then heal until it is joined. And I will tell you about a fistula that occurred in a man's leg where you might take an example and guidance for your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	There was a young person around thirty years old, who had pain in his leg due to something coming from within the body that made its way into the leg. He was plagued by a large abscess which had no apparent reason for needing to be opened; but doctors acting out of their own folly opened it so many times until the pus came forth, and they ate away at much flesh. This became a fistula, and took such severe damage that all the body fluids and moisture from his body were lost. And many physicians continued treatment for over two years without any knowledge in the art of surgery, until I was called to him and saw his leg and the remedies he was being treated with, and what was corroding through the wounds within his body. His skin became red like youth's complexion, and had a yellowish color from the body fluids; and it would turn red again due to its youthful vigor, and had color like citrine stone.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I pitched a tent near one of these bumps, and then searched all the bumps, finding that some came against each other from every part of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	I hastened then and extracted in one of these bumps until I discovered a part of the bone, finding it rotten and pitted. The corruption reached inside the bone to that part; it was evident from this piece of the rotten bone that there was no other corruption but what I had taken out; so I began to heal the wound with medicine for a long time, not being able to stitch it together; then I started again, discovered the bone as before and found the corruption continuing in the bone. I thought about it and decided it was right, then removed it, and tried to stitch up the flesh; but I could only do so when I extracted almost half of the bone, then I laid it out completely, and then stitched it back together with medicine; it healed quickly and was stitched properly without needing to restart the procedure due to my own weakness from fear, which couldn't bear it, and also because of my fear of death for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For blood evacuation often occurs, but was fully healthy, and in place of the bone birthed a hard flesh, which was well arranged and had no harm or opposite effect at all throughout, neither outward nor inward.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, if it needs to be set in this way: take hold of it, and pull at the end of the bone that is open, and command that it extend upwards; and put on a second piece of yarn larger than the first one, and tie it around the flesh that's inside the bone, pulling up the head so you extract the rotten flesh from below, uncovering the flesh where you wish to set the bone, making sure not to hurt the flesh; place a firewood or a board under the bone to support the removal of the rotten flesh; and treat as many times as necessary until one can see and feel the decay, treating again if needed.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	And if the bone is rotten and doesn't open up, and corruption occurs within or in a part of it, uncover all of the flesh; then place charcoal above it, and then let the corruption be spread from one side to another using the flesh; and do this for as long as the length of the corruption allows. If the corruption is at a joint, cut that infected joint and expose the bone from the other side; if corruption exists in continuation between two joints, there's only another point like this to consider; if the corruption is located under the finger or heel of the hand, it becomes very strong but all the same you must inquire about how this corrosion opens up; and clean it using various ways as much as possible, but without having the vein or nerve against your actions; know that the incision and tools to work on these bones vary according to each kind of surgical operation's tool; understand that the work will show you which tool you need based on knowledge of this art form and evidence from disease manifestation; if you think about the tool needed considering how it should be used.
dou feu	by fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	The joints disintegrate either due to internal reasons or external influences; and when you have cured that damage through medication treatment, and if it does not yield any benefit, then you must treat that limb up until the point of origin of the damage, so that the patient escapes from this fate of death, or the malice which is greater than the fault of body damage; signs are visible when the limbs turn black, as though they have been burnt by fire, and after this stage comes a series of damages to all parts of the body, spreading limb by limb across the entire figure. You must treat this with urgency in your treatment, and if it is due to being struck by venomous creatures like sea scorpions, snakes, and suchlike, then treat accordingly, and if the damage occurs at the head, do treat it immediately without giving any space for it to spread up to the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	And if it reaches up to the wrist, when the grip is on the joint, so that the corrosion does not extend as far as the elbow; and if it extends to the arm, when the grip is on the knife; and if it goes past the knife, death occurs, and there's no way of salvation other than in its own potency; and similarly do you perform this operation whenever the corruption arrives or spreads: If it arrives at the first joint, when the grip after another joint; and if it spreads to any part, when the grip covers all parts; and if it goes up to the leg, when the grip is at the knee-joint; and if it reaches above the knee, there's no other way except that you leave the sick person to die; and in the way of gripping or securing the limb, it is that you tie from above and below, extend one strip of linen from each of the three strings down, and another strip of linen from each string up, and cut through the flesh between the two strings at a broad gap, as long as bone is exposed; then perform the grip or secure, and place strips of linen on each side, so that the linen does not touch the healthy part, and cause further injury to the sick person.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	And if bleeding starts when you operate, cauterize the wound quickly or apply some stoppers. Then come back to your medicine until it is complete, then bind the limb with a suitable bandage and treat it as long as it heals; and I will tell you what happened to a man: he suffered from a blackness that seemed like an incineration of fire, and this corrosion came first in his foot, covering all the foot until it reached the flesh. And when he saw the corrosion, he hurried to cover his foot and was healed. After this period, the corrosion returned on the palm of his hand, and he came to me, and I applied things that resonate after cleansing the body, but couldn't stop the corrosion; and he asked me if I could cut off his hand, and I refused until I had hope of resonating the material again; and doubted as well that if I cut his hand, it wouldn’t survive because his body’s virtues were weak. And he lost all hope, went back to his land, hurried to cover his hand, and was healed. And this story is told just so someone else may learn something if necessary.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	No pus ever comes within the nourishing flesh, it stays so long that it forms a large gathering of worms; and then eats and pierces, and worms are born in it, and the animal remains blind, like a pot; and the skin above is also as delicate as silk pieces, and doesn't reach to the bone or nerve, and this disease is called 'well', and isn't called 'fistula'; but if it extends so much that it comes all the way through to the bone from the inside, then it's called 'fistula'; and the skin is such that you can cut all of it off, even when it's delicate like silk; and it doesn't swell because of its decay.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if you have decided that the skin is burning and there's no corruption within, and that the skin is thick with pus, then treat it with a catheter thus: check if the breasts are large, and the bowels inside them smell of putrefaction, then make a catheterization from Egyptian medicine in this manner: take garlic, oil, and litargy equally, heat them all together in a pot over fire until the medicine turns red and becomes as thick as honey; then take this medicine according to your need, mix it with water and honey, and use it to catheterize the breast, hold the catheter in place, let the medicine sit for two hours, then drain it by pressing. Repeat this process as many times as needed until the breasts are thoroughly cleansed and emptied of pus; and never catheterize with water mixed from ashes when there's no Egyptian medicine available, and take ashes from vine wood and mix them with water, pour it over the mixture, let it flow out, and use it to catheterize, until you know that the breasts have been thoroughly cleansed. And if the patient can't bear this or can't tolerate the Egyptian medicine or the ash water, then use a mixture of water and honey or add some litargy; or catheterize with honey and wine mixed together, where honey has the property to cleanse and wash away things; and wine makes pus burn and disperse. And when you've done this, and if you have ascertained that the breasts are thoroughly cleansed, then use a plaster made of what is created by the body itself, and apply it with oil and wine. Or catheterize using medicines and ointments, about which I have said their properties or discussed in detail regarding the usage of ointments; if there's little pus at the breast and the catheter can't enter, then widen a small iron rod, put an Egyptian medicine or basilicon ointment over it until it becomes wider. And if the wound is too wide and you don't let as much in except what could fit through the catheter, then widen it slightly and leave only enough of the ointment for the catheter to pass; and if pus-filled bowels are above the wound, then seal or lower them so that they're not higher than where you are.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	For when the bowe is fully inflated, you should not let it grow fat; and if you cannot cover the chest all over as you see fit, then arrange yourself in such a way that the bowe goes to its lowest level possible. Because when the bowe is fully inflated, do not let it grow fat and if you cannot cover the chest all over as you see fit, then arrange yourself in this manner: have the bowe move down gently, and leave nothing of the bowe; and take consolidation medicines to put inside the healthy area, and place them under the linen covering that covers the entire healthy area. Then cover the unhealthy part of the chest slightly further than the first, since apply ointment of sulfur on the other piece according to the size of the unhealthy part, and place it on the unhealthy part of the healthy area to ease the bowe, and do not remove the large linen covering except after several days once. And that which is under the unhealthy part of the chest, often removes to remove the bowe, and know what comes out of the bowe, whether it's poison or not, or enough, or digested, or indigestible; and watch carefully if the patient feels pain or no pain, and whether there is pus or not, and when your medicine has spread in this manner until you see the nature that jumps on the unhealthy part of the healthy area, then know that the chest is healing now, and approaches health. And then release the wound in the morning, or on the third day, and when you relieve the wound, change to another linen piece, and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breast secretes undigested matter after several days, you'll know that the breast is not healing.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if venomous snakes bite after a long period, do not despair of your health, for healing approaches.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	For there are individuals who take longer to heal from infection in their wounds, and those who do the opposite; and if someone feels indigestion immediately after several days, know that their breast is not functioning properly. And should the breasts take a long time to produce milk and remain distant, adjust your medicines with both dry and moist substances as appropriate, such as ointment with a thin consistency, because there's a significant amount of vitriol involved, which is the last medicine; prepare ointment with a thin consistency, mix it with rose oil, and apply it with old wine of similar strength; then cook it and use it; similarly, if ointments with thin consistency are not available, or you take myrrh, aloes, and incense, grind them together, mix the powder with honey when it's over a fire; then form this into a paste, apply it on the breast, and remember to administer an aristologe for a long time, along with the roots of celestial lilies, which have properties similar to those of flour from various spices; you should use simple medicines or mixtures: grind them, turn them into powder, add honey as previously instructed, and then apply it; if healing takes a long time and is not successful through this treatment, know that corruption has occurred internally, affecting the bone or hard parts of the body, or affecting organs; when treating for fistula, as we have explained earlier.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	From the abscess of the nail
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	Panarice is an abscess that forms under the nail of the hand's little finger or foot, or by chance forms in other toes; and when it grows old, and one does not take care of it, if it spreads to the nail bed, runs and moves about until they reach the root of the nail, and by chance reaches all of it; and corrosion comes down to the bone, until there is stinging pain, and the joints swell on both sides, and the color changes.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have instructed in the section on treatment, and if the cure does not work, then it is necessary for you to remove all the excess that has remained under the nail. After that, cauterize the wound.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	The fire cautery is very helpful when the bone is healthy and the nail is healthy. But if the nail presses on the flesh, starts to point, and becomes inflamed, it's necessary for you to place a metal strip under the nail where the flesh points, and keep it raised at the top. Remove that thin and gentle piece of flesh, and place medicaments that are hot and corrosive on the wound bed to remove everything; then treat with ointments until it heals properly.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	And if the corrosion is in the bone, you must treat it, and apply force because as much of the bone that is corrupted, it cannot heal. And if you see that the bone has decayed, then treat it according to what was said earlier; then cure it until it has healed. And if it becomes hard and swollen, and it feels intense pain, then it should be treated first; then clip the nail across with a sharp blade from above, and beware not to cut into the flesh beneath the nail, for the patient would feel too much pain. And if this happens, place something that soothes on it.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	The pain deepens in the hand.
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	You must adjust those who are born with unusually thick hands in some people by chance. And by chance they have parts or they have bones, and no time there is a nail, and none of these are born at the root of the joint, or the birth is within any of our arms.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	Those born without any movement of the head do not move, and those born at the joint might happen to move; the size of the one who is muscular is so light that in this manner: cut it from its root down to a thick spoon's width.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	This one that grows at the root of the joint is hard to cure: hold onto copper with you.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In the one who is born or attached to the rear notch, it is necessary that you first remove the soft tissue up to the bone, then cut the bone with a thread suitable for this, and then treat it until it is clean.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The joints that come together are born like this, or by the healing of wounds, or through fire welding, or through similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	It is necessary that you cut this seam, so that it heals according to its natural forms; then place between two moistened cloths or sheets in rose oil, so they do not fuse together. Or you can place between pieces of fine plaster until the seams are fused, as it should be.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If when joining occurs with either hand and palm, then make that welding just like it should be done.
des vils	Of the villages
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	The villages are large, fat vessels filled with melancholic superfluities that come from various body parts. More comes in the legs of those who walk and work, than to others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore, you must administer one purgative dose for him, and then heal him with the basilica's remedy.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	The treatment of iron takes place in two ways: one involves cutting and letting black blood out. The other way is that you open the vein and pull it all out with force.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	The treatment of fever proceeds in this manner: first heat the leg with hot water very strongly until the large vein becomes thin. Then pull the leg back from the afflicted area up to the part below the knee; then cut the vein at one point, two points, or three points, making a wide incision. Next, evacuate and force out black blood using your hand, from this side to that, as much as the properties of the ailment can bear; and then close it, instructing for him to apply meat juices turning black all over it; and repeat the evacuation and cleaning when veins are full, which is harmful to the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The method of the operation is as follows: lift the leg from the bad side, if there's hair there, then immerse it in a bath. And raise the leg with hot water until it turns red and inflames the veins. If you don't have a bath, heat it over fire instead, then place it on the vein along its entire length starting from the bottom of the thigh, or at the part below the ankle; then peel off the skin with an awl, and scorch each side of the vein until it appears when felt; and one sees that it's red and black, and when it enters or touches the skin as if it were a white thread; then cut out right where you are, all along until she is raised from the skin, and then lift it by another half inch, then reheat with an iron, as you did before, then lift it to yet another half inch, so on in increments of half inches; then peel off the skin over the vein until it appears, then raise it onto fire, just like you did, and lift it again to a different half inch, just like you did first; then cut with another size or sizes if you need more, then lift them, and heat up at the bottom of the leg bone, then move and lift till reaching the second size; then press with each increasing size until it can all be squeezed out, then heat. And if you're unable to press and lift, you should insert a thimble of strong double thread through each stitch, tie it down, pull it, and press right where it's pulled, then turn your hand back and forth until they come out; and make sure it doesn't get heated up, for if it does, you won't be able to pull or lift it and will cause harm to the patient; and when you've completely pulled them, put on the wound a cloth dipped in wine and rose oil. And treat until it's clean.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And if the joints are contracted and twisted together into one mass, and it is not straight, as we have said, then it should be cut forcibly but not carved; and treated in the manner that was previously described.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	The shape of the iron that one uses to cut the tooth is curved, and it does not slice, so as not to cut through; and it has large curves, because if it were sharp, it would cut through the vein, but being thick, as we have said, and this is the form:
de la voinne civile	from the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	This vein is present in the legs, in warm areas where no herbs or trees grow, and in soil lacking moisture; and sometimes it appears elsewhere than in the legs, which happens due to corruption originating beneath the skin, just as serpents and worms do within the body, penetrating between skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the signs of this vein's beginning show, so that there comes a very great inflammation in the leg, then change its course, and the vein starts to emerge outward, just like the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	When the shoulder opens, it is necessary that you wrap around one third to three quarters of a piece of linen, and tie it, leaving the linen hanging on the leg. And every time there's a bit left over when cutting off, wrap inside the linen and tie it; and if it's too long, cut out a part, then wrap again, making sure not to cover its root until it's fully exposed. If you do cover it, it will enter the flesh, causing pus and decay or disease; thus this matter must be treated little by little up to the shoulder, leaving nothing in between; and only once the treated vein is five inches long, or ten, and roughly twenty paces from where it originated on me, does it become fit for use. Then you should cut off one inch or two ends of it, then pierce till you reach the bottom, so that everything comes out; drain any inner matter thoroughly, and prescribe medicine against putrefaction for a single day, then treat further as for pus.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And not once at this vein cuttings, and especially when it opens in the ankle or hip joint, where bones meet, causing much damage and where cuts are made. So then treat accordingly as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	worms that are born between the skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	This illness is called in our land "cow disease," because it has often affected cows, and it's a small worm that is born between the skin and flesh, and it travels throughout the entire body, up and down, and its presence can be felt as it moves from one limb to another, until it reaches the skin where it was going, and it grows; and it becomes infected with pus from some fluids, like coming worms, snakes, and parasites such as roundworms or those of the stomach; and there is doubt about its malignancy, for when it travels through the body, and when it ascends to the head, and reaches the eye, by chance it returns, and destroys the eye; and this happens many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	When you see it being treated and bled, only then can one understand that as it proceeds: hence, it becomes necessary for you to bind the head above and below with a firm bandage tightly. Then cut upwards and drain it, and if there is no discharge in the flesh, if you fail to find any, then apply fire cautery on it until it starts bleeding; and the greatest harms that it causes, are when they go towards the eye, as we have said; and if you see it coming or beginning near the eye, then bind it firmly below him with a form, cut upwards, and drain; and one should use the aid of purification from body fluids by medicines that dissolve, and beware of eating cooked meats which cause putrefaction.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	The pain that comes from wind.
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	This disease is called in our land "vakirir", and it is a pain that affects any member, and spreads from one limb to another; and I have seen what I am telling you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	I was summoned to a sick woman and she showed me her arms. She had a small swelling in the veins near her elbows; and shortly after, I saw it rise as if a worm was climbing up to her shoulder, faster than anything else, like hot silver cut from one thing to another; the pain left that part of her body and settled into her shoulder, and then a little while later spread throughout her entire body until she reached her other arm. Then she told me that it twisted within her body, just as I had seen.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I marveled greatly at how she moved member by member within my body, for I had never witnessed this disease in such a manner.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	Always, I wanted to have many that well had wanted to move the pain from one place to another, but I did not want it myself, as I saw in the woman; and I thought it was because the woman had a dry body, with uncovered veins, and because of this constraint, this windiness appeared; and they do not appear like this when considering those who are delicate and have moist bodies and closed veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	And when you see treat this illness, and the patients feel this pain, if it opens as we have said, quickly above and below, then hold onto it for as long as that windiness escapes from its place; and cauterize your area; and if you do not see it at your eyes, then treat those who debout the windiness, such as stinking pills, serapin pills, and similar others.
des saiettes	Des saiettes" translates to "of arrows" in English. This term refers to objects that resemble arrows, likely referring to projectiles or weapons in historical contexts.
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows are various depending on their shapes and according to where they pierce or hit the body.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	The variety of their shape consists in that there are those with large points, and small ones, and barbed, and soldered; and those with two angles, and those which have tongues, and those where there are pieces; and that one chucks out nothing but in any member it chucks according to two manners: or in the principal members it sticks, such as head, heart, liver, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar organs.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	When it comes to the shoulder joint specifically in these limbs, and the sign of death that I will tell you later on, they show: you should be prepared for extracting this arrow because death follows in various dispositions; and if this bad sign does not become apparent and the arrow is not fully extracted, then pull it out and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	And the sign of the brain when the arrow pierces through and lodges in the bone, and starts a fiery fluid near the brain, is followed by blindness, deafness, inversion of the eyes, redness in them, inflammation and redness of the tongue, spasms and mental confusion, vomiting of pus; and sometimes loss of strength in the nose or ears; and perhaps loss of speech and voice; and a white moist exudate coming out from the wound that resembles pus, and also burns like charcoal; and if this sign appears, you should take action and remove the arrow if it's still there.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	The sign of the dart when it bites or pierces, is that it's near the left breast and feels as if it were stuck in something hard, not empty; and by chance the dart also becomes silent like a pulse, with black blood and coldness coming out, and fever and cold sweat, and fainting: then know without doubt death approaches.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of the arrow that one should not ignore is when foam does not come out from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient's face turns red, and they sigh loudly with a quivering cold.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrow is found in the covering over the buttocks, it is located below the small ribs; and produces great pain and sighing; and all the limbs move.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrow is in the stomach by chance, then there would be nothing of undigested meat coming out from the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrow is found in the belly or abdomen, and there's no passage of bile through the intestines, then there's no hope for treatment or extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if an arrow is stuck in the bladder, causing urine to spurt and escape, and patients feel intense pain: know that this wound is fatal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other limbs, including the arms and shoulders, neck, throat, collarbone, shoulder blades, spine of the back, ribs, chest, and legs, as well as seeming members, are safe according to several different positions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When an arrow is in the body's nerve or artery and it is not poisonous, as I will tell you what happened to me, because when you do that treatment.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	It happened to one man that an arrow struck him in his armpit at the root of his nose: I probed it and pulled it out from another side through the fat of the ear; he was saved without serious harm.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And pulled out an arrow from a game that hit him in the fat of the eye near the eyelid, under the paper, and the arrow was stuck, not able to reach much beyond the shaft, and the arrow was big as a Turkish bow length without ears; the game player was saved, and no bad accidents came to him.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	And remove an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and that arrow had Arabic feathers on it: I let the skin go first, then made my way through with precision as I pulled it out, leaving the Christian sound.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	And pulled out an arrow from the house, that was stuck in his belly or chest, and thought he was dying; then after thirty days had passed, if it didn't change its position; I cut into the arrow, attached something to it, and pulled it out without any bad incident.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	And if you encounter a house with an arrow that has fallen or hit it on the back, and found the wound healed up inside; and stayed the arrow within, not changing its natural positions, nor did any harm come from its natural actions.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And there is another person who fell with an arrow in his face and had the wound stitched; and ever since has suffered great pain; and many others like him.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	And one fell an arrow into the court of the princes' home, where it was stuck in his neck, being slightly tilted to the right side; and the arrow was entirely embedded. I was called for treatment after it was stuck for three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I found the wound quite narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	I tried to remove it using all kinds of delicate methods, and didn't feel anything; and he was experiencing pain and discomfort under his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	I thought it was due to the tip of the arrow. I placed an adhesive and digestive plaster on his neck because his ears didn't swell up; and then I saw the arrow's tip in his ear.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	I placed the plaster on the wound immediately, and treated it quickly, so that the patient suffered long, until he felt the arrow inside his nose; and I told him this.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	I applied corrosive aqua regia to the wound using my hands until it was opened, and I tested it; I felt the tip of the arrow moving towards my hand. Then I readjusted in the wound opening with that corrosive aqua regia up until I saw the head of the arrow visibly appear; then passed through very well for about four months, and then closed so much that I pincers worked on it from both sides and couldn't get out; then kept refining and engineering methods for tools, until I took it out one day with well-made pincers according to how its shape will be in the end of this chapter, while treating and leaving the wound open.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	And they judge that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: I will restore it then, and after being sewn up, the patient was completely healed.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	Or tell me about the quality of extracting arrows, so that you put your treatment on what I do not say, because books cannot take everything into account; but wise masters compare well with very little knowledge, and regarding what is present and lacking, find a new work and a new tool, in removing foreign things that happen in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	I say that arrows penetrate members or the point of entry according to two ways: either through the upper part where they enter, or from another side; and the one that enters through itself or where it is inserted, this arrow penetrates the flesh, and has done so no longer.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And if it doesn't jump now, let it stay until the bone is thoroughly cooked inside, and becomes soft; and then you'll see its release. Also, if it's stuck in the bone and cannot come out, leave it like this for some days, and remove it each day; and soon it will jump. If it doesn't, pierce deeply inside all through the subtle forest, until the inner parts are fully widened, and then extract it.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	And if the arrow is stuck in the bone of the head, and reaches to one of the organs near the brain, or any other event that I have mentioned opens up for the patient: do not remove it immediately but let it stay until it becomes level after a few days. Because if the arrow goes up to this point, it's a death sentence.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is only stuck in the bone and not yet fully inserted to its depth, and stays without causing any harm for several days without a bad incident, then remove it with skillful extraction.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is so deeply embedded and cannot come out, then apply hot fomentations internally, as I have told you; then treat the wound until it heals.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And if the arrow has been returned into the body to such depth that it cannot be seen, and you want to extract it using all your strength; and if you sense it, then attempt extraction without any suitable tool; and if you can't due to the size of the wound or the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone, nerve or vein, then make a cut as large as necessary; and try extracting the arrow if possible, and if there are ears attached to which it is held, remove the flesh that sticks out from both sides up until you can, then break or bend the ears of the arrow, as long as you can extract it; and be careful not to break the arrow when doing this, so that it won't come out more painfully.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you can't do it in one go, leave it until the shaft is completely rotten up to the elbow, then try again, for its extraction is easy.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	And if blood flow contradicts you during this process, apply what we have discussed in the treatment chapter; and protect against incision near nerves or veins. Position your arm as you might safely remove the arrow without risk, quickly or slowly, firmly or gently. Place the patient according to their position just before the arrow fell, for that is the greatest assistance. If you can't, place them according to how the symptoms show you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	The arrow that came from the opposite side, or where there is no part of it present, or if the skin is swollen at the point we can't see or feel clearly: then cut upwards as far as your forceps can take hold, and then pull: should it jump now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is held in the bone, twist your hand around as long as she enters the bone, and enlarge the bone, then pull her.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	And if it can't come out, let it stay still for now, and then start extracting again until it comes out. And if there's part of the arrow left in there, pull that too till it's gone; and if it's just the head of the arrow remaining, and you're able to extract that way, use a tool with a pointed end so that the point of the arrow goes through the tool when you pull, making extraction easier.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrow is within, you must remove all the flesh around or where it enters until possible, then clean the wound according to how it should be done.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if the arrow is in or hits the chest or bladder or abdomen, and it's close, you must remove it; and if possible, cover it up. And avoid covering the vein and nerve, then extract it, and then stitch the wound, should stitching be needed; and treat until she heals.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The form of the tongs used for arrows resembles an eye, and here is its form:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And in various ways: large, medium-sized, and small, depending on the size of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the arrowhead is also like the feathers of a bird, by piercing at the tip of the arrow, as shown here is its shape:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The form of the forceps to push and retrieve is as follows:
des voinnes dou cors communes	Of veins from common causes
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	The veins from which bleeding occurs are thirty-one, of which there are sixteen, namely: Two small ones that are behind the ears, called "grass" heads; and two arteries that are in two visible temples; and two veins that are in the corners of the eyes, called "aspirers"; and the vein that is on the forehead; and the vein that is at the head of the nose; and two glands under the throat; and two veins above the lips from the mouth, these are the veins called "augerich"; and two veins along the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	The veins that we commonly treat are in each arm: one is the cephalic vein, and is under the left costal area, and they call it the "vein of the head"; and the middle one is called 'large vein', and is made up of the cephalic and basilic veins, and they call it the "vein of the heart"; and the basilic vein is either on the right or left side, and they call it the "vein of the belly", and it is above the fossa, and this is the one that we treat, which opens clearly on the pouch.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	The salve-telle is the vein that's between the little finger and ring finger, and it can be found in two places; and in the leg and where the foot meets the shinbone are three veins: one is located under the bend of the shin bone on the left side, and the second larger one is at the ankle on the right side; and there's another vein called 'the knee', which is located at the ankle on the other side. In the other leg are three veins beneath these.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	The healing of veins that are behind the ears is assisted by ancient cathar treatments and migraines; and the qualities of a healer as I tell you, and whether you touch your head with an inflamed area or on the veins where they are in a rough cloth; then pinch the inflamed area's neck to a pin, until both veins appear behind the ears under two heads: then hold them firmly with your thumb, and where you feel the pulse under your thumb, let it bleed; then take the lancet, and insert through the vein up to the bone, then lift your hand all along the vein upwards, cut out well the skin and vein both for two inches deep, and make blood flow until you see; then tighten and tie, until it is healed; and I have already told about incision and cautery in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	The healing of the two arteries located in the two temples, if it involves ancient embolization and thrombosis, along with water-induced tears; and the quality of this healer is as I say: it makes its neck tight until the two veins clearly appear open. It feels the pulse all over your thumb, then checks it further down. Then lift the hand above the vein at your index tip, and hold the scalpel there, lift the hand up again, and cut the vein, just like you did with other veins, and make a cut according to your need; then release the patient, place your thumb on the vein for an hour, then put cotton over it; and then bind them well, leave them until they heal. And we have spoken about their extraction and their operation, or the beginning of this book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	The treatment of the sinew at the forehead is worth as much as the treatment of the cephalic artery in ancient diseases, and headaches, and heatstroke; and the quality is that the patient twists his neck until the vein appears; then take the tool called 'drill', which has this shape:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	And place the tip at the vein, and press with your hand or another thing, allowing a little blood to flow according to how much you see; then free up the neck for the patient, and bind the vein until it is healthy and no part of the work has been done by a large flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	Always, it must not be that the flames are too much; and heal across because the bone is close, and by chance break the flames when they are delicate.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	The treatment of the two veins found in two sinuses, as well as heatstroke and overheating, and earache in the ear canal, and diseases affecting the face; and the quality of their treatment is that the patient twists his neck due to some tie when turning (as previously explained), then treat them, and make a cut somewhat long but slightly wider than the flame, because there is no flesh involved.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flames are subtle, by chance they break; then do a correction with blood, as much as you need, and then bind it with cotton, and bind it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	The treatment of the neck when it's injured involves bleeding, and sudden release, as well as diseases in the face such as headache and redness that comes with fever, especially if the face is old; and the quality of the treatment lies in constraining the throat first, then pulling the nose towards your left hand, taking a thin flame long, and sticking it inside the lip at the space between the two nostrils, for the vein does not open well completely. The fire will now begin to cure; and do not go too far with heat, apply bleeding gently according to your need, then stop it for one night as it recovers very quickly; this is how the flame works:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	The treatment for the inner ears aids in tightening the ocelli, initiates mixing of fluids, helps with a multitude of diseases including ear infections and corrosion, as well as herpes. And the quality of this treatment lies in squeezing the throat on both sides just like we have said previously; and ensure that the doctor is present at the head of the patient, place the patient's head on the edge, then treat the vein for a bit longer than it is wide, applying bleeding carefully, or only as necessary. Then repeat elsewhere on another vein, after untangling this connection, squeeze the veins moderately so that the patient does not choke; and leave them until morning, ensuring that the wound heals.
de la sainie des leivres	In the healing of wounds
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The treatment of veins in the mouth aids in closing wounds and helps with gum decay, lip cracks, nosebleeds and internal injuries.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	And the quality of healing is to have the patient stand in front of you, and hold their neck as I said; then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one being on the right lip and the other on the left. You know them by the fact that they are black, and because inside them there are small, black veins: so take both of them, and if you don't recognize them, and you're in doubt, then take the bigger one from each part, and do the same for the two veins above and below these ones since it's the same method.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	In the healing of injuries to the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	The healing of the veins that are near the tongue helps after the head's healing and this is done through narrowing the throat, and treating eye diseases, and mouth illnesses; and the quality of a surgeon is to have the patient lying under sunlight with their tongue raised and look at each side for one black vein: then heal both of them, and don't overdo it since they are near the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	The veins of the cut through which we commonly heal are healed according to two ways: or by placing them in contact with all iron hot broad, or with subtle olive oil such as knife blades, and they are called 'anisel'; and they are large and subtle according to the width and narrowing of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The shape of the mirthin flame is very well known, and it is quite wide as you can see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And it requires to open the veins that are full of large visible blood and contain large blood and disturbance; and this is the shape of the olive oil flame:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it is more penetrating, and used to cleanse delicate veins, or it has fine yellow blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The healing of the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases that are in the throat, and in the neck, and in the stomach, and in the abdomen; and it's important for the healer to heal properly and be aware of the artery that is nearby.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And if the artery is hit, and bleeding follows, should it be necessary to stop the bleeding, as I have said; and there must not be a grasping of the flame, but cutting it instead like before.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And if the basilic vein is not clearly visible, it may be necessary to extract it, and use another one; or you don't want any part of this, or you drain through the arm in place of this vein: it opens clearly; and you cut to the flame as before, just like we said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And if you know how to locate the site of treatment, it should be done as follows: cut the arm so that you touch the site until you feel the pulse; then mark the site outwardly, and then tie the arm down, and cut towards the flame as before; and be careful not to puncture the artery when you see the site inflamed, because it is part of the artery: listen out for it then.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see something protruding upwards as much as the urine of a child, and the veins are red and subtle, know that it is a vein: so then hurry up, place your finger for a long time, then remove your finger when the vein stops bleeding, an event that has happened many times; tie up the arm, and leave it like this, do not move the patient; proceed with caution and do not move until he is saved.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the wound is not cleaned, and you need it, and the medicine is not present, if you open the artery when it opens, because the head of the body retreats; and clean the wound.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	And take the bark of a fir tree, and cut it, and take one half and tie it firmly up to the other side; if the wound stops bleeding, it is fine; if not, then treat it as we have said, with powders that stop bleeding; and the bandages are not changed in multiple positions because of the small size of the wound and the strength of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	The treatment of the vein is aided in its middle section where it deals with blood from the head above and from the chest below, as it consists of the basilica and cephalic sections, as we have mentioned; and the physician must be careful about the nerve which is nearby, and if he doesn't go too deep and comes across the nerve, and inflames and injures the health, and by chance can't heal; and this nerve opens many times, and if it doesn't open in any men for its subtlety, then you should let your hand guide the tool towards its end; and listen to the nerve with your power.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is a vein between the two nerves, make the incision long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	The treatment of the cephalic vein is beneficial, as it deals with blood from the head and assists in healing; and it is fitting for a surgeon to work on the olive flame or the mirtin flame, because it is the safest among all veins, since there is neither nearby nerve nor artery.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	Always aim for the lightest blow, and do not take offense if you must try it once, then attempt again; indeed in some cases the limbs swell after the first instance, yet there is no harm.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of health is according to your thought.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	The first thing you need to know about hygiene is that it's managed through force only to maintain health and to avoid future illnesses; and this hygiene should be done in one of the three veins: these are known as cephalic, faecal, and basilic; and you should clean yourself at the beginning of prayers on your knees, and during autumn and winter after meals, when signs of satiety appear; and you should wash on the first or third day, after two hours or three days.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	Hygiene for illness prevention doesn't have a fixed time, but it should be done as needed each day or after meals at any hour; and it's not advisable to bathe children until they are fourteen years old or pregnant women only during the first quarter of their pregnancy up until seven months.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	Neither should doctors treat the elderly who have surpassed sixty years old.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	And when one seeks to heal oneself, in whatever manner it may be, so that they must cleanse the intestines with a light cathartic if they have retained mucus, so that the veins do not draw out the excesses that harm the principal limbs; or cannot heal themselves if they are too full of meat, or drunk, as long as they lack strength, nor sputum-filled. And be wary when one attempts to heal after colic, and vomiting, and abdominal pain, and frequent urination, and labor, and staying awake, and indulgence in pleasures; then refine the humors, if it is too large due to food, drink or medicines; then bathe oneself, provided nothing prevents you from doing so for refining the blood, and healing of the wound from the third below the anus as we have said; and guard against this day of labor, pleasure and excesses, and do these things with joy. And keep the healer's hands above him higher than those who are healed, and rub his arm twice or three times, then loosen your tie moderately from the middle. For if it is too tight or loose, he cannot correct himself; and then rub your hands onto him until the veins swell and you can feel them. Then moisten the healer's palm with a little old oil, then place your right hand on that vein over his anus for a moment or two where one intends to heal, so that the blood does not clot and fail under the knife.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	For there are veins that behave like strings when heated, and there are those that are full of windiness, so that when one puts them over the flame, they retreat from the flame, and cannot open the vein. And thus it is with this type; and if the person heats the vein, then the wound becomes too narrow, for which reason the surgeons must be knowledgeable in such matters.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein opens on the first try, that's good; but if not, it should be tried again slightly over where you were or quickly, depending on whether his arm is swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And if his limbs are swollen, and the wounds are alarming, let him stay for one or two days, without bandaging his arm: it may happen that pus accumulates; do not bathe in water afterwards, then resume surgery as you see fit; and if there is little pus or if you doubt whether so much blood leaks out as you can see, then heat the small wound right across with the flame; and work a bit more hastily, thus making his limbs swell. For this happens many times when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If you see the arm is inflamed, do not cease the cure, and place a bit of oil on it, for oil relieves the body from blood's pain, and settles in that area where oil is placed; thus administer oil to every cure you give to veins, to stop the flow of blood; and similarly treat twigs and wads of hemp when you put them on the arm; the wound and its pus subside when it is too big.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if there comes a large abscess that happens frequently, in the same way even when it's not being treated because sometimes the opening of the vein is small, then hurry and place a wet sponge on the arm with some warm water and vinegar for a while; and you should do this after bleeding from the vein has ceased. And if it remains on the arm for several days without any blackness or greenness, it doesn't harm. And if you notice anything, put aloes or myrrh dissolved in the juice of calamus, basil, or something similar on it.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	Many times abscesses and signs of healing were seen in the region of the basilica: so place your hand there, and if you find the area soft upon pressing with your hand, then that is an ill sign.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Hence you should not put on any thing of what we have said, for perhaps by accident without the artery; but let it be one plastered with oil to harden the place, then treat it with another cure until it heals.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And give each person blood according to the amount of its strength and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	But if his veins are black, let him bleed until the blood turns red; and if you see a lot of it, let him bleed until it becomes thin; and if it is too hot, let him cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And it is fitting for the one who is full and strong, needing blood extraction, that you make him a wider wound, and have wide flames; and for the weak one, do the opposite, and it suits him to be cleaned cautiously little by little, and he should be cleaned in cutting across rather than straight; and this method of cleaning saves from bleeding and nerve constriction, and beats those who clean long over wide.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And for the one whose body needs cleaning, it is fitting to give him moistened apple juice; if he is heated up, do three or four times with blood extraction. If he has a cold complexion, before the cleaning eat moistened bread made in syrup mixed with mead, or in aromatic honey syrup containing spices like pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and let it have a pleasant smell.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if it fails in surgery, after some blood has been let, it should inhale a broth of meat, and a pleasant, subtle syrup, and use other things that we have discussed in the section or chapter on collapse, for the evacuation of veins.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if it wishes to bleed its arm, and be able to heal again, when it is weakened by extensive surgery, it should bleed gradually and little by little, according to the amount of its strength continuously.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And if someone wants to bleed their arm after the first surgery, and they have strong veins, they should bleed seven hours after the first surgery, or even after the new hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And if one wishes to heal differently, they should begin healing on the second day or the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	For there is much blood within the body which has heated up, and it causes fever; so you should drain large quantities of it, and widen the veins until they break under pressure; then when all conditions for health are met, place your hand on their pulse as they recover, making sure that the breath doesn't move towards the area where pressure was applied; this happens many times when the surgeons are negligent. And it's not right to see release of the arm and have blood come out a second time when the veins are closed, pressing them forcefully. Nor should you quickly extend the arm after that, as this would be bad; but let him stay until he recovers for the second time; or you apply at the tip of the flame, until the blood, which has frozen to the vein in the area, flows forth and place a small piece of salt immersed in water on it, gently pressing.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is ruptured, let it alone and do not tighten it, until the abscess subsides.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if the need is to drain blood for a second time, let it out where the healthy person is himself, or in another vein, or on the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein is located under the neck from the vein of the arm because it is composed that way.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the method of healing is that when the patient immerses their hand in hot water until the veins turn red. Then they should be tied moderately so that blood appears clearly. Now you are healing through it but not wide or long; and make them wide, and heal very close to the joint of the hand, if it cannot drain completely, then put your hand back into hot water and let the blood flow in the water until you have enough. And if it is like this, don't immerse your hand in hot water again, because you keep it warmer than cool; and healing from this vein is safer than all other veins, there is neither artery nor nerve in it.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	The method for saving the right hand from all diseases affecting the liver is as follows: pinch the hand and immerse it in hot water until you see the veins; if you heal diagonally across, but make sure not to hurt anything; do not overheat excessively because the nerve is all exposed, then put your hand back into hot water if it's frozen in the wound and cannot drain completely.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated the blood as much as is necessary, place a cauterizing agent over the vein and seal it quickly, and do this for each case.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The health of his left hand is against the disease of the mouse [a type of poisoning], and do everything similarly as I have told you for the right side.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The health of the liver is worth all diseases that occur in the body, such as diseases of the lungs, retention of flowers, and diseases of the kidneys, and similar diseases involving the arms and old legs.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	And the quality of its health is that the patient should be bathed in hot water and rubbed on the body until it perspires, and then bandaged over the ankle joint. And if there's a knee injury, it goes some distance down towards the leg; therefore, you should treat it whether it's a larger knee issue or at the ankle, as it is valuable to do so.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you heal it on the bone, take care of the nerves that are around, and heal through it as well as cutting; let the flames ascend.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if you can't get rid of it, reset the bone in water and allow good evacuation of the vein.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	And if it's her first treatment, she should start from the second on slightly higher because the leg is salty; do not doubt about nerves, as we have said, and thus treat both legs equally with this liver remedy.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The nerves of the sciatic vein are at the knee joint, and their health corresponds to the pain in the hip, when it's due to blood congestion.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And the quality of its health is such that the patient enters or bathes in it, and stretches over the ankle three times by twisting, because otherwise the vein will not open; and if it does open, you should heal it in all possible ways you can, and across; and you must stir it once you catch it, for the veins are bare and she responds very much to manual work.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And if you do not find it, heal no part of what opens or at the foot's back, and direct towards the little toe, and guard against nerves; and make as much correction to the blood as you see fit, and then untie the knot, and put on cotton and tighten; she is now healed.
des sainies de ventouse	of suction therapies
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Ventouses are made of horns, or spiders, or glass; and suction treatment is done in two ways: either by cutting and drawing blood, or without cutting.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And this suction therapy that is meant to cause injury is done in two ways: either with all fire or without; and the suction made by causing injury and extraction of blood is carried out on sixteen parts of the body, from which one part is entirely at the head's chief; and another is around the neck; and two more are on each side of the neck; and the suction under the chin; and the suction on both shoulders; and the suction on the blisters; and the suction in the middle of both arms; and the suction on both legs; and the suction on both ankles; and this suction does not deal with blood, for it targets small veins that are scattered within the flesh, and because of this they do not weaken at all, as one would in bloodletting; and it should not be administered, whether at all fire or without fire, to any disease that comes from overfullness, until all parts of the body have been emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And if it's necessary due to illness for suctioning therapy, or out of habit, we should apply this once an hour at the beginning of each month, or towards its end, and in between and every time; for there are those who, when they need suctioning, weigh too much; and there are others who find congestion and warmth within their face, and on their head, and around the neck, and dark spots under the eyes; and those who notice a drop of blood in their mouth, and have difficulty swallowing, and cough up blood; and there are also those who worry, and see by nosebleeds and blackouts and deaths and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, especially around the end of the month, we instruct to suck after three hours each day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	The earlobe bleeding helps with headaches ... that is why it comes to the eyes, and it should not be done after the removal of all over the body; this suction therapy is in relation to the treatment of cephalic disease, and it should not be used by those who have a cold constitution, or who are suffering from fever, for these cause them much harm; and for these reasons they should not use it, nor those who have or suffer from head cold diseases.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who often use this, become forgetful, and because of that, it's advisable to place the suction cup slightly further down due to the risk of forgetfulness.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	The windpipe in the middle of the neck is located under the jaw and basilica. And because of this it is squeezed under the ribs, and has an incision along the channel of the heart. And everywhere else, and for expansion; and here it's best to gently push it, as if it holds too tightly, then causes choking or bloating in the stomach and heart.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	The windpipe at the two ribs of the neck corresponds to pains in the jaw and throat, and eye problems and headache, and for choking, and pain in the root of teeth, and is under the position of the jaw. It's appropriate that you instruct the doctor to position his hand when pressing, not to compress the artery, and there should be no sudden flow of blood.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	The ventilation under the chin contributes to mouth diseases and gum decay, as well as similar illnesses occurring in the mouth; it is within the field of healing for the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The ventilation under the shoulders leads to illness that comes from heat and congestion.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	The windpipe at the two ribs corresponds as much as three veins in the arm, because it drains blood from these large veins; instruct the doctor not to press too deeply there, for the muscles are bare of flesh and are close to nerves and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The suction cup on the buttocks is good for drawing out dampness from deep within and various diseases from below. It's necessary that the suction cup be large and made of spider material; otherwise, if it were too fine, it might break and cause significant injuries.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	Leg suction cups should be used without hesitation, as they draw blood from the entire body and are beneficial for old pain in the legs, joints, bladder, and kidneys, as well as eliminating toxins; they are placed on both ankles and calves, and eventually weaken the body after prolonged use, leading to emaciation.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The method of applying the suction cup is as follows: you should place it first when empty, and apply sucking steadily, then quickly, equally moving it, without stopping this action until you see the color red and swelling appear. Then stop for a moment, and replace the suction cups, taking care with positioning since there are those who have tough flesh and clear pores: they require only one strike and large wounds that go slightly deep should be made; and sucking should be done lightly.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the spot is large, then it's necessary to strike twice: the first time to delicately clear the way for thicker blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the spot is very thick, then it's necessary to strike three times; and when we wish to draw out blood gradually, then we should only do so once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if we cannot manage without blood, we often do so; and when the wound is deep, it's better to pierce deeply, and then stop at a point that allows the knives to be pierced immediately. This technique applies especially to those with thick skin and hardness, who are prone to bleeding, you should apply suction cups for extraction on the skin: if it has an inflamed state, one of purple oil, or sweet almond oil, or cucumber seed oil; and if it's in a harder state, one of watercress oil, or lily, or chamomile, or any similar oils.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the excess is large and cold, take oil of wormwood, or balsam, or anise oil, and similar remedies.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if the wound is for a soft flesh and large pores, there's no need to apply oil; but it should be washed after suction with pink water, or cold water, or water from raspberry leaves, or water from cucumber, or porcelain water, or any similar substances.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And for those who have much moisture, if it is lifted with willow water, or myrtle water, and sumac, and other similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And those who have large excesses drink old wine, or water from a spring, or decoction of rue or chamomile, or other similar things; and they should not be treated with suction cups before or during the bath but after one hour or two. And do not sleep afterwards, they need to be rinsed out, when it's time to use suction cups and when they have been subjected to suction.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And take care of those who are being treated and are choleric, and if they feel too hot and inflamed; it should be that they consume cold things, such as pomegranates, endives, and lettuce salads, and similar items; and eat small pieces, and pork chops, and moist meat.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And those with cold constitutions should drink honey syrup and moderately fragrant wine between old and new. They should eat small portions and pieces of small fowl like pigeons; on the day they're about to be suctioned, it's better for them to drink more than eat. It is advised to give some people neither triamcinolone nor muscat before or after suctioning, as this might strengthen their main body parts. Keep their stomachs light but ensure that those who are hot don't drink these substances.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	The suction cups that are placed to cause irritation are those placed on the liver and in the lungs, and for gout, and on the belly and intestines and hips. Because this limb does not suffer from being pricked with wounds, and one performs it forcefully only to draw blood within the body. Like when we place them on the nipples when the child is breastfeeding; to remove the stickiness that exists in the body. Like we place suction cups on the belly and intestines to reduce the body's size; and removes pain, where there are swellings or stones exist, it removes by its attractive power accidentally the swelling, or empties out the stone from its place; and this is done when placed on the liver and lungs when there is retained stiffness. These suction cups are administered empty solely for suctions purposes. They are not administered together with fire under any circumstances, and they are filled occasionally with hot water, as in diseases with much weeping, and in such a manner one fills up the suction cup with hot boiling water, or with water that has cooked suitable herbs for this purpose.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The shape of the suction tool used at fire is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	And it has two sticks of half a palm in length each by the circumference and in the middle one small notch as to pierce like an awl, so that it does not wound the patient when put on the limb; and in the middle there is a rod across from a spider or iron for inserting a candlestick, and they are made both large and small according to diseases and the size of those taking them; because children's suckers are different than those of adults, and thin ones compared to fatty ones.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And thus should we apply this suction cup to the limb: take the candle or thread and insert it through the rod which is within the suction cup, ensuring that light reaches the bottom of the suction cup so it does not burn the patient; then place it on the limb, position your thumbs over the notch as we have said, so when you wish, if vapor escapes, remove the suction cup; and take the candle or thread in this manner, as before, and repeat often if necessary.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	In the suction cup then, which is administered in the disease of pleurisy, there should not be a ridge or an indentation, and it must only be used when it is full of water, and placed solely on the limb. And this is its form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	Without gloves they are only used in limbs where suction cups cannot be placed due to their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar parts; and when the limbs are clean of flesh, like elbows or knees, and others similarly; and the quality of their use is that whenever you find without gloves that are in sweet water without pollution, take them; then place a nut in sweet water until they become familiar and have nothing inside. And then bleed and suction them, then rub the limb until it becomes red, and place them on the without gloves; and when they are full, and start producing, if there is any part where you can place a suction cup, put it there because this yields very little afterwards.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	If not this way, raise the arm first from the easy position, and then from the difficult one very carefully, quite well indeed, then prick it. And if the skin becomes too raw after some time, moisten a linen cloth with cold water and place it on the wound until the skin is healed; and if the wound is multileveled, place ground vitriol or garlic and similar substances on it until the wounds are healed; or you put half of peeled beans in the arm, let them heat up to the arm level, they will now stop bleeding; and if there's need for more, take other veins.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And if the veins do not gather properly, rub on the bleeding area with fresh blood, or you stick a needle in it until the blood comes out, and then place something there; and as soon as they sense the blood, they will stop. And when you see that they are bleeding again, dust some aloes powder and finely ground myrrh or ashes on them, and they should heal now.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	This begins the book of fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	These chapters are many times necessary in the art of medicine and the restoration of fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	Know this, dear son, that the foolish minds of these people delve into this chapter's content, something they would never see in any old books or read from letters; and because of this reason, this knowledge has been hidden in our land. I have not come across anyone with true understanding of it before, and I myself know nothing about it. My knowledge comes solely through the study of ancient books that I've extensively worked on, through experiments and by living a life accustomed to such studies; thus, I'm describing here what's contained within this chapter in its entirety, then simplifying it at the end, making everything very clear as to how the tools used are made and utilized, just like I did in those two chapters before this one.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	So it follows that we should outline the preface of this book, which covers the essence of speech and chapters where one's intelligence is engaged. We must remain truthful, so those who have experienced this know and learn this noble art, and also teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	I say that when fractures, dislocations, twists or inflammation occur to any part of the body, you should quickly cleanse the patient from one side and the other, without allowing anything to disturb them; this applies especially for those who are weak due to old age, infants, or those with poor health. If their limbs are either too stiff or too cold (meaning they're not properly warmed up), or if they are being fed cold food, such as cold meats, bird meat and venison - you should also avoid alcohol and any fatty foods. Avoid filling them with too many foods that block the blood vessels in the body until you have doubts about an abscess developing or the spreading of material within a limb. If the patient starts to feel better after their initial treatment, continue treating them accordingly based on how they respond to your care.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bones start to heal, it is necessary that one cooks the meat that causes excessive cooking or has viscosity, such as cooked wheat in water, and rice, and chestnuts, and peas, and cow's stomach, and eggs, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For this kind of cooking leads to more movement and heals the breakage faster.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And know that breaking bones in the elderly and weak cannot be properly restored or glued according to their nature due to the dryness of limbs, nor in those who are too tender, such as bones of small children; but do this, break into the bone you have broken and tighten the joints together again while you reinforce it just like before; don't finish your work abruptly and because of this, feed it with large meats as we said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that fractures come in various ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	But the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the foot or leg, and I will tell you all about fractures in this chapter.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there is damage heading towards harvest, and another when sharpening, such as the cut of a feather for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if in damage with injury, and breakage with a small crack.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	And in each manner has its tool and proper instrument for restoration, according to what memory brings to his mind; and it is known that the breaking of bone occurs when one's senses are twisted, opens well outward, and feels pressure from the hand; and when there is no twisting or sensitivity at the touch, and if there is no breakage; but it can well have twisting, or crack, or small breakage.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	If it is not suitable for you to move it by hand, but apply the following remedies, and then gently tighten it now.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	And know that the break that went against its course, and are its two parts detached, you must now put them in equal points, as abscesses on either side; and if abscesses get infected, do not leave any day, until the abscesses heal. Then make it even at a movement that you can do lightly and wisely, and know that their restoration is easier than those with pieces; then tighten, as explained after this.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And if bones have broken pieces, and are divided into two parts, whether it's in the hands or feet, or under your hand where it's a small limb, or at two tendons, or one tendon under your hand; and place the limb according to its natural shape, so that when the broken member parts have recovered, you gently reintroduce the additions to their places with movements as you can, and ensure there is no injury or pain from your actions; and adjust well both ends of the bones according to the best shapes.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And feel well with your hand if you think it is not quite right: if the dressing is beautiful and do not strain too much; do not squeeze as those who bring about pus discharge and muscle contraction in their work, as we have desired many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And when the limbs are in position, so restrain the patient that they do not move them, neither while awake nor asleep, nor on turning or any other manner. And ensure well that the limbs are securely set to feel no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	For when they feel no pain, it is not properly in place, and you should arrange them in such a position that they do not feel any pain. And take care to set them straightly, so that there be no crookedness when they are restored; and the quality of the broken limb must follow what I am telling you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that broken limbs vary in size, degree, and shape.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	For there are small limbs, such as wrists and ankles, etc.: it is proper to wrap them in soft and delicate linen; and for those that are larger, such as calves and thighs: it is proper to wrap them with a large and sturdy bandage, because wide bands embrace the entire big limb and restrict it evenly from all sides, so there is no twist. Then bind around loosely, three or four turns according to the limb, and hold your hand on the whole band slightly tight, then go above the breakage and tighten less, allowing the breakage a slight distance away; and soften the band slowly and gradually, until you touch quite a portion of healthy tissue, then start another band again, bind it around the broken part tightly; then go back to the area under the breakage and apply moderate pressure, neither too strong nor too weak. Just as we have said in the previous lesson; then place linen or bandage bands between the tightly bound areas until everything is evenly done, then fasten everything with a central bandage, and then properly place your pins if there's no pus or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	And if there is swelling or an abscess, place something soothing for abscesses above it, and which reduces the swelling, allowing it to remain that way for a few days; then press on your fingers, they should be of half the width of a reed securely pressed, or from a staff used in making pipes, or from palm leaves, and do so according to this shape:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	But it is necessary that the fingers which one places on the break be slightly larger and wider than the others; and should be as long as fits for the size or grandness of the limb; then press them with your fingers in the same manner as you did at first pressing, then tie a small extension above it also like the first pressing; make them tighter later and less so now; and it must be that the thread is just right, not too thick nor too thin, and should be made of soft linen; for if the thread is too thick, like those who make their pressings with linseed strings which are often twisted together, this leads to error, because the pressing will not be equal if it is too fine, and it does not suit that there is less than two paces of space between each finger.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the wounds are irritated by the pins after pressing them in their healthy places, put patches of linen or wool on them, so they do not blister.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is swollen and the joints are broken, I will tell you the treatment below.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	Know that it is not fitting to restrain all broken limbs for the whole first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	For when the limbs are large, it is not advisable to apply these supports that after three or five days, or more depending on the nature of the abscess occurring; and here is the method of old plastering for restoring fracture, dislocation, and twisting: you take flour that remains at the walls of the mill, mix it with plenty of egg, make this concoction neither too thin nor too thick, use it, and this is the common way of using plaster to restore fractures in various positions, equally so for women and young children because it is not too strong or too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another method of plastering to restore fractures and dislocations: take 3 barley grains and garlic and mint and asafetida and gum arabic and myrrh, each in .x. 3 grams; and incense and aloes, each in .v. 3 grams; vinegar is also needed, .viiij. 8 grams; grind these into powder, then mix with plenty of egg; if the mixture is warm, use this plaster, for it has a good composition, restoring broken bones quickly, and is suitable for many people.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another plastering method that is suitable for twisting: take mastic and white wax, each in about 10 doses; myrrh and aloes, each in nine doses; senna in six doses; Armenian balsam in ten doses, grind it well, mix with water or plenty of egg, and administer.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Another method for setting bones and joints, and relieving the pain that occurs, and sharpening uses bone, and bruising: take new wool, and cook it in oil and fat, and place it on them.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	Bandages do not heal, but they are better for soothing abscesses and properly applying the pains.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another method of plastering that heals broken bones: take dried fig leaves and terrestrial oak leaves, grind them together, and make a plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another method for setting bones in case of bone fracture and to alleviate the removal of pus.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Take root of vismalve, chamomile, violet flowers, groundnut of each one; and grind, mix with wine, and if the limbs are heated, mix it with wet coriander water, or plain water, and use it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another method of reattachment more forcefully than the first, when an abscess hard comes to the healing of the limb.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Take roots of vismarrow, and flaxseed, balm, milkvetch, and saussage, and flowers of violet and chamomile, from all take one part; and grind and mix with salt water, or sweetened water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb, and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	In his book, Hippocrates instructs that to restore strength in the fractured limb, one should apply a balm made from beeswax and oil, and nothing else, more. He states it should be of neither too soft nor too hard texture.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems Galen that we should place on the broken limb to restore it, things dry but slightly warm, such as myrrh and aloe and incense and similar things, just as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another way of plastering that is useful for injury and pain: take mutton and feathers from cooked sheep or bird feathers, and mustard, and equal salt, and grind them together, and make a plaster with it and use it.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then let it set for a little while later, and be careful so the patient doesn't feel any pain or feels the bone moving in its place; if you don't let it set by hand for days. If pain starts at the limb, or itchiness persists without rest or swelling occurs, if this happens then hurry, remove it, apply the dressing immediately; take a light cloth and moistened sponge, dip them in water, and immerse the limb as long as the itching stops and pain is relieved; then let the member rest for an hour, then place on dry wool, soaked in water or rose oil, secure with a bandage until you're sure of healing properly; and manage the inflammation of the limb and relieve the pain, then start applying a fine dressing and a little more of the paste, but do not apply it as strongly as before; and be meticulous until it is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you notice that pus and redness, pain, and swelling are present everywhere on the wound, and you need plastering and bandaging, then start again, just as you did initially.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	And if there is no change in the limb like what we have said before, and you only release it after three or four days, five, seven; and never leave it for more than twenty days according to observation until the healing process has begun, and approached union of flesh within. Then you should maintain stricter restraint than initially, allowing its body to swell as I've mentioned previously; if you see that the skin dries excessively beyond what's required, know there are no new wounds involved; then submerge it in hot water each time you release it, and do this every third day, and clean a little of the wound area. Through this process you will eliminate any remaining pus from the limb, and swiftly correct for the mistakes made by ignorant surgeons who force the limb back into shape: that is harmful, and such operations are dangerous; I see nothing else but patience and proper surgery as alternatives.
des diverses manieres de brisure	Regarding the various methods of crushing.
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	Many methods of fractures exist, and various shapes occur, with different causes being designated; for there are fractures made by the impact of a sword, and necks fracture all the bone up to syfac which is under the bone, just like in an axe or staff strike; thus this manner of breakage is called "axe-breaking".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	When the sword penetrates through the bone from above to below, it is called this method of breaking "absolute"; and these are the large or small injuries from these two types of breaks.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is sequential impact, or crack in the stone, or through stone, or other similar injuries.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a break close to the membrane beneath the bone or on the bone itself, and this wound can be large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if there is a wound that has healed within the bone as thin as hair, and the crack is small, thus it is called this type of breakage "hairline". And if the injury is made by hitting with stone or falling objects, or from something similar, causing the piece of bone to enter downwards and be stuck in between such like the candlemaker when they burn candles on them; if the stone enters inside.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	This occurs more often in those who have wet bones beneath, such as the bone of children; it happens in all these ways of breakage where small fragments are lost like stars; and I will speak about that in its place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And let us know all the ways of breaking through by removing them from above, and the inquiry into tests, and through corruption in the flesh that is upon it.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The appearance of hair is known by this: when one has uncovered the bone and rubbed it in, if the black break appears.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In treating the breakage, be careful of adverse events due to the disease, and if you see no bad adverse event, such as vomiting bile, loss of appetite, expansion, fever, and other similar symptoms in various conditions, do not hesitate in diagnosis.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see an alarming mishap, yet you hope for salvation, then start the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when winter comes first to you and it is in winter, then you should remove the bone before the fifteenth day of the month that you can.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in summer, you should hurry to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the pus around the bone becomes putrid, and the accidents that we have said occur.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And if the breakage of bone comes up to where the membrane covers the brain, then it is necessary for you to cut through the broken section like this: and take hold of the root of the diseased head, uncovering on the bone in every way that you can, and around the appearance of the wound as much as you can. And if bleeding starts revealing the bone, or an abscess forms, use what is appropriate and then fill up the space with wet cloths soaked in rose oil; and allow the wound to rest until the abscesses are subdued, and are assured of stopping of the bleeding; then begin excavating through the bone according to two methods of work: one method is that you cut at a narrow slice in front, which is the form:
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And make another cut slightly larger than the first one.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second method is that you should have several different-sized cuts: some narrow and others wide, with each being sharp-pointed and made of iron; and when working on them lightly, ensure that you do not injure the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is too hard and doesn't penetrate, you must puncture it internally in such a way that you administer cuts with needles, not too deeply so they do not pierce beyond the bone's thickness, and there should be a margin of about one circle above the point, ensuring that the point does not pass beyond the bone; and you must have more than one, so that each goes to its place within the width of the bone, for you need needles for all sides; this is how three kinds of needle formations are:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The quality for piercing internally through the broken bone is to place one needle on the bone, and turn with your thumbs until you know that the bone has pierced. Then replace the needle a little further elsewhere, and do this all around, then cut in between the perforations of the bone which is located between the teeth, and do it more subtly than possible and gently as we have said, continuously until you pull out the bone to your hand or with no tool that you have such as forceps; and make sure not to touch the brain or spinal cord.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And when you have pierced and cut the bone, it's necessary to scrape away what remains of the bone from all other tools like a file, but this one should be more robust and more delicate than another file; and if there is nothing left of small bones, or any scales, then gently scrape them with the other instruments; then heal the wound with preparations and treatments as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And the other way of doing it is what Galien stated, which is more prudent; and he uses a lot of force, and this is his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	Firstly, you should expose a part of the bone, at or near where the break appears to move, so that once you have exposed this part, you will place underneath the tip of this lens-shaped incision, with which we are dealing here:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	And do not cut from one side only, and have the limb divided into two parts, so that you cut towards the bone; then strike with a small hammer from above, such that you gently touch the entire bone, and take care to avoid the skin that lies beneath; if it is hard against the bone, then delicately strike it, for one strikes the bone without causing harm and without fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the bone breaks without piercing through the membrane, and the bone is cut only above, and there are small fragments, then you should proceed after that roughness, and remove the scales using a fine razor. You must have different quantities of this tool to apply in each area most appropriately, according to the work and the appearance of the breakage.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you are facing large razors, and then finer ones, and keep doing this until it is done well.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	For each of the other delicate haircutting and breakage procedures, you should adjust your approach according to their orientation; this is something that cannot be adequately addressed by someone who has devoted themselves to this craft.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	And if the boil is discovered, you should take a linen cloth according to the size of the wound and soak it in oil roset, then place it on the wound. Then take another cloth doubled two or three times, soak it in wine and oil roset, and place it on top of the first cloth; do this more gently than possible so as not to weigh down the boil, then apply a bandage above this other cloth without applying too much force so that only the wound is treated. Leave it like this for one or two days until the abscesses are calmed, then remove the bandages and administer medications such as rosemary roots, tumeric flour, incense powder, and aristolochia, among similar things; make a powder from these things and place it on the wound, also administering gentle medications. And guard that the wound is always clean, do not leave any ointment or allow pus to form, for when pus forms under the skin surface, it spreads and causes harm to the patient; as soon as something pungent is put on the boil, it becomes inflamed from above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Therefore, take care that no accidents befall the patient, as we have said, where there is doubt, let it not cause fear.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if no harm comes out except due to the medicine that we have placed on it, should such a virtue be present, then you must take one part of honey, and three parts of rosy oil and in wax one spoonful, and then put this mixture on your skin. After this, proceed with the customary treatment methods until it heals completely, as long as it is well.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Know that neither of the two parts above the nose are ever broken, or only one by itself, as these are two bones; and here below is cartilaginous tissue, which does not break, nor can it be bent or twisted, and then heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And if one of the two parts is broken, it is necessary that you pinch your little finger or the back of your nose, and place this break inside your index finger, and out from the nostril, until the nose recovers its natural shape; and do this gently, and beware that the patient does not feel pain through your action.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is in the area above the nose and cannot reach the nostril opening, it must be that you place him level with the tip of a knife slightly thicker than that.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	And if the break is of two parts, then repeat this procedure, and try to restore it on the first day if you can; if not, after the seventh or the eighth day, when the abscess has been drained, then pinch at the base of your nose with a linen cloth piece, should the break be in one part.
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Or you apply another one from the other side, if the break is on that side too; and let them be as thick as they fill in the hollows of the nose.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And they say no restorative requires the application of butter to swellings, and one must change each day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	I don't think it's correct, but they should be moistened in the preparation of a yolk butter, and with powder from grinding; then leave the swelling until the bone is hard and the cartilage has hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And instead of tents one uses goose feathers or no feathers at all, and if you have a half-cooked egg spread around them, and let the wound be open, and blow on the patient's lungs; or do whatever you see fit.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if abscesses come to the nose in such a way that you are working on them, then place a wad of moistened cerotta or cotton in olive oil or in a drop of eardrop.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the abscess breaks out, then cover it from outside with a plaster made of ground poppy seeds and incense powder mixed with yolk butter. Then place it on light bandages but do not bind them too tightly; and if the pieces break off easily with the nails, and they are broken into small bits, then use instruments suitable for this purpose to extract the abscess contents, treating each part while healing and bonding as necessary; and if there is no wound within the nails, and the treatment of the swelling, then place poppy stalks in it until it heals.
de la routure de la mandibule	On the rupture of the jawbone
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jawbone is ruptured from within, and there's no wound outwardly visible, only the breakage is outwardly visible. It doesn't split into two parts externally, rather it fractures internally; one can detect this by gently assessing it.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	It is necessary: if the breakage occurs in the right part, you should push your index finger into the mouth towards the side. And if the breakage is in the left mandible, you should use your right hand's index finger to push from outside and gently apply pressure on the inside of the breakage, then move it outward with the other hand evenly.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if there is an internal fracture of the jaw in two parts, then it is necessary that you apply extension to both halves until they are even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if the movements of the teeth occur, or a rupture, hold them with a thread of gold or silver or silk. Then place wax on the broken mandible and put two strips of cloth above it; and place one large candlestick well made, or an equal piece of leather, long and wide according to the mandible, above the cloth strip, and bind it as tight as you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and eat light meats.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	And if you notice that the figure changes, allow it to settle for three days, and then adjust what has become unfastened; apply plaster on top, mixing with powder from the mill with enough egg or flour of almond after removing the wax. And place wool lightly on top of the plaster. If the plaster hardens and the patient's position does not change, let it be until it heals; many times heal in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if abscesses come out, apply what we have instructed repeatedly.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a break and wound together, reward nothing of the bone when it is removed; so skillful are the tools for extracting such substances that they suffice.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, widen it with fire according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all these pieces, and there remains nothing, if the wound is wide, apply two poultices suitable for it to hasten flesh growth until it is healed.
de la forcele	by the power
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The forces break many times before, towards the shoulder, and the breaking happens in three ways: where it is broken and torn into two parts, and there are pieces, and it is the more light to restore; or there is breaking with an injury.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the operations are when the breaking is with an injury, that you have two ministers, so one marks the shoulder where the force breaks; and the other extends to the neck towards the body part. Then make the break even on your fingers, so that the shape becomes as it should, and there be no appearance or movement.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you need to extend more, then place a round sponge of cloth or wool over the shoulder down to the elbow; and make it as large according to your need; and stretch out and lift the broken limb, holding the sponge in your hand so that you can make the break even, as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull the head from the strength at the front, because it comes forward, then the patient should lay on his back with his head elevated, and place a half pillow under the shoulder, and press the minister to the shoulder from below, until the bone of the strength is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then position your hands for breaking and if you find bones, it's necessary that you cut through them; and gently pull the pieces apart, and if the bone cannot join by any pushing, then make a cut on one of these incisions that you have made. But when using this tool on the strength, place something under it to prevent slipping:
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	And it seems like a spoon, and is not inside, and can be as wide as you need, according to the size of the bone and strength of your work; and has two heads, as you see, and one is wider, and the other narrow, as is the incision in the wound that you made when treating the bones; and once you are sure about an abscess being there, if it touches the wound, and if the opening is small, or you doubt about the presence of an abscess touching the wound, if it does touch, then fill the wound with bandages and tents, according to its size.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And when pus comes out, if moisture is present, use oil, rose water and saffron, and place it on top.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	The grinding of the bone, when it is in relation to wounds and size, is that you put on the bone the plaster made from the powder of the mill and abundant yolk of egg, and place light sticks above, and put a wedge underneath if needed; then take a very large band about one palm wide. Then place two layers of fabric over the sticks and the plaster. Next, take a slender stick around three inches in size and length, and wrap it around that band so that the part of the band is hanging down; and place the stick over the breakage, and turn the band up to the neck, and underneath both the clean skin and the diseased skin; then remove from each side, and when you see that the ligament holds the wound in its place, and clearly see that the stick does not move above the broken bone, if it is necessary rewrap it every day, and when the thread is removed, keep restraining it. And make sure to lay out the diseased part on his back, and put him on a slight incline under the skin when he sleeps, to lift up the shoulder; so that you relieve the strain on the wound by the alignment of the shoulder, or you tie his arm around the neck, and do not loosen it in case any unfortunate events occur, for up to 20 days; then begin rewrapping if needed, and keep restraining and leaving it like this until he is restored. And she is completely restored within 28 days at most, and less in some cases.
de la brisure de l’espaule	Of the breaking of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	A fracture may occur in the shoulder joint or its middle section and not anywhere else due to an impact; if it matches the pattern of the fracture, then treat according to its natural form, using all possible methods. Then sprinkle with flour from a mill along with enough eggs and gentle wrapping, place double cloths over it; then place a large and subtle long stick slightly wider than the shoulder joint; ensure there are no movements anywhere in the shoulder region by placing woolen linings of the stick, making sure the stick is evenly placed. Then tightly restrict everything into one large band so that the stick does not move from its place, check each day; every time it loosens, tighten again, keep the stick even if it's too tight for the shoulder joint, have the patient lie on their side; and finally, after twenty or twenty-five days, the shoulder will be healed. And once this period is complete, release the restriction, you'll know it's healed properly as there's no bone that would easily settle in place.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of the bone sticks out and does not come back to its place, then take it up from there, and do so with care. Follow what we have instructed in treating abscesses caused by force.
de la brisure dou pis	From the fracture of the foot
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	The flesh is sometimes broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; it often breaks at the edge.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in the middle, if it retreats toward the outside, and the patient feels intense pain, lack of strength, and vomiting, and blood comes out, and the cavities open within the broken bone, and you can tell that well.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And for the restoration: if the patient feels better lying on their back and both sides, then you should place them on their back with their shoulders elevated. Then press their shoulders down, and join their ribs together from both sides using your hands, carefully making sure everything is in a way that suits your skills as long as the shape of the bone is what it should be; then apply plaster and bandages over the subtle salt mold or another light structure, wrapping it all up with one cloth, tie it firmly to the broken bone so it doesn't move. Then bend their back roundly and tighten it, strain every hour for the patient, if they become better relieve them of the strain; and if they should need to remove bandages due to corrosion or itching that comes from the wound, or pain or pus, act quickly, remove them, clean off the plaster, and treat as best you can in all manners. Then reapply the plaster firmly until it heals.
de la brisure des costes	Concerning the fracture of ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	Know that the breaking of ribs only occurs in those large beams behind the back and within the chest, and it is due to them being brittle; one feels this well during examination at the heart's location.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	The treatment for this involves placing an equal section of the break, as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	Then apply the plaster and bind with one hand, if you need to.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the breaking of the ribs is deep within, then the patient feels intense pain and piercing, as if from weeping, because the bone pierces the tissue; there are also swellings, immediate vomiting and a large amount of bleeding, and this is an indication of severe illness, for which the elderly would try to use drastic remedies.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if someone says that it is appropriate to give meat which inflates the belly, in order to expel nausea outward.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not follow this advice; for we do not apply pus or ointment where it has not come.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it has come, then heal it.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And let no one among us apply suction cups to the body in order to suck out shape, and this seems reasonable; nevertheless, there is doubt that the suction cup draws away excesses to the body due to weakness.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And it is said that in any place where one should cover the body with wet wool in oil heated hot, and we insert cloths between the ribs to make equal the warmth inside, then apply the treatment for the coldness of the body, meat and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels intense pain that cannot be tolerated by the bone piercing through the skin, there is doubt for the patient as to whether it's necessary to cut through his location of the broken rib, and one must place an instrument in this area to prevent further injury; then one must cut into the bone and gently drain any pus. Then stitch up both layers of the wound if it's large, and heal with plasters until he is whole again.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if abscesses occur, place them on wet cloths in oil rose, and put them under the bed; and cure while the body should suit to the abscess, and keep guards always at the side where it must be, until it is healed.
de la brisure dou col	Of the breaking of the neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	No break occurs at the neck's bones, and it doesn't bend; similarly with the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to any person and you want to know whether they will recover or not, if you see that their hands are softened, swollen, and dead, and cannot move or stretch them, and when you prick them with a needle, if they do not feel.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Know that death can occur in many ways, and if they remain alive and feel well when held steady or not, know that the bone's joint is saved, and the disease has been cured, if care is applied.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And if a similar thing happens to the spine of the back, and you want to know whether it is healthy or not, then be cautious that his limbs are softened, and that he experiences accidents while being held, and jumps wind and loss without desire on his back; and when one has observed this on his belly, he also jumps without desire.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when it is tightened on his back and he wants to lie down, then he cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	Know that they are mortal: if you do not work diligently in their treatment.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this misfortune does not happen to him, then it is a matter of lesser concern.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the treatment is that you should apply it if there's pus coming out, if you place on the spine or on the yolk of an egg, until it calms down; then put on one of the soothing plasters and let it dry, and bind it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that part where they feel pain, until they recover.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any bone is broken, cover it on the inside of your knee; and remove the bone, then join the two wound edges together, if they are large, with stitches, then treat with an ointment that binds cartilage until you recover; and if the piece of bone is bruised, which is called the "knob of the knee", if you hold your left hand pouch in your left hand, place it evenly against the other hand at your power, then put on the plaster and support above, should you need to; then compress it, and if any broken bone comes out, treat it there, and remove the bone, and heal the wound until it is cured.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	From the breaking of the bone at the hip
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	It happens that the bone at the hip is broken, and if it happens, there may be a slight loss of strength in the thigh; and it runs long, and descends to the knees, and comes to pain in the leg, and stings, and swells what is broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is that you extend your hand upwards as long as you are on the breakage; and know where the breakage and its shape are; and if the breakage is only at the thigh, then put an equal breakage there, as long as it has a natural shape.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the breakage runs along or it descends towards the inside, then guide the patient so that their body is on their stomach, until you become accustomed to restoring this breakage.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have placed it evenly, put it on the splint, then place a log of wood or charcoal on top, and hold the fire steady, so that it does not move; and apply heat along the back area until the wound is even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on their side or on their back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if the abscesses rupture and begin to drain, do not touch them until they are calm, and place something as we have previously mentioned; then return to wound care, apply pressure in accordance with need, should there be no adverse incident; this is how it's done.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	The process of breaking the splint.
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The assistants are those that are between the knife and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, one must restore it according to one of the two ways: of which one is that you take one solid stick of medium thickness, according to this shape:
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And tie two heads with two pieces of rope, and put them up top, securing the patient on one spot; then place the patient's broken arm on the stick until it reaches the elbow, maintaining a bend in the stick equal to half its length, then position this at any heavy object or where helpers can pull down; then set the broken arm so that the injury is level with both hands together, until the broken limb returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other way is that one secures the patient on their stretcher, and ties their hand to their neck, then instruct two helpers: one to cut where it's injured at their hands, and the other to cut down from both ends of each piece of rope and extend each person to their part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is more vigorous, then restrain him in front of the pain and around it, and above the pain, and extend each minister to their part.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the pain is close to the head of the shoulder, it must be that you place one band in front of the lying position and another towards the knife, in front of the pain; and similarly if the pain is towards the knife, it should be placed lightly, without effort, as long as the pain is equal on the left, and above the knife; then apply an even incision, just as it should, and restrain him, unless there are discharges from the stitches.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if pus comes out, do not immediately tighten until after seven days, and apply grease-soaked wool in a gentle manner and with rose oil, until the pus coming out is relieved; then apply tightening, and how to apply this tightening is that you place the plaster over the wound, then join the arm under the shoulder support, and put your hand on the shoulder or breast; apply the cloth, tighten it on the shoulder support, and on the arm, so that the arm is in its usual position, without anything preventing it, or if the bone isn't broken.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you suspect that the bone doesn't move, use braces, and place an extra large and strong brace over the wound, with one inch of space between each brace. Make sure that each brace is as wide as it can pass through the wound by three inches from each side; then apply tightening on these braces, just like I explained at the beginning of this chapter about wounds, more forcefully but without pulling away too much.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	And if you see the base of the nails and constriction, as we have said, in the earthenware where you are restoring a broken limb, and you hesitate about removing an abscess there, then leave it bound for seven days, as we have said; then examine every three days the connection, making sure no irritation or swelling appears on the surface or that infections can reach the limb because of its narrowness.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If it concerns the arteries, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And if no such incidents occur, or if it takes more than three days for the shoulder to heal and the body remains hot on its back with hands on the stomach; then place the aid of the shoulder with one well-packed cushion of equal wool, and observe each hour into the day or during meals that the figure of the broken limb does not move or become soft; if it is treated by the virtue of medicine, and give them meat as we have mentioned before in such a way that the meat would be at its finest texture; and when they start to recover, if it becomes bulky.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	And it is customary that the shoulder and leg must be restored within forty days from all this; then one should loosen, bathe and administer ointments and medicines to heal them.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the constriction is ugly and twisted, it should be left for days or two months to loosen.
de la brisure du bras	From the breaking of the arm
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is made of two bones which are called the 'foscile' pair. One bone is small, and it covers the pocket; the other is large, and this one lies underneath towards the small head. Sometimes only the large foscile breaks or even both bones break together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When the small bones are broken, restoration is light, and healing occurs. And when large bones are broken, healing is poorly done, and more difficult than if they had been broken together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If it's only the small bone that is broken, then gently stretching should be appropriate, and making them equal.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	And if it's the large bone, then you need to strain more forcefully; and extend it up on his thigh, and pinch the hand pouch higher than the others, and the small muscles lower than the other muscles, and make sure that the bones cross themselves, and that the thigh is in front of him higher than necessary, so they do not suffer any effort; then extend your assistants' arms to their respective parts below their hands or at their wrist, and another assistant at the other above.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then place the eyes evenly, according to their best shape.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if during the break into pieces, you place each one in its place, and if there is none that sticks to the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, then make on it and on the bone, as we said previously.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if during the break into wounds, I have spoken about this in another chapter; take care of the treatment.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	And if during the initial stage of reattachment, abscesses occur, then create a bandage from rosin and white beeswax, ensuring it is neither too hard nor too soft; and apply the bandage precisely so that when the abscesses are alleviated.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	And apply the wax, and set the plaster of the powder from the mill with a good amount of egg. Then place the sticks, and ensure that the stick for healing is placed somewhat further outwards, and slightly wider than the others; know that it must have six sticks or bras in various positions: either when the wound is within one bone, or within two; and keep more over the wound than anywhere else, just as I said at the beginning of this chapter; and make sure the cloths under the wound are soft and moist, and neither hard nor abrasive. And use threads made from linen that are neither too thick nor too thin, as we have mentioned.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And reward the member and the link after a few days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And if any bad accidents happen to the member, such as itching that occurs on the member, it is necessary for you to dip the member in hot water, until this itch is relieved; and let the member not be moved at all while resting.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then continue the tightening process, and if the ligaments are removed and the bones are exposed, do as seems appropriate.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if care is taken so that no injuries can occur on the limb because it is too tightly bound, you should soften it a bit with a poultice, and let it rest like this for several days until the injuries heal, then tighten again.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things we have said come to the patient, or if the dissection lasts up to twenty days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	Otherwise, or rather, then place your hands on his neck, and make sure the neck is straight, and avoid movement and strain, and sleep on his back; and know that this cure takes thirty days or forty-five days, and perhaps twenty days, depending on the nature of the remedies and their qualities.
de la brisure de la main	Of the breaking of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that on the back of the hand and in our fingers there are few injuries, and they only bend many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	And when the heel of the hand is broken or bent, it is necessary for the patient to lie flat on his back and stretch out his hands in front of him equally; then place his hand on an extended surface and extend the broken fingers, putting them evenly together until they are properly aligned; and put the bandage and splints, if there are no abscesses, then he should place a splint according to the size of his hand; and wrap it up in one piece of linen.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the injury is at the base of the fingers near the belly of the hand's sole, make a frame with linen and instruct the patient to press it onto their broken toe; then stretch out this long piece of linen, and place the splint in such a way that its length matches the width of the hand's sole, and tighten it as it should be tightened.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the break is outside, it must be that you place one splint above and another under at the foot, so that the hand is open and straight, then bind both completely within the hand, and seal off the connection between the fingers.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the break occurs in any of the fingers at all, when it's a sprain, just apply evenly; and compress with the palm, and if you see that applying a small straight splint helps lift the sprain, and prevents movement; and if the break is on other fingers like in the index or one of the others, apply evenly, and bind with the healthy one which follows; or you bind all together until movement occurs, or place on a splint like when you wrap; take care in restoring and arranging each dressing separately, and treat those who come with it, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	Of the broken knee
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	The bone of the knee is often broken, and one can see it many times as it turns in front and behind; and the restoration happens when one ties above the breakage .1., with a band around the fracture, and .1. other underneath.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the wounds lie on this face, then each minister extends his link to his equal part; and it is when the break is within the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the breakage is close to the root of the nail, then one of the threads towards the edge and the other threads under the breakage.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And similarly if it is close to the knee, then let the threads pass through the knee, and the extension downwards; then place the pins at the level of the bone with both hands, as long as it follows its natural shape, and then apply the plaster, and the bandage, should any abscesses not come about.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is pus present, let it settle then return to your work and your treatment; the wound has been treated in that manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is necessary for you to wrap around the breakage with one or two double pieces of bandage for durability, and leave out the excess. Then turn the leg until the heels reach the root of the knee, and stretch the thread longitudinally between the foot and the leg, passing through the knee inwardly; then guide the top part of the thread over the knee and the leg, then place an electrode on the breakage and another electrode on the bone of the leg. Then use your thumb to stretch the material between the leg and foot with a woollen cord so as to maintain even tension, then begin tying tightly at the breakage forming three or four turns; and when you go beyond the breakage and apply less tension. Then take the two threads that you have stretched between the leg and foot, tie them into an electrode above this point, and continue down along the thread until it passes beneath the knee; then tighten if necessary so that it does not move from its place, then leave it like this, then unless another sign of an abscess appears.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if it happens that it dislocates, reposition it in the way we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone involved that are caught, it is proper to remove them if possible; and if it's not possible, then it is fitting to cut through the muscle, to draw out force; and treat it as we have said, until it heals.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And no time is the egg broken thus when these rods are placed inside, as in the shoulder and arm; yet still, upon making such repairs there's no harm to the patient.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	Know that the egg is restored in one day, or perhaps a little less or a little more, depending on the diversity of temperaments.
de la ruelle dou genoil	from the garden alley
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	You know that near the knee joint there is some cracking, but it bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, even if it's just a crack, or it might pierce, and appears in every wound, and feels like a wound, and one can feel this very well.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And for the restoration, it is this: to place them even with what is round at their ends, until they are assembled and moved as one can; then put on plaster, and add a round wick if needed, and tighten it according to how it should be done. Next, reestablish all the arrangements we have discussed for other injuries, such as abscesses and similar occurrences; when faced with each situation, apply what is suitable until they are healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	Of the breaking of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	You know that in the leg there are two bones, from which one is called straightly "hammers" and the other is called "foscile"; and they have all kinds of injuries and breaks just like in the arm, and because of this its restoration is similar to that of the arm, and the operations are all the same. And if both of these bones break together, then the leg turns in every direction.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the delicate bones are broken, then turn them forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	And if the large bone breaks, one feels great pain and can see it clearly; then turns internally.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	Then apply extension, and place it evenly, and align the stars equally; but still, if the break is irregular and there are several pieces, that the extension should be smaller and more gentle; and adjust according to your skill.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed your work, take two sticks of horse hair that will cover the leg on both sides and be as long as the leg from the knee to below. Then wrap them with two bandages each above and below, and tie them in the middle; so that the leg cannot bend either to the right or to the left, and thus it is well done; and none should administer a single stick as long as the leg, made of horsehair, and place this on the leg to prevent movement. This must be done in the break where there's a wound; and move the leg each day to see if there is an abscess or any other complication; so treat it until it heals properly; and check the leg every day to ensure no further complications arise.
de la brisure des os dou piet	From bone fracture due to impact
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle it does not come from fracture, but whenever there is a fracture and with bones, only stiffness occurs in various positions, and there is no force involved.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if it happens to the bones in the foot fracture, and you see these bones stack on top of each other, place such foot mallets under the ground, like it wanted to go, and then put your foot under his where the bones are raised, press it as much as they come back to their heels; then apply plaster and bandages over it, and place a small table underneath the belly of the foot with two handbreadths filled, then tighten it towards the ankle, then wrap you in blankets around, and other things you need.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days have passed, you should release the bandage because you will find that the bones are even, whether broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if any of the fingers are broken, then restore them, just as we said about the fingers of the hand; then put a splint on each broken finger according to its length, and make it slightly wider than that, then place under the splint the board I mentioned, and hold it in place; and if there are two or three or more, break them, then put one splint on each finger according to its size, wrapped in a single linen bandage, and hold the board under the point. And being at the front of the table above the belly of the patient, so that you can apply it well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And you should not forget the other things that I said about other injuries, as we have said; and treat each incident according to how it should be done.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	regarding the breaking of the bone in the hand
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bone of nature breaks in a woman, if you make her stay enlarged, then incline her to the part of her back, and support her from behind; then fill the gap made by nature with cotton, and place it as large as needed; then stand up the woman and lift the back gradually, and then jump out the cotton until it reaches the entrance of nature, and bring the bone along with you; and when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and once she has urinated, return her to this process, doing so for seven days or more: the break will be healed. If you see fit, take a bladder from a goat, tie it at the tip of a stick, and blow the bladder inside until nature takes back the break; then fill with cotton and leave it like that for some days, until everything is fine.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	And when the bone of the wrist is broken, or in a woman if it is restored like we have said about the hip bone; and these nearby breaks are not hidden by him who devotes his study and use to them, and heed my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	For the breaking signifies in many positions the right path of restoration: so understand it then.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the case of a broken penis, take an oyster shell and fill it with the penis; then wrap it tightly with bandages, and leave it for three days or somewhat longer; it will heal quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	Of breaking with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for the one who has a break with a wound, even if it is large, such as the bone of the leg or shoulder or similar, that they are now treated with bleeding, so that the bleedings we have mentioned bear witness.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is healed, you should reapply vitriol, or if you don't have anything else, then restart the process of healing at the same time or on that day, or in case there are no pus discharges.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if there are no pus discharges, let the healing continue up to the next day, until the pus is reduced. And don't touch it on the third or fourth day either, for you would be causing harmful accidents.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if you see bone broken out on the cheekbone exposed surface, it is necessary to place it gently with your hands, in a small extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extensions are not suitable to place evenly with your hands, you should use this iron tool that is made of metal, which has seven inches or six inches in length, and its width suits the size of the wound; for this, it's necessary for the molder to take three or four pieces, according to what they need for each treatment of broken bones; and make sure it's round but a bit thick so that it doesn't bend when you compress it on your limb during work, and be sharp in front and large at the middle forward part like this:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And called 'palanchon' because it is necessary that the crooked shoulder be placed on top of the bone tip. And it must be beaten once and only until it heals, making sure they are even against each other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the break is subtle and the instruments cannot well grasp the bone, it is necessary that you hold onto the tip of the bone until the instruments have the ability to do so.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot return the bone back as we said before, if you have an instrument suitable for this purpose or like a scalpel or a surgeon's knife at your power; then cut that which is stuck in the hard part of the bone and small scales.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is returned, and after the patient feels great pain, understand that it has not been placed in its natural position.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	Do as much as it fits in its place, then coat the wound with a black and clean liniment of wine; and if it's external; don't put any ointment or other thing that could cause oiliness on the wound, to prevent the development of decay and corruption; then give these treatments once you have restored the bone, and leave the wound exposed, cover the surrounding area entirely according to the size of the wound, and take great care not to restrict the wound with pressure; many times this mistake has been made, causing harm or corrosion in the patient; and make sure that the compresses are softer and less abrasive than other pressures.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that possibly harmful incidents have occurred inside it, as we said earlier, and you find pain in your arm, then it does not suit to place plasters; but instead envelop around, in the place of plasters, hard cloths, and bind them.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one or two days that the wound is healing and that the swelling has gone down, remove whatever treatment you have applied with vinegar, and apply a healing ointment, such as the fourfold medicine and similar.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And you must dislocate the limb twice a day, in the morning and at vespers, until it is healed and sound.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And the limb should be positioned so that the bone comes into contact with a slight ease.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if the days continue and it can't heal properly at its place, be aware that there are small bone fragments causing this issue, so it is necessary for you to work on the wound with tension, and remove all these broken parts that cause pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula appears in the arm or any other form of decay, it is necessary that you treat it according to what he explains in the chapter before this one.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And when the bone is broken and open in the body, as for example in the elbow or shoulder or other parts of large bones, if you do not treat it, because many die from this, but leave it until it heals; by chance, it will drain through it after twenty or thirty days, then treat the wound if possible; and if you cannot, let it be.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	The burns that come from sweat
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	The burns often come after the healing of the wound, especially when it's close to the joint. There is much to observe in the figure of the limb; and by chance, one cannot do the natural actions with the limbs.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Take caution therefore when it comes to these fresh burns: if you administer any of the restrictive medicines such as aloes, frankincense, myrrh, sycamore bark, carob, and similar others, do so either individually or in combination with each other. Mix them with stoptive wine or enough egg or oil; then apply them in poultices on the affected area and hold them tightly but don't remove them daily. Remove it only when the nodules are gone. Or you can place it under a well-made piece of plaster because the property of plaster is such that it clears all swellings above limbs. If the nodulation turns into hardness like stone, requiring extraction, do so after applying a dressing until healed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	of the member which becomes weak after the siege
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the breaking of the bone is restored, and after that the limbs are weak and subtle, this happens for many reasons: due to which it was bound too tight, and was not bound as it should have been; or because there were too many bindings, and could not reach the member's necessities; or due to excessive bleeding; or due to excess movements, not in its time; or due to having little blood in his body, if it is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the treatment involves making the patient eat their medicine and make their body tender until the pus multiplies within them; then they provide baths and give them joy and rest. Then apply wax to the limb so that the wax attracts to the large pus, and rinse it frequently with warm water until the pus corresponds to the limb. And restore its natural figure.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	The limb is bent after the injury.
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limb is twisted after restoration, and if the bone was broken apart, then the form of the member becomes ugly. Nonetheless, it does not lose its natural function: nor should one believe those who say that we must break the whole limb anew; many people have done this in our land; these operations are criticized, and lead to great harms, even death. Still, if the fractures and injuries are fresh, then they should be soothed with hot water or medicines that soften tissues such as leaves of vismalve, roots, and mallow flowers and similar things. Then apply a moistening plaster made in this way; or take greased figs, grind them with corn meal, and other remedies that diminish the heat, and make a moistening plaster from these substances. Alternatively, you may use well-prepared yarrow, mix it with fat from geese liver or oil of sesame, and apply this as a plaster. Or take greasy figs, grind them with bran, and similar medicines to decrease the heat, and prepare a moistening plaster using these ingredients.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And never does a node fuse by rubbing continuously and for a long time with wet hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And permit some movement to the limb each hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the twisting is old and hardened, like bone, and requires being treated with metal tools, then up to the bone if it's necessary, you should make incisions delicately; and consider and apply study in the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	This begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing great pain and injury to the patient.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation happens to none, if it fits now to bring back without hesitation.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	And if you delay, they swell the limbs, and by chance put them under pressure at their joints; it is not appropriate to move them at the hour when they are swollen: many times it brings pus and other pains. Nonetheless, whenever this happens, make a physician treat the patient, then let him alone until all the abscesses have subsided; then immerse the limb in hot water and oil, then gently reset it, and cure each member as the treatment comes to their joints.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have arranged the chapters on shoulder dislocations up to this point.
des mandibules	of the jaw
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	It happens that the jaws are dislocated downward, and the dislocations of both jaws occur in two ways: either they are somewhat ossified at their locations, and slightly softened; or they are completely dislocated, hanging towards the feet, causing saliva from the mouth to spill out, unable to hold it, nor close his mouth, and wrap his tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it can return through various dispositions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And when it is complete and done, you must quickly reset it without delay; and do it in such a way that the servants cut the head of the patient, and place one of their hands' pocket behind the joint of the jaw within the mouth, if the dislocation involves two parts; and the other hand should be extended outward to make them equal. And instruct the patient to soften his jaws and move them in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And the fingers should remain evenly placed, until they reattach in its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if they return to be sore, just as when the two jaws are together, should you use hot water and oil, so long as lightly moving them; do not overly force their movement back in place, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And when they are brought evenly, and the mouth of the patient closes well with mellowing, one puts on wet cloths in a wad made from rosemary oil and beeswax; then binds it lightly with moist string. And the patient sleeps on their back, and their head is between two pillows, so as not to move neither to the right nor to the left, nor strain at all, but only consume light food until the pains cease and the jaws are healed. And then eat what they desire lightly, without working to open the mouth for eating or drinking, until the jaw is well healed and restored.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two mandibles cannot be correctly placed within an hour and are not turning back to their original position, it leads to fevers and habitual swelling, and sometimes stomach upset, and occasionally vomiting of pure liquid.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	And when you see this, then know that it is a loss; and many times, it has caused death in eight days for the one who experienced it.
de la forcelle	from the forcible act or action
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The forces cannot relieve from within the middle of the ribcage and down to the backside; it is dislocated only once outward, and one feels this well indeed.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And the restoration is such that the patient lies still on their back, and extends their arms; then presses them into your palm shape, and they will return. Then place it on the plaster, and bind it, and tighten it; and the shoulder which is opposite to the blade cannot dislocate; if not, and should it dislocate once, you must reset it to its proper place as we have said; then place it back onto the plaster and bandage, and tighten it, and command the patient to rest until they are healed. And thus similarly is returned the shoulder of the spine when it has been relieved from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	Of the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	You should know that an shoulder dislocation occurs in three ways: The first way is when it dislocates towards the part of the scapula away from the pit; and the second way is at the part below the heel. And by chance dislocates above, this happens rarely; and doesn't dislocate behind for the shoulder, nor inside for nerves; and multiple times dislocates downwards near the scapula, even to those with little flesh, because in these it happens swiftly; for those who have enough flesh, it jumps outwards and returns towards the pit.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And by chance happens to some men a blow or fracture, and inflames the shoulder with an abscess, and fears that it is dislocated because of this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	Therefore, you must experiment on it as long as you are certain; then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And you will recognize the dislocations when it moves towards the scapula, and there is differentiation between the diseased shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find various manifestations between them; and you will find a hollow at the head of the shoulder, and along the scapula to the elbow, as if it were an eye. And the patient cannot move their hand near their nose, nor make any movements; and similarly, if it is dislocated above, it's not completely hidden, because you clearly find it at the elbow; and this way of dislocation cannot be cured until it's new, or when there's a baby involved.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	The method is for the ministers to lift their hand from the malady above, then place their hands on the shoulder blade, and lift the joint up strongly towards its natural position; and the ministers lift their hand, extend it upwards, then put it beneath; if it comes quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	And if it doesn't come as we have said after a few days, then the patient should be dipped in hot water; and apply soothing warmth and relief, such as decoction of rosemary and fenugreek and milk thistle in water, and apply this remedy; then bandage the patient's back, put wool next to his armpit, it shouldn't be too soft or too hard, then place your fingers on his heel under the wool, and lift up the shoulder joint with a strong upward movement, and pull your hand from under the ailment; and another assistant should cut the head of the ailment, so that it doesn't move downwards; this shoulder returns immediately now, and if you see that it is being reset in this manner: then make sure there's someone larger than the patient standing nearby facing his back, and push up his shoulder under the aid with one hand, lift the aid up so that the patient hangs down at an angle, and another assistant pulls your hand towards the belly from under the ailment.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the limbs are too light, he carries nothing weighing with him, and the dislocation returns immediately.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And to reset it, you can do it in another way too: and insert the long stick into the ground, so that the limb is like a piston, and neither too large nor too thick; then place it under the limb, but make sure there's something soft underneath, and let your limbs stay long on the stick. Then stretch out your hand from the other side in this formation, and the joint will return to its place quickly; and if it doesn't return through all these things that we have said, then do this cure: take a stick of two arms wide and three feet long, which has a shape that allows its head to enter down the groove right inside the socket, according to this form.
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	Then tie the stick where the stick is covered with cloth underneath, so that the stick does not bruise the wound, then place it on the base under the wound; and extend your arm along the stick from its length, and tie the support on the stick, and the arm at the hand's head, then place the arm on one of a pitchfork's prongs of as wide width, and keep your hands down, and leave the body hanging from another side: the joint will return now.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is like this, in any manner, if you need to place an equal wool stick on the shoulder socket, then put the plaster covered with powdered mill grinding on top of this, along with incense and egg yolk butter spread all over the shoulder and around it. Then hold the addition from under the shoulder joint, tie the link onto the plaster, wrap your hands around its neck, and let the hands remain like this.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	It is necessary that he chew little at first, until the limbs are strengthened, for it will heal more quickly; and then chew more after five days or seven, and move it; and if it is firm and not made soft, it is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the connection has been forced away by moisture or for another reason, then you must apply three cauteries to it, as was described in the previous chapter on cauterization.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this, and it dislocates after seven days, and the joint does not stay, and cannot lift your arm up, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is cut, stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never be placed in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation that is near the buttocks, and breasts, or behind, if it is caused by pushing, stretching of hands, and administration in another place; and treat as long as it's clean.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after the healing comes swelling in the limb, and prolonged movements, then use hot baths many times, until that swelling is relieved, and it returns to its first natural state.
de la dislocation dou coute	From the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	Know that the shoulder joint is dislocated by points and comes back by points; it has been dislocated from all sides, even in front and behind; such a dislocation cannot be fully restored because one can clearly see and feel its extent; and it's dislocated according to every figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the bad side with the healthy one, if you can see them clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the connection is bumpy, and prevents the arm from bending or touching the shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	It is necessary to reset it this way that the abscess is opened and heals, for if it were left closed after incision, it would be painful to try and reposition; and by chance it cannot be fully returned in all ways, even when it's behind; it is worse than other dislocations, and causes more pain, and by chance death comes from it.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And this restoration is as follows: when you can bring it back to its position, extend his/her hand with both of your hands; and the arms should be spread out, and the hands guided towards the elbow from front to back, backwards and forwards, and push the joint towards its socket or at the base of the palm until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if there's a dislocation in front, it returns when they double their hand onto the other hand, and push with the blade at the base of the palm where the dislocation occurs.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And if it doesn't return to its place, you must apply strong extension; and when you do this, extend the arm with both hands, then rub it with both hands, so that it does not move during extension. Then bend the arm in every direction, having wrapped a double length of cloth around it from top to bottom; and when you are trying to join the joint back together with your hand, apply oil to help soften the joint, then force the joint into place until it begins to heal; and once it is in place, cover it with dry plaster mixed with egg yolk, then gently bind it again, keeping the arm at the neck level of the shoulder, and leave it for a few days, then remove the binding.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firmly in its place, then release the ligament and leave it as is; and if you see that the joint is not properly fixed, reapply the plaster and the ligament, leaving it like this for a few more days until it's firmly set; then release it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And if they feel sore after setting the joint back in place and it moves again, bathe them well and rub vigorously, pressing until they are relieved. Or you can put a layer of fatty sheep's wool on the joint, leaving it for one day and one night, then apply the ointment, and allow them to bathe; and when they sweat, gently rub the joint, then replace the wool, and let them bathe again; and do this two or three times until they are healed. If possible, place a moist calf's stomach, heated with butter, on top of the joint; if it returns to its rightful position.
li dislocation de la main	The dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The hand joint is dislocated, and the return is lighter than with other joints. Whenever this happens, it is necessary to restore it quickly in the same way that it was dislocated, so that the limb swells or an abscess forms.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	And when you set it back in place, do this by placing your hand on the bed and stretching out your minister's hand, then align their palm with the appearance of the joint, pressing until they fully recover. You should observe if it is properly aligned; thus have them hold the back of their hand on a table at extension and retraction.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, you should have the patient place their hand's back on the table and position your hand at that point of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If it returns now, that's good. If not, if the application of plaster bandages to relieve abscesses stops, and then you leave them alone without restarting.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	And if they cannot bear it, and you are unable to place them in the correct position after some days, then the joint remains twisted; and as long as their hands are swollen, they cannot exert any force. Therefore, know that the nerve has been cut or the artery; should there be no other means of applying pressure with a cautery if necessary, and by chance, there is no alternative solution.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hands are in place, apply the plaster that we have mentioned, then strain and leave it for five days, then release and leave it as such.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he cannot move it well, and there is no soreness, with hot water, and rub until it becomes warm.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the fingers
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	No time should the shoulder be dislocated from its place on either side, nor at the back of the palm or stomach; then the shoulder is in position and prevents the dislocation till it recovers. Then support the head of the shoulder, and bend it towards the part where it is dislocated; and leave it for two days, and then set it equal that day; and during that time bind it, as we have said, and release the dislocation that day, and move it around, then bind it again in a moment; and do this often until it is tight, and perform it similarly if it is dislocated in the stomach of the hand, just do what you did before till it heals; and do it similarly if it is dislocated from another side.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	Doing the realignment of the ankle and back.
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the ankle or back is dislocated, or if there are multiple dislocations, without any treatment, as time hastens the disease of the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	And the signs for this are that it starts to pass its excretions in an uncontrolled way, not being able to hold them in check, and many times they soften parts of their body, either both legs or both arms or one. And many times they become two-legged, meaning they gain the ability to walk upright; this condition is called "gilbositez": for its cure you have to diagnose if the gilbositez came from childhood: if there's no cure or healing up until that point.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	And the one that comes from birth or impacts or similar things, according to old healing methods with big words, did not yield any great benefit in all cases. But I have summarized it based on my intention and formed tools in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	I state that when it comes to the umbilical cord before the belly button forms, there is no injury or health issue; similarly, when it comes straight across both sides, and one can only treat what directly hits the back, as I say; and ensure that the patient's body is stretched evenly from its back up to its left side, and that there is tension around them so they do not get hurt. Then place one hot coal in front of the head and another at the feet, and tie a string under the belly button in between these two coals; and secure it on the hips, knees, and ankles, respectively; and two attendants should know how to handle the strings, one at the head and the others at the feet, among these two coals; ensure that they are well sealed, as we have said, and let their palms rest on the back of the coal until they revive.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And if it does not return through this cure, take a three-arm table and place it in the middle of the body, and let the sick person's back be against the table edge. If the person is lying down, place their head on one end of the table where they are closest to you, then place the table halfway along their spine; place each foot under the other end of the table and press well until they come back to consciousness at their usual location; if necessary, do this procedure to the wrist which turns towards the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And if you insert two charcoal pokers at the elbow joint of one arm, and between the knees two others, with each poker having an inch of space above and below; ensure that the joints on each poker are intact, or where they bend, have them firmly in the earth so they do not move; between each pair of charcoal pokers place a single turning poker, whose handle turns towards the joint; have small charcoal pokers of one-inch length in between two turners for turning wrists; then bind the strap that is among the knees near the wrist, and another to the knees at the other wrist, so each servant turns their wrist on the entire bandage. And the masters should place the spine upright as we've said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	And when they are even, place them under desiccating plaster with plenty of eggs, then apply them, and then use an earthen tablet of three inches long, that purges the area of gilbositis and the healthy part of the spine, then bind it with a bandage, as we have said before, and care for the patient using subtle poultices until they are well; and if any change occurs in the health, it is necessary to administer softening medicines and soothing ones, along with the application that we mentioned earlier; and one piece of charcoal is administered each time, and at no time does an appearance arise in the lower part of the spine behind the back, and one must consider this as dislocation; and it is the bone that opens, so one should not have presumption: by chance it would bring death.
des dislocations de la hainche	Regarding hip dislocations,
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	Know that the joints of the hip and those of the shoulder only admit dislocations, not fractures like other joints; and the joint of the hip is dislocated according to four parts: inside and outside, in front and behind; and more inside than outside, with less dislocation forward and backward.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And the knowledge of its dislocation from within is this: when one joins the diseased leg with the healthy one, it's longer, and opens more on the diseased knee than the healthy one, and cannot make the diseased knee bend towards the fire; and it's the limbs that are swollen under by abscesses because the joint of the shoulder comes to them.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of him who approaches the fire, so this event is contrary to what came before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of him who comes to face it, so these events are well with his leg according to its completion; nonetheless, he does not double bend the knee without pain, and if you try to make him walk, he cannot do so beforehand, and retains his urine, and swells the ankle, and when he walks, he passes on his heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of him who comes to face it from behind, so he cannot spread his knee or bend double, and this leg is more twisted than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the shoulder blades are sore on the back above the hips.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The remedies for this sign of dislocation are that if it is an old dislocation and remains in its position without any treatment, then there should be no assumption about it; and it must not have the appearance of self-correction.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And in the case where the dislocation is fresh, there are four ways to perform a dislocation: if you rush and return the joint, stretch it both inside and outside, and move it to the right and left; by chance if it returns, no further treatment is needed.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And if it doesn't return in this manner, you must apply strong force and hold the leg firmly with two hands, or tie it tightly around the knee; and another person extends their hand over like this that they push their hands under their buttocks. Then, pull it up firmly on one end of a strap under the shoulder; and someone else holds the head onto the strap; and stretch them both up and down at once until the diseased part is lifted off the ground all at once, then let it stay hanging.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of extension applies to four similar situations, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is correct.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	If not, then it is necessary to apply treatment according to its appearance. When the dislocations are in the chest cavity, you need to observe the patient's healthy side and place your hand there, then tie the bandage at the base of the arm, and above the armpit, then secure the bandage towards the armpit and force; afterwards guide others to hold his arms, wrap your hand around the large side of the diseased arm, and extend it outwards forming a shape: if it returns to its place now; this method of dislocation is lighter than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	And if you cannot bind it in this way as we have said, then it is necessary that you tie the two diseased feet together with a strong bandage around the two ankles and both knees, and let the diseased leg be extended two arms longer than the others; then hang it from the head of a pole and place one's long arms above in the air. And command to one's assistants to hold onto the head of the limb, while another holds alongside with the patient, who wraps around the limb forming a circle, because the joint returns rapidly now.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And when the dislocations are at the back, if they lie with pain, as we have said in one who has gilbositis, and tightens the bandage on the diseased leg properly, and on the other side; then place two hot pokers, one on the head and the other on the feet. Then insert the poker between the thighs of the patient along their diseased form; and lay moist cloths under them to prevent any burning to the patient, then extend each attendant towards him, and have the physician set it equally with his hand to the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If she returns, that's good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, place on the table and press it in this way as we have said about gilbositis, and lie with pain on the healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is in front, it must be extended immediately with the affected leg, as I have said; and place his face towards his pain being on the side of the affected arm, then press with the other hand, and extend it downwards to the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And if a dislocation is in the back, it does not require extending the patient backwards or lifting them up from the ground. Instead, they should stay as they were when their hip was dislocated backwards, as we have explained about lying on both hips; and stay on their stomach, and extend the limbs like we said previously, and must press against the joint at the table; it is right when the patient extends their legs, and they are level. Then adjust the thighs, apply the plaster, tighten with one band so that the hip does not move; and rest for three or four days, then dislocate again, and apply plaster over it; and if you see they are level, apply pressure, as before, and let them rest for three more days; then dislocate again, and have them walk properly until the limb is reinforced.
de la dislocation dou genoil	Regarding shoulder dislocation due to joint displacement,
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The knee can be dislocated in three ways: to understand this, it is within and without, and behind; and it does not dislocate forward.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And the symptoms are that you instruct the patient to bend their leg at their knee. If they cannot touch their knee, know that it is dislocated; and for the restoration of all this, make the patient stand upright, extend their leg if they can, and place your back against their buttocks, then put their foot on yours. Then take their knee with your palms, pull it between your fingers, then bend both sides from under the knee firmly; and another helper should extend their foot as long as the knee returns to its place, and you will know that they lightly bent well their leg at the knee; and apply the plaster, have the leg burn against the knee, and keep them together tightly for three or four days, then release; do not disturb the patient's walking until their limbs are strengthened.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if there's no motion of limbs at all, apply strong extension as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is restored.
de la dislocation dou talon	Of the dislocation of the heel
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heels are never fully set and always partially dislocated, both inside and outside.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And if there are such signs that the ankle is swollen and tends to move towards the part where it is dislocated: the repositioning should be gentle, and one must gently extend its hands when it feels slightly back only.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	And when it is completely dislocated, you should have the patient sit upright and guide them with their legs out from under the ankle; then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and twice more to the left, then lift it up straight, firmly hold the foot up high; and perform this twice as we said, while lifting and pulling the foot; if it returns, that's well; if not, continue with the procedure because it will return; and if it can't return this way, make them lie down on their back on the ground, plant one leg firmly in the earth between their buttocks, bind bandages around them so they don't bruise the ankle; then shave the buttocks and have another guide lift the foot to their hands or to a line, which they tie around the neck of the foot; then extend each guide evenly, and place the bundle firmly under the buttocks for the ankle's support when you stretch it up; then hold the eyes level with the dislocation at their hands, and have another guide shave the healthy leg above the knee, and the dislocation will return quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And when it is at its point, put the plaster and bandage above, compress firmly, bind with the foot, and watch that no nerves under the ankle are pinched. Make sure not to tie too tightly; then let it be for two or three days, and if it comes loose in binding, remove it. Then release on the third day or fourth, and give rest to the patient for four days; and should he surpass this termination, it is not certain that he has not dislocated again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if abscesses are put on and they come out, it is necessary that you soothe them, as we have said elsewhere, while they are sound.
des dois	This line seems to be incomplete or improperly formatted in the provided text. In context of a medieval medical treatise, "des dois" might potentially translate to something like "of the duties" if it's part of a larger sentence discussing responsibilities or obligations related to healing and care. However, without more context or additional lines surrounding this fragment, its exact meaning is unclear. The full sentence would provide better insight into its precise content and translation.
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When both shoulders are dislocated, if they can be beautifully extended through laborious effort, it is a simple matter.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the dislocation is in no part of the back or foot, it should be made to rest on his full length or flat on a table completely straightened out, and put your foot where it opens at these joints, then press with your foot firmly until he revives; and when he is equalized, and there's nothing opening, place under the sole of his foot a table with two shoulders, then compress firmly, and let him rest for three days, then release. And make him to rest until he is sound.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	regarding injuries and dislocations together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	When injury comes with dislocation and you want to restore it, many times the patient dies: so do not be presumptuous in your treatment, if you are inexperienced with the art or have not used it for a long time, and if you lack pity and mercy, don't be rash; and at the start use things that soothe and help in abscess drainage, and leave the patient to God's care, if you do not see hope of recovery; and when you see hope, immediately reset the limb back into place, as with the draining of pus; and when the limb is back in place, give soothing and antiseptic treatments for abscesses, and treat the injury properly, using dried ointments; and if due to dislocation there's breakage and small bone fragments, you should set them, and follow what we've said about simple diseases; and beware of entering a path of fear according to what I've said, because this comes from your Creator and through knowledge for the care of yourself and your body.
Amen	Amen
