O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	You dear children, I have completed this book which is the last part of the science of medicine combined with its fulfillment, and concluded it through my presentations and by making its statements.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And in my vision it came to me that I would complete this with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, that is to say "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is conducted in our region and is lacking everywhere, so it has been lost to its science and has been reduced, and nothing remains from it except small descriptions in books by the ancients that the hands have performed.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And thus error and vanity came about, and minds are closed off, and the science is distant.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	It seems to me that I should revive this treatise together with its organization according to the path of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and will come together with the forms of the fire cautery tools and other implements for the work with the adjustment of declaration and preparation of them, as is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because there are no skilled masters found in our time, the art of medicine has been neglected.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And whoever intervenes in this matter should ascend to the science of anatomy, as Galen says, until they understand the judgment of limbs, and their shapes, connections and separations, and have knowledge of bones, nerves and muscles and the number of bones, and the arrangement and movement of veins and the static ones, and know their location.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And thus says Hippocrates that not with words but with deeds is great; and indeed in the art of manual skill.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We inform you at the beginning of this book that if someone lacks knowledge about what has been discussed, they may fall into error and deceive others; thus, I have seen many times people who interfere with this science and abandon their knowledge and experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	And I have seen a foolish surgeon who operated on a woman's neck for scrofula or a sore, and cut the arteries beneath her neck; because so much blood came out that she died in his hands.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And I have seen another surgeon who treated a stone in an elderly man's bladder, and the stone was large; he removed with it a piece of the bladder, and the patient died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I have already been called to remove it, and saw the arrangement of the wound and the size of the stone, and indeed if they had cut him he would have died.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I saw another instance where someone took care of .one duke from our land who had broken his leg, and along with the breakage was injured. And the attendants to this man filled their ignorance by forcing the break onto the injury as if it were healed already, without relieving any swelling, and allowed it to continue for one month; and I instructed them not to displace it again; and he remained like that until the leg fully swelled and the joints and ended up losing his leg.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was summoned to come to him and I quickly came to relieve the leg. And when I heard it relieved so smoothly that he felt no pain at all.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But all paths of corruption were already confirmed in the body or member, and it could not be healed; and the process of decay continued within the member until the limb was completely lost.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And there is a second type of lesion that collapses an inner part of one abscess and then inflames due to the wickedness of its ruler.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For a sore, when it is pure of melancholic humor, it is not advisable to touch it with iron if it isn't in its original place so that one can remove all that has been corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And for this reason, dear children, you need to know that the work of hands is divided into two parts: that is, where there are risks in several positions. And I will show each one of these topics in this book where they have fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	Because it is necessary that you keep this in mind, so that no one may speak ill of you. If you take up your weapons with caution and firmly hold them, use the best method such that through God's grace you come to salvation and remain healthy; leave terrifying diseases without complaint for healing; remove from yourself those who make you doubt, have faith in yourselves so that you can come from this world to glory of the other.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Galiens advises in none of his admonishments: "Do not treat any illness incorrectly that you might be called foolish by others.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have composed this treatise according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapters deal with fire cauteries and medical water cauteries, and are arranged from the head down to the bones; and on the forms of instruments, and metal tools for cautery, and everything necessary for the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapters are about cutting and piercing, as well as suction cups and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar matters; and they have their chapters arranged and the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapters are about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar matters; and they have been arranged from the head down to the bones, and specify the forms of tools.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Just as we recall our work, it is fitting that I should speak of the quality of each temperament and its harm.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I state that the qualities of assistance, and harm, are the longest word and subtlest science and the secrets answered. And many wise people spoke about this, agreeing with it; and I am satisfied with their words, for I dread its length.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that the cautery assists universally in any condition where there is matter, for there are two conditions: this means hot condition with matter, and dry condition with matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In the hot and dry condition together with matter, some planned and said that the cautery is great help; and another one said otherwise: that the cautery only helps in diseases coming from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is so hot, and should never be treated with a hot illness by heat or drying; and someone who says the opposite claims that using a cautery provides significant help to hot and dry illnesses that come within the bodies of men.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the body of the man and its moisture to the disposition of fire, you find that the body is cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this word.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it true on every occasion through experimentation.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And every way, do not interfere beyond that which has been proven, and only those who have long experienced the art of cautery know the chapter on cauteries. They understand the variety of skin types in men, and the positions and causes of their illnesses, and the occurrences and space during treatment; we fear nothing else, equally so for cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And let all parts come together and agree with the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, children, that a combined fire cautery contains secrets of treatments and offers more benefit than a fiery medicine cautery.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and comes forth only from the body that is heated, and harms no other body if it has no name.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	The hot medicines travel from one part of the body to another by separation, causing diseases due to lack of healing; and unexpectedly, a disease affects a person's health. If the fire has height and because of its goodness in substance does not do this either, unless there is excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And I have found this through experience and the length of my service and study in the art, and it is true about things. And because of this, I apologize for the length of my words, for I do not like to withhold from you the secret that is revealed by fire and the quality of the work, how it removes diseases from the body, as the philosopher explains in demonstrating; now receive this in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, child, that they determined when the cauterizations should be done, and read prayers.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cauterization is appropriate at all times, for the harms arising are minimized by the aid of the fire cautery; and likewise if the cauterizations are due to necessary pains that cannot wait for the time until greater evil befalls the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And never think, poor child, as the fools do; for a disease cured by cauterization does not recur. And they say thus: but it is not like what they think, because cauterizations are only medicine that alters the complexion and dries out the fluids that cause pain, and works better than medicine for the quickness of its effectiveness, and for the virtue of its work and authority.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And the possibility is that sickness comes only once according to the complexion of the disease and its location, as well as its virtue; and excesses are gathered in him through the consumption of foods and similar things. If cauterization isn't administered when there's little excess and moisture, especially like dense pain-causing cauterizations, then such pain doesn't recur; but this happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And no one understands why cauteries are called the last of medicine, and it's to be seen; but they do not believe that cauteries should follow medicine, rather their understanding is false, and cautery is indeed the last of medicine because when our methods of treatment in any disease fail, then we administer our cautery, and it works.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Thus clearly understood, the use of cauteries is indeed the final resort in medicine, not according to the mistaken belief of others.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The old ones said that gold cauteries are better than iron ones, and they mentioned this not just because of the quality of the gold but also due to its high substance. They stated that burns from a copper cautery do not cause rotting, although it's hard to see, I have tested this and found it true in some people; and gold cauteries are better than iron ones, as they claimed.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And still when you heat the instrument of gold, you do not perceive it until it is heated by the color of the gold, and then it cools immediately; and if you heat it too much; it goes to the fire; and thus there is enough prevention.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And because we use our iron cautery that we have prepared for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	So you have ordered this chapter on the first shoulder up to the elbow, because the sight should be easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	oil cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	The use of cauteries is for moisture and cold in the head. There are two types done due to reasons associated with an illness called 'soda', and due to many fluids that descend from the head as ears, and due to abundance of dreams, toothache, throat pain, and similarly for all diseases caused by cold such as paralysis, soda poisoning, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is that the patient's illness be cleansed by a solvent medicine altering the head. It's done in three or four times, depending on what the efficacy and heat and habituation to the malady can bear; and then the head part of the malady is washed afterwards.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then place it between your hands and put your hands under his nose. Afterwards, place the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two nostrils; and let it be where your middle fingers are touching, if it bleeds from there, heat up the cautery called 'olivare', this is its form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place your thumb in the joint's signet of ink, and move it down gradually and firmly while adjusting; then lift your hand suddenly, and check if you see the bone.1. If you don't see it, continue with the cautery until you do observe the bone as I've instructed; afterwards take one pinch of chalk, apply it smoothly inside a cloth, place in the joint, and let it stay for three days; after that put on a moist butter bandage; keep this on until the scab is removed; afterward treat the wound with the ointment known as 'tetrafarmaçon', until it heals.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And if they were to say that among the old remedies, when a wound remains open longer, more purging occurs; and for this reason it is advised to move [the patient].
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And if anyone among these says that we should let the cautery continue until part of the bone is burned, and then remove what has been burned from the bone and treat it.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And they say that one must let the cautery burn for so long, and push it so hard that you raise from the bone as wide as a thumb which women place in their needles because the fluids flow out. And should we leave the wound open for a long time; afterwards, we must clean and stitch it.
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two methods of cautery do not seem to me to be good in all respects, except for in some people where there is a passage for fear; and it seems to me that I should leave them as they are. Because the joints become weakened by continuous exposure to nature's solutions, as we testify on other limbs; and even when the joints of illness are naturally weak, my first impression of using cautery is more healing and effective for me, and with this method I work together in assembling health.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of the old pain in the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When throughout the head comes chronic pain and lasts for a long time, one must use the patient's herbs and pills which are called "cochies", and treatments of chief and ears and bandages; and if one performs the cautery as we have previously stated, it will not work.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take care that the head of the sick person is of strong nature and not too cold; therefore, apply the cautery near the cautery point as we have said above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After doing the cautery on each horn of the head up to the bone, as we have said before, do another one near where the horns meet; and make two cuts in the place where suction cups are put. And move your hand gently so that you don't touch the bone: patients feel much more pain with this kind of cautery than others, and I'll talk about it elsewhere. It should be noted that the cautery on the horns should be more delicate than that used for half the head, which is the form:
dou cautere dou chief	A cautery for a head wound commands the patient to let their hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When there is sudden pain in part of the head and the illness extends up to the eye, and the shoulder joint is cleansed with purifying medicines, and other treatments that I mentioned in the division of diseases have been done, but none provide benefit: then you should perform cauteries according to two ways, namely with medicine ague and fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The cauteries using medicine ague involve taking a spoonful of oil, and applying the bark and dressing to each part for twice an hour, focusing on the temple area where the pain is localized. You should then properly place and tightly secure the oil in this manner; keep it that way for 12 hours after which you release it by removing the garlic paste, allowing the wound to heal for two days or three.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the oil treatment, as long as it remains in a healthy state; and if you see that certain burning medicines which I have written about or those described in the eleventh treatise on burning medicines should be applied.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The iron cautery follows this manner.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cautery as it has this shape:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And call it "closed" because its tip is made in the shape of a bell with one and a half inches of curvature, and halfway through has a small appearance; and place it on the painful area, hold your hand and gently twist the iron for just a moment until half of the thickness of the skin is burned; then lift your hand to avoid burning the artery, allowing plenty of blood flow.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After placing a linen bandage, apply it to the area for three days; then replace with a moistened cotton ball in butter, and continue oil treatment until the affected area has healed. If you wish to cauterize this headache with the iron cautery across its entire point, take care not to cover the artery in this new wound which is not old.
de emigraine	As for the migraine
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When treating migraines as we have discussed in the divisions of diseases, if you do not find relief and observe that the cauteries mentioned earlier with respect to medicine and metal do not help, then it is necessary for you to heat the cautery known as "cultellare" until it becomes white; and proceed thus by holding a line halfway down the length of your hand, and keep your hand steady so that you do not cut the artery and stop just before reaching the bone; and guard against the jaw becoming stiff when eating, and ensure only the soft parts are moved without causing spasm to the patient, and be wary of bleeding from the artery if it is cut or have considerable fear even in those who are unaware and inexperienced, and who have not been trained and experienced; and leave the work halfway through; but I will tell you how to stop bleeding when an artery has been cut, and show you where this occurs in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you find that these cauteries do not help with the illness, and patients are suffering, then apply them to the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed; and if you observe this, use the cautery as we said in the chapter on the extraction of the artery, together with a cautery that has two blades; and these cauterizations are better than others and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of the pain of the ear from cold
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When pain from cold comes in the ear, and we have applied solutions of medicines and other treatments that we discussed under division, and if the pains persist, then heat this cautery called "points", as follows:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After applying the cautery throughout the affected ear, or around both the places where pain persists, remove it slightly from the root of the ear after marking its location; place ten points around each ear; treat until the area is healed.
de la torture de la bouche	of the pain in the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Torture that should be treated by a cautery is only those that move through the body fluids, as we have said in the divisions of diseases; and do not apply a cautery to symptoms that come from dryness and pustules of bodily fluids.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When treating this manifestation of internal torture that moves through bodily fluids and chief's discharges and gargling, if it doesn't respond well, then you should apply the cautery to the ear for three times: one time at the root of the ear, another slightly behind the temple, and the third in the adjustment between the two lips. And place the cautery on the healthy part where it is exposed, and apply the cautery right above the ear near the outer ear, then another time on the temple as long as a finger; let the cautery remain there until half of the ear's skin is burnt; this is the form of using the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the manifestation of cutaneous disease that we've described earlier, but it's a bit more refined. So when it comes to using surgical knives, they should be slightly larger than usual; after you've treated the area according to what I've said previously until it becomes healthy again.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When dealing with an old apoplexy and you treat it as we have said, and if the patient doesn't improve, and the sick person has fever, then make four cauterizations: two on the two corners of the head, one on the forehead, and one under the jaw which is called 'vassel' as we had mentioned before, and the last cautery on the mouth of the stomach; and treat it as we said previously.
de litargie	"De liturgie" translates to "On Liturgy" in English. This term refers to a scholarly work or treatise about the rites, ceremonies, and practices conducted by religious leaders, typically within Christian churches. The phrase is often associated with the study of ecclesiastical rituals and the organization of divine services in historical contexts.
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this illness, you should give the patient large and pill-like substances that purify the brain; after this, wash the head of the patient thoroughly, and then place the tallow plaster on the back of their head. And this is how to perform the cautery: do it in the manner I have described.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If it is healthy this way, that's good; and if not, do the following:
de la froidor dou chief	from cold near the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary to cleanse the head of the old and what we have already discussed. After calming the head with the patient, then apply the cautery around the lesion, and on each horn of it, and once behind and three on the spine near the neck; and if you need more, and the area is moistened and the patient is suffering from an ailment that has spread, then add four more cauterizations on the spine at the back. Continue until the most sensitive part becomes dry and remove your hand. Then continue with the treatment until the health improves, and use the cautery known as "olive-shaped", which we have previously mentioned.
de l’epilempsie	Concerning the epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	The epileptics should only use the fire cautery for those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary to first modify the brain with years of treatment and other cures that we have mentioned in the division when the body is large and suffering from physical medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it's a child who cannot endure it, make them gargle and masticate often with good meats; after that, he places the head in the middle, and I do .i. cautery according to what we have said before, and .i. cautery on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the body is large and suffering from pain, make them do cauterizations as I've said for those with paralysis and softening of limbs, on the spine at the back and neck, and apply olive cauteries according to the method that I've explained.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is young, do this minor fire cautery like so:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When due to melancholy the excesses or the fluids become corrupted and form thick mucus, then apply a part of this fire treatment as we have explained for those who are paralyzed.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if due to melancholy the excesses are declining towards melancholy and there is moisture in the body, then administer something for cleansing the brain as was explained previously in that section.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After removing the head of the body; afterward make one piece of linen well made, as big as a ring, place it on the head; and if the patient is comfortable with this, arrange that all parts hold it well in place; afterwards present the application, and cover it with old bee's wax butter; then heat it on fire until it can be applied without causing discomfort; afterward remove the ring from within through the head opening, and let it cool down; and do this once a week to each part of the body using another good method of governance until they are healed.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	Or if you see to cauterize them by making points all over the cautery.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	This method of cautering moistens the brain greatly; and then put on wet cotton in butter and in lard grease.
de l’awe des eulz	of the movement of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the onset comes first for the eyes through the signs I have mentioned in the division, then start and make the patient drink something purifying the head, and protect it from all moisture, and make him sweat or take baths several times fasting.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After commanding him regarding his head, and make him cauterize under the head, and make two cauterizations on each temple when the decrease of the disease is in both eyes together, or if it is in one eye; then apply all the cauterization to all veins and arteries that are around the brain, and let them be cauterized long according to the width of the temples; and guard against bleeding, and if you see too much blood coming out, stop it immediately as you have.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	And I will teach you about the extraction of arteries and incisions using the cautery method, how to apply it; and any time a cautery or sear is made between the two bones behind.
dou cors des larmes	of the tears' cheeks
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	When the tears from the eyes have been long and accustomed, and are located on the veins or under the arteries that appear outside of the head; one can see that they are cold excesses of phlegm. Therefore, I will apply the cautery method that was discussed at the beginning for descending to the eyes: .i. cauterization around the eye, and .ij. cauteries on each .ij. temples, and .ij. cauteries where one would sear between the two bones; if there is need for more, then carefully cauterize above the eyebrow with a small .i. cautery.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	due to the tears within their eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you medicate according to what we have said in the division, and it doesn't benefit, then give three spoonfuls of vinegar to the patient. After he drinks this, let him rest his head, and apply a cautery or mid-cautery olive oil; and make two cauteries with the cautery named 'claw' on the two spines, a little near the hair. And guard against the artery so as not to cover it.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the cautery which is called 'claw':
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the paper of the oil is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize it with this cautery which is called "olive".
de coi ci est li forme:	Of which the shape is:
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see that you should make two cauteries on the two hairs as long as the hairs are; and do not let your hand rest until the third part of the paper is burnt, according to the method I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	Of hair that stings the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	No instance has occurred where the hair of the eyes turns to the gums and stings the eye; in such cases, one performs cauteries according to two methods: namely by fire, or with burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so that they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they grow long and even, then command the patient to heal; after this, on the paper of the eyes draw a figure that is as such as the leaf of myrtle, and be it the start of the sign beneath the hairs. Then place wadded cotton moistened in egg white and garlic paste on the eye, then heat up the cautery which has the shape here:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After this, apply heat to the figure you have marked gradually and several times, until the skin is reddened at that spot; and the signs of healing are when you see the paper receding, and the hairs raised in the outline of the eye; then raise your hand, and leave it like this for three days. Then place moist cotton in butter until the scab is removed; after apply ointment until it is clean.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if hair and paper becomes soft after this, then begin the cautery on that same area as you did before. If all hair is removed, apply heat until the paper lifts to its natural level, evenly, and doesn't touch the eye.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The cautery of medical fire commands the patient to allow hair growth until it is long and even; then take parchment to form like the leaf of pine. Then take French soap and hot wax, one of each, and finely grind them together; mix quickly so that it does not cool down. Pour this onto the form like a pine leaf and apply it to the paper under the eyes; if the illness lasts for only one oil then you should open for one finger-width, and if in both as well; put moistened cotton near an egg over each eye; the patient's head is in your healthy hands and place your thumb on the medicine, pressing once every time the patient feels the burning sensation of the medicine, because it also feels like burning from fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When this has been done for some time, if the medicine stays on your finger.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And when the abrasion will have passed, lift up the head from awe, and reward it if you see that the paper has been lifted just as it would be by constraint of fire or through a cut; and if so, then do it well.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If not corrected, it is still corrected by the medicine on his body where the medicine has worked, until your operations are even and your eyes are in place; then put moist cotton in butter until the burnt area is covered. After that, cleanse the body of the salve which is called 'dyafenis' and other kinds, until it's clean.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if it requires that you protect well your operation through great care so that no medicine leaks into the eyes.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if the paper becomes moist afterward, and the hair touches in the eye, then restart the medicine on that side of the body which is softened by the clean paper, just as you did before; after that, cleanse until it's clean; and this is the form of the leaf of mugwort:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	Know that the eyes of people vary in size and degree, and according to this let your constraints be; and do not completely close off the right way for those who are studying this craft.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	regarding the treatment of fistulas by cauterization
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and your treatments are not benefiting, then it is necessary that you apply cautery to it according to this method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to place their head in your healthy hand; cut the ministers’ head between your hands in such a way that it doesn't move or remove its head; after this, put damp cotton inside an egg or garlic juice on the eye; afterwards heat up the cautery which is prepared: and be over the head as if it were the shape of a feather of a peacock, assemble it so that the cautery is over the head; if you see, let it be pointed from one side chief to another, and if you see, let it also be like a tent; but always remember, this which is above suits for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After pressing the fistula if it is opened, treat the putrefaction and dry it; and if it is closed, let it heal, and take out of the bowe; afterwards place a heated form on the cautery, and hold your hand with the cautery at the part below the nose above the eye, that your hand doesn't make a mess; then put the cautery in the grease of the oil, and let it be contaminated.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the beginning of the cautery up to the bone, it would be well.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If not, then restart the cautery one more time, and if you need to do so again, leave it for three days. Afterwards, place moistened cotton on butter and apply the ointment cure until it is healed. If forty days have passed and it is still not healed, then apply corrosive vinegar medicine until the bone is exposed; and follow this according to what he discusses in his chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a way of cauterizing fistulas that none of the old ones mentioned.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	Understand by fistula, and follow the method; afterwards place in the incision a thin piece of bone shaped as follows:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	And make it to the size of three inches in length; and hold your hand or the cane firmly, without moving the patient's body, so that the melted wax does not run into its natural drain; and when the wax is inside the ear, then leave the wax to do marvelous healing.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healed through the cautery which we have described, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	But if not, it is necessary to administer pertussis to the child, and bring the fistula back to the body according to what must be done in its own proper place.
des crevaices en levres	of cuts in lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Often, there occur cuts in the lips which are called 'whiskers', and also in the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cuts with what we have said about divisions, and the treatment does not benefit, then apply a small surgical instrument according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And put them quickly into those incisions until they grow as far as the skin; after that, cleanse the wound of pus while it is still sound.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess in the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess comes in the root of the throat or the lymph node, or under the tongue, or at the roots of the teeth, after causing gangrene and swelling and becoming inflamed it turns into a fistula; and you treat it as we have said in divisions, and it doesn't benefit: then it is necessary that you have one cautery according to the size of the fistula; after that, remove or plug the opening of the fistula, and keep your hand until the iron reaches the bottom of it and all the way through; and do this once or twice, after the treatment as we have said in treatments, while it is still sound. And if it can be treated like this, it's good; and if not, you should uncover the wound and remove the rotten bone, according to what you find in your manual.
dou movement des dens	movement of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicine but this does not work, then put the head of the patient in your healthy position; afterwards apply heat to the cautery which will come after this in such a way that you place one stick under the tooth; and immerse the cautery inside quickly, hold your hand so that the patient feels the warmth coming to the root of the tooth; afterwards lift your hand and continue the cautery according to your desire; afterwards fill the patient's mouth with salt water, and leave it for an hour and then rinse it out.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this way the tooth that was moving is repositioned, and the softened gums are restrained, and the moisture is purged and dried.
de la dolor des dens	from the pain of teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When tooth pain comes due to cold, or there is cold or frostbite involved, and medical treatments do not help, then it requires cauterization according to two methods: and the wax cautery and fire cautery.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Wax cautery, if that means you take butter from a cow, and at the end of a iron or spider's fork; after this, take cotton and envelop it on the tip of a tent, and cool the butter until it hardens, then place it on the painful tooth rapidly and hold until it becomes cold; do so frequently until its effects reach to the root of the tooth, and if you see wet wool and cotton in the cold butter, put it back on the hurting tooth, and heat one iron rod until the fire reaches inside the tooth's pain.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	Assemble the fire cautery if it is such that you want a piece of iron or of a cat, and make it large enough so that the flame does not reach the mouth of the patient; after heating the cautery, the shape will follow like this afterwards, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery cools down; do this often, for the pain will be alleviated that same day or the next.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it is necessary that the patient fill their mouth with good butter while waiting for this cautery to heat up, and then apply it forcefully; this is the shape of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And make a fire cautery to the extent that you desire, according to your capacity; and this is the form of the rod:
des scrophules	of the scrophula (i.e., tuberculosis or similar skin disease)
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the scrophules are due to cold fluid and moisture, and do not respond to medicine by digestion, then heat the cautery as described below for its form, and create two openings for fumes to exit on the other side of the cautery; place the hot cautery on the abscess once or twice, depending upon necessity, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess; if the abscess is small, adjust the cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it like that for three days; place moistened cotton with butter over it until the pus has been removed; after this, perform dressing and tenting treatments until healing occurs.
Li forme de la cainne:	The form of sugar:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	When moisture invades the channels of the lungs, especially when it comes from a cold constitution, then it is necessary that the body be cleared first with solutive medicines; after this, apply the cautery at the base of the throat, and make sure not to extend all the way to the throat, but rather just a little.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	After this I made another fire cautery at the joint of the neck with the shoulder tip, and let it be the type of cautery called 'clavicle' which we have a form for. And treat the area in the way we previously mentioned until it is healed.
de la toust	From the context provided earlier, this line could be translating to:
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all and any lung diseases are caused by cold moisture, and the patient does not have fever or dryness, and if it is an old disease, then do two cauterizations on their force (muscle) in their veins; and another cauterization under its tail between the two nipples. And use the cauterized parts that are called "clavile" according to the form previously mentioned.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And if you see it, make the fire cautery by pressing on all the cautery that is called 'points' from which its form is as described before in ear diseases; and let there be points up to XXX, or even more.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After treating the area as previously described, let there be three rounds of fire cauteries according to this shape:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And because these are lighter cauterizations, you do them three times in succession.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	After that, wrap the limbs on his back and sides; after that, gently lift the kidney within the bladder with your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated internally, heat the cautery which has two handles until it forms as shown here:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	And apply the cautery to the kidney until it pierces up to the ribs, and bring together the figure of the cautery with four cauterizations; and for this purpose use a cautery that has three handles, because the figures of the cauterization consist of three cauterizations; and they follow the delicacy of a tent and is the form of the cautery which has three handles:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And always join this one on this first nerve because there are seven cauteries on it.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After placing the cautery, press with force; afterwards, let the patient rest, and do not move his limbs for a long time until he is well settled.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated from above, where little happens, then make a fire cautery on the thickness of the clavicle cautery, or do some cauteries by pressing.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joint is closed, and the moisture is removed and the patient is healed.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When cold and moisture affect the stomach, and are proportional to its constitution, they multiply in him, and try various familiar remedies but gain nothing. Then it is fitting for the patient to be covered on their back, and to extend their legs and arms.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	From this on, perform three cauteries over the belly button area down to the feet using a quantity equivalent to two, for each of these cauterizations focus on the collarbone, and then two more cauterizations further down the ribs until the pattern of the cauterizations forms at three angles, with an equal space between each so they do not join together when they cause corruption; ensure the cauterization is done correctly so that it affects both halves of the chest, and arrange the figure of the cauterizations according to this form without adjustment.
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if you see to be cauterized with a large cautery in the belly according to this form; and the one who fears from this cautery, cauterize by pressing and commanding over the belly at that point according to the amount you see of it. Then cauterize throughout the whole cautery which is called 'points'.
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment we have just performed, as long as it remains clean.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	Regarding the liver pain due to cold, moisture and large wind, it must be treated by reducing its natural disposition through excesses; and the patient should follow what we have advised in divisions for liver issues. If this does not help, it's necessary that the liver is soothed on its surface. Then apply three cauterizations in accordance with this form, figure, and quantity on the liver, right under the ribs, where the gallbladder might be located; leave space of about an inch between each cauterization point. The cauterizations should cover the length of the back, and avoid pressing too much throughout the entire area; heat only half of the liver thoroughly, and ensure that the patient lies on their side, extending their legs and raising their arms; this is how it should be done:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	And if you desire it, cauterize these cautery instruments with a knife, being subtle and skillful in the art, and guard yourself that you do not burn all the area, for you would dry out the entire body; and let there be no steam until it just boils, for the areas are very subtle at that place, and know how to see.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	When it has abscessed in the liver, and you need to determine whether it is within the liver tissue or the peritoneum: if it's within the tissue, you will feel moderate pain; and if it's within the peritoneum, you'll feel intense pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	And when this treatment draws out the pus, it is necessary that the patient feels a tightness on its head; and then mark where the abscess is, and heat up the cautery which resembles a raisin, according to which you will know its shape.
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	And when using the fire cautery, let it be until the blood is ashen and comes to the knee joint, until all pus has been expelled; after that follow the treatment for wounds until they are healed; and it should not happen that anyone uses this cautery without knowledge of medicine, and because of this method these diseases have occurred no times.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	So he can strongly open [things], and still I think it's better to let him [the medical procedure] be done.
dou cautere de pleuresin	of a cautery made with plumb.
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The old ones said that we should do pleurisy-cauterizations with roots of aristologe, and here's how: take a long root of aristologe, the longest you can find, let it be dried, and make sure it's as big and as long as your fingers; then soak it in oil, place it on fire, and cauterize once between the elbow and neck, and twice small cauterizations a bit lower in the area under the beard; and once between the fifth rib and sixth, slightly behind; and once below the buttocks, and twice more across two ribs further down from the cauterization that's between the shoulders; and don't squeeze your hand at all, instead perform it openly just as when you smell.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And it was said by all the old that no man uses an iron cautery at the armpit, and they heat it up and place it between the ribs, until it reaches the abscess; and then when the pain leaves, as we have spoken about in the liver abscess.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this section is fear or when the patient dies now, or a fistula comes which cannot be cured.
de la mice	Of the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you are treating the illness of someone for which we have spoken about various treatments, and it doesn't improve, then they should try three ways of applying a cautery that are all effective.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	There is a method like this where you make three or four cauterizations, according to the length of the mouse, according to the shape of the cauterizer for the liver as we have said previously; and do not press your hand all the way down on the cauterizer, and let the patient feel some warmth from under their back; and another method of cauterization is where you heat the cauterizer with two handles, as we showed in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift up the keur which is near the mouse, or where the pain comes towards the left side, and make the elevations according to the height, according to the length of the body, and the cauterizers should be according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	After applying the two heated needles until they are pierced from the other side on the leg, and then remove the cautery tool. In this way, there will be four marks. And if you notice, completely cauterize with all three needle of the cautery tool.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the healing process when it has received corruption over an extended period, and this is as true of other treatments mentioned earlier.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	The cautery does not work for the ydopoid (or syphilitic) disease, except in the way that is called "arsenic therapy".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	When you treat it using the methods we have discussed in divisions, and your treatment does not benefit, then it is necessary for you to make four cauterizations around the anus, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the spleen, and one location under the tail; and let the cauterizations be close to the spine near the knee.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After let the cautery heated for a long time to smoke, and do not stop cleaning with the patient after the cautery treatment; and healing would hasten, and both measures would work together with God's help.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The shape of the cautery for the abdomen is the clavicle, as we have shown before; and for the back it's an olive shape, according to what was set out earlier.
de l’enfleure des piez	regarding the swelling of joints
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	When the fingers swell in someone who is hydropsic, and are full of yellow bile, it is necessary that you apply the cautery on the back of the hand between the first and second finger; and move your hand with the cautery without turning.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And don't go in too much around the wrist, otherwise it would release the yellow bile, and use the cautery as per this shape:
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After doing this on both two legs. On each leg at the tip of the knife edge; and have the cauteries along lengthwise, one in front near the knee cap and the other behind, inside the leg; and leave the cauteries to burn for a long time without curing until the wound heals; after that cure the rest of the treatments as we have said.
de la menoison	of memory
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	When the stomach discomfort is due to coldness and moisture, as long as the memory-retaining and digesting properties in the stomach and intestines are affected and cannot be cured by regular treatments; and you see the patient suffering greatly and with strong symptoms, then apply a large cautery on the stomach according to what was described earlier or the stomach cautery, around the circulating cautery; and apply four minor cauterizations inside the mouth for each subtle cautery, and two cauterizations on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see the moistors abundantly present and the patient suffering, apply the cautery to the root of the hair, and one cautery on each armpit, and two small cauteries on the stomach in front of the large one; because the treatment benefits when there is good help.
de la cure des emorroydes	regarding the treatment of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	When the hemorrhoids are or have a base, or one or more, and they are old and consist of large cold and moist corrupted humors, and if no benefit is received after treatment as previously described in sections, then apply the cautery: III on the spine of the back, that part which is entirely outside beneath the loin muscle slightly and slightly in a triangular pattern, and I application of the cautery under the belly button II inches; and if you think that the stomach is chilled and the meat does not cook, and one sees swelling of the abdomen, then apply a large cautery on the stomach as described previously, and another on the liver, and another on the spleen to all parts with the cautery; and leave the application of the cautery for as long as necessary.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treatment until it is healed.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	Of the disease called "thelul"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When treating the disease "thelul", heat up the cautery to resemble a hot iron and then place it entirely ablaze over the affected area of the "thelul"; leave your hand until the fire reaches the origin of the vein from which the pus flows; do this once or twice, and if there are multiple cases of "thelul", cauterize each one just as we have said; after the use of beneficial ointments until they are healed; and if you apply a large cautery over the affected area, it will provide more aid.
de plaie mal curee	Of a wound poorly treated
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot endure surgery or opening (of wounds), which we will describe in their proper place, then there comes a disease that cannot be cured otherwise than through cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	If no one comes fistula, and it becomes old and decays due to corrupted moisture, if you want to try at all with a subtle test, and remember that you need to know the entire test how much it is complete.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	After scraping the cautery that seems to fit, and applying it to the fistula according to how much of the test has entered, and continue with the cautery until the rotten and corrupted parts are burned away. Once, or twice, or thrice, depending on your need; and be cautious not to burn nerves which are nearby, and large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	If the fistula reaches into the bladder and the intestines, be aware of these conditions, and do not carry this out except in a healthy part. And remember it is not pernicious; after treatment until it is healed, and if the condition is serious, and the substances are lasting long periods, then you know that the condition is completely healed. And if the substances are not lasting, know that the condition is still there, and the bone has become rotten at its root; and like one of these we will say in its entirety.
de la maladie des reins	Regarding kidney disease
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When abdominal pain comes from rain and strong winds, affecting a woman's health, then it is necessary that you apply the cautery to the sides of her abdomen on both parts and at the wrist cautery we have mentioned before; and if we cauterize in the middle, there will be three lines of cauterization, which will provide more help.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is swollen and weak due to cold and moisture, causing discomfort or retention of urine, then you should apply the cauterization below on the bladder, where the hair starts from the wrist, one each side (right and left), and make sure each cauterization spans as long as a fist; and also do one cauterization below the back, or two if needed; and perform clavile cauterizations according to the form described previously.
de la marris	Of the cautery
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the liver is cold and moist, and does not allow conception at all for this reason, and the flowers are corrupted and their ends are delayed; and when they come in, one feels great pain: then it is necessary that we do three cauterizations inside the womb, as we have said or to the bladder, and two cauterizations behind the back; and may the cauterizations of the clavicle, as we have said.
de la hainche	Of the hips
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the viscous moisture descends to the socket of the hips, and because of this reason it becomes immobile in its place, and the signs are that the leg is longer than the other when measured together; and when you find the joints at their departure point on the view, it should be that you cauterize the patient's hip socket with one cauterization resembling a circle, and mark right before the buttocks inward from the socket as it turns, so that the socket be within the circle; and if you make the cauterizations like those that have been cauterized on the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the fire cautery is not present, do these three olive oil cauteries, and make sure that all of your patients receive them; and treat them as long as they are healthy.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the pain in the thigh
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes in the thigh bone, and this is due to coldness and moisture, and treatment of such illness has been discussed in division, but the cure doesn't work, and the disease is old: then it must be that you purge the body of the large bodily fluids with stinking pills or other good similar pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	After performing the cautery; and the method of doing the cautery is in two ways: that is to say, together with hot remedies, and fire cautery.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Fire cautery has several methods, among which one is like this: you apply three triangular cauterizations based on this shape, and ensure they have good depth and width, with space between each cautery the size of two coins. Olive oil should be used after each application; no center application is made in the middle part of the hip, as there are four according to this method.
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see it, cauterize with the fire cautery around the circle that we have mentioned before in the dislocation of the hip; but do so in such a way that the circle contains all the hip and all the muscles around the knee be burnt.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is how it's done in sciatica, when the pain stays in the hip and doesn't reach up to the thigh or down to the leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if it reaches up to the thigh and leg, make two cauteries there or until the patient says they're in pain due to pain, and then four cauteries above the ankle, at the left part a bit more; and use cutting cauterization methods, and burn off any excess flesh from the wound. And if the patient senses that the pain extends up to four inches below their knee joint or just before their heel bone, apply the cauterization where they feel the pain for three points or four times at the point which is referred to as 'points'.
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if the need is there, then do more; and if it appears that the pain lies between the knee towards the thigh, then cauterize with a surgical or circular cautery, and be very careful in all your cauterizations to not leave even the slightest trace of fire until you burn through the nerves and large arteries, and do not cause further harm and constriction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I have seen many who applied the cauterization on the ankle to their knee, and they kept it until the leg was entirely swollen, and even the feet, and all of the feet became infected.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After an abdominal treatment that led to death.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pains are divided between two parts, apply a cautery to each part according to this method.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And the sage instructs about the fire cautery for the hip, as follows: make the iron rod of such size that its head is as thick as a rabbit's ear, or perhaps slightly smaller, and ensure there are joints along it, with each joint positioned between them, extending from one end to the other with space equivalent to the length of a small rope; and place the joints in two rows, resembling knots, and have the iron handle well made; this is its shape:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And heat it until it is all red and smells of fat, then put it on the malady lump on the hip bone, and twist it towards the healthy side; and apply one application of cautery and let it heal for three days; then apply a poultice of butter, and leave the wound open as long as necessary; after ointment treatment until it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasim says that we use very little of this type of cautery due to the fear in his opinion, and we see few people using it; yet still, this is a good cautery method, which can be endured, and is beneficial.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	The fire cauteries in medicine consist of an instrument with joints where the edges descend into the door, made of steel or iron with a long outer surface. It should have a height of two inches and include the thickness equivalent to one coin between each joint. They should also be smooth on both sides and joined together according to this form:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After placing on the hip socket of the lying patient on his side, quickly place your hand on the hip socket; afterwards pour between the two hot circles which should be heated on a small charcoal fire, and leave for an hour or more. Allow the patient to endure heat and burn from this.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it finds a kind of mordent, as well as by fire; and when the mordents have passed, lift your hand with the tool and raise the hip from the bed gently. Leave this for three days, and apply butter until that which is blackened from scorching is extinguished; and let him stay three more days until pus has appeared; then this would be the last help after the treatment of ointments while he is healthy.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And if the pain has spread up to the thigh or even to the leg, you should make the needle prick as before according to what you did at the hip also; and this is the way of using hot needles, and I have written about it in the section on correcting medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take equal parts of salt and fresh lime, grind them together, and put them into a new jar.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	So that it has the size of a razor's point, allowing it to enter; and put immediately after that pot another well sealed pot, then place lime and salt and gently pour water over it, until there is two inches of liquid above the powders. Then thoroughly mix with your hand until you have well integrated them; leave this mixture like this so that the oil and sediment or wax come out, then take all that mixture, and pour it onto the lime and on top of the lime as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	And indeed it will be much troubled and administered in the workings of medicine and in other's cauteries For it does equal work like that of fire, and it is with other medicines too; such as properly applying to the hip bone as suggested by Thessius and honey from carnelian seeds along with soap, all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galen tells us of a treatment for someone who was cured of the pain in the hip and sciatic nerve, and greatly so, and says that no other treatment was done, and that they were healed all at once when this cure had been performed, and they bathed themselves as he instructs below.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And they instruct you to take in this manner the pure fresh and dry litharge, and crush it very finely with a little bit of fat, and apply it onto the hip and thigh and leg where the pain is felt, and bind it; and leave it for three hours until the patient no longer feels the burning sensation.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then have them bathe as long as their body is somewhat revived, and make them lie down, and the pain will leave them entirely and they will be well.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And know that no one should use such medicines as cauteries, unless after the body's discharge has taken place.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And Dioscorides states that when the sciatic vein is burned with goat's fat, if the help is little; and the cauteries should be made in such a manner.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take lanolin and mix it with old oil, and apply it to the depression that is between the first toe of the foot and the other one called the flexor.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	After taking dry goat's horn, hold it over fire until it becomes charcoal, and place it on the wool, leaving it until it stains; repeat this process again, and do not stop doing so until you think by sense that it will reach up to the waist, and the pain has ceased; this method of cautery is called "goat's horn cautery".
de la dolor dou dos	of the pain between the two backs
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether through coughing or percussion or due to too much evacuation, or due to exposure to cold substance, none of these appearances justify the use of cauterization, for it is that which comes from an infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is fitting after this that the patient should be emptied of bad pills or other such things when one performs cauterization on the back, at the place where the pain occurs, marking three lines with an incision symbol, and in each line from .v. to more cauteries according to the virtue and quantity that the body can bear; and you perform the cauterizations according to the 'points' type of cauterization method; and if you see fit, do three or four cauterizations at the intermediate 'claw' type cauterization following this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	Many times this illness befalls young children, and the signs of its beginning appear as they stand alone, pale; and you find in the last spinal bone at the back and on us the appearance that comes over the other bones.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and observe it being treated, if you must cauterize it with the fire cautery following this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	If the fire cautery befits each segment of the spine equally.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see fit, apply the fire cautery along the spine at the point where the cautery touches two or three lines, and keep the points close together.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After the cure as long as it is clean according to what we have said, and beware that you do not apply the cautery in gilbiositivity which is at the point of a nerve.
de la dolor des jointes	of the pain of joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When joint pain is caused by moist substances spreading through each limb of the body, and when pain comes in feet, which they call 'gout' properly, and when it's due to cold reasons, and treatments with medicines cannot cure it, then they are treated using cautery like this: make the mouth of the cautery at the joint of the foot, and use olive oil as follows:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if there is need that you grasp on the foot of the leg, if it receives cautery to the entire length where we claim 'point'.
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if the pains come up to the knees and other joints, when this happens many times, apply cautery on each knee three or four of these parts, across the entire olive oil; and if you need more, do so more, but don't move your hand beyond until the heat of the knee is well done.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend as far as the knees and back, then it must be administered to him with the cautery that we have described in our chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	And if the pains are in the hands, make punctures around line II of the foscile; and if there is no pain in the wrists, make punctures on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come up to elbows or shoulders, cauterize each part, and provide good guidance to the patient and take care of medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	And if you give him good guidance and cleanse the humors, he will be well helped by God.
de la routure dou syfac	from the rupture of the uterus
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When rupture occurs in the groin and the testicles descend into the belly, this is new. It is necessary that when you have them cleaned, you do not touch him until morning; and use things that allow the wind to move, so that his intestines descend from his belly. After that, make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to shave his armpit until the testicles are repaired, then pinch them with your fingers, and apply heat under the rupture onto the bone of the wrist, making sure it resembles half a circle above the stomach; then heat up the cautery as described here:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	As long as it is white and smells of scented oils.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Then remove the boils at their roots; and have your assistants mark her hand so it doesn't turn around; and work well on the thighs with the patient, and place one cloth under his head and one under his knees under his thighs, and another under his buttocks that marks his hands; then apply the cautery to each sign in your hand, and keep your hands straight until you reach the bone, and if you don't reach it the first time, do it again several times until you reach the bone; and be careful so the boil doesn't escape when you do the cautery; that you don't burn them; and so the patient doesn't suffer or any other harm.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And know that if you do not reach up to the bone with the cautery, your operations are worthless.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And it is necessary that the cautery for children be subtle according to their size, and likewise for adults, the cautery should be as large as their measure; after three days treat the wound with a butter cautery until the scab is removed; afterwards apply other ointments until it heals completely, and let the patient lie on his back for forty days so that the wound may heal well; and these instructions must be followed carefully to ensure the pus does not spill when he wishes to go to chambers.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	And after forty days, when he wishes to stand up, guide him into wearing a well-made bandage and do this for another forty days; ensure he has good rest, work lightly and guard against excessive drinking and eating, as well as overexertion in speech. And if he follows this guidance, his healing will be complete.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will say hereafter about the treatment of amputations in this chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	of the rupture of the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	And when wounds come into other bellies and are known, and you see that they do not grow any more, then apply the fire cautery repeatedly according to its quantity, and use three times as much of the common measure; follow the treatment according to what we have said; and none of the old ones said it is necessary to cauterize at the fire in three angles according to this shape:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	The first sign is the beginning of an infection and draw a line across the width above the wound, and another below it, and hold your hand so that all the hot part of the instrument touches the skin.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	However, the first cauterizations are lighter and more moist.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	from old pain in no member
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain occurs in any limb, whether from falling or being hit, and that pain lasts long, if the treatment with medicine doesn't help, then it should be cauterized using a 'pointed' cautery tool, and the cauterizations should match the length of the limb, its smallness and weakness, as well as its effectiveness and location of twists and pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If it is properly responding to the first cautery, that's good; if this doesn't work, start with another cautery on this one, because those wounds are such that they must move in proximity to their member, so you must perform the cauteries until the injuries are healed.
de meselerie	of malady
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The burns are treated only once by each cautery through great help, and similarly the disease that comes from the putrefaction of blood and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	Can't you see the cautery tool? Take care when dealing with this disease at its beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have explained in division, without spreading or lingering. If there's doubt that corruption spreads throughout the affected area, then apply two cauterizations: one at the nose towards the forehead at the end of hair, and the other on the forehead towards the back of the head; and I also let my hand rest so that each cautery reaches down to the bone, until the scabs are expelled, allowing the vapors from the thick fluids to escape. Cauterize near the mouth following what was explained before.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	And if the mix is spread everywhere; and it clearly disappears, so you should cauterize with these burners that we have said about or, one burner on the nose, and two burners on the spine of the neck, and five burners on the spine of the back, and one large one on the breastbone and another nearby, and two on the shoulders; and two each on the ribs, and two on the tendons of the feet, and one on each joint in hands and feet, and on the pits of the hands; and beware of nerves that are at the heel bone, do not burn them; and never make a burner on the bone under the elbow, and another on the bone of the stomach, and another on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And know that as I do more cautery, I give him more aid, and he benefits from it; and know that patients do not feel pain at the cautery as healthy people do, because their bodies are already completely corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is necessary that the size of the cautery be large or small according to the limbs and joints, as you will find in the ways of metal tools.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After the cure with flour and honey, or other treatments, until it is clean.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When inflammation occurs in any limb and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, but it remains dirty, then I perform cauteries on the limb according to the size and smallness of the limb; and make sure that each cautery penetrates a little into the pus from the wound; then apply ointments until it becomes clean.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And always make the cautery and at hand and on foot and back, at the end of the nerve that makes the limb move, and thus it is drained; and all the while no one should interfere unless he knows about the limbs and the exits of the moving nerves in the body.
de albaras	Of almonds
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease known as "albaras" is developing and medicines do not work, then use a cautery to cauterize, according to the size of the wound inside the anus, until the bleeding stops and its color changes. After that, treat it with a mixture of flour, lentils, rose oil, plantain leaves, and extracts from colonic and almond plants, each in one part. Mix all these together, wrap them with a cloth, let them air dry until they heal.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The treatment of a sore by cautery
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When the gangrene starts at the beginning, and you see it stop, if you treat it with a cautery that seems like a circle, all around around the gangrene.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	Yet, the wise ones advise to apply the cautery even in the middle of the gangrene; and I do not think this is good either, for fear it might lead to ulcers and corruption, which I have already avoided numerous times. And the more sensible action would be to cauterize around, with a cautery that is called 'circular', as we explained earlier in terms of other types of cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of swelling that cannot die down
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	When someone has an illness which is called 'adubelati', and it hesitates to die or due to the excess that it produces, or because of old age when sickness has taken over (that is when one is too old), and they have little blood, or due to the time; and you see it hasten towards death: then cauterize within from a few small cauteries; afterwards let them stay in this way.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	And it will hasten towards death.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it pierced all through with the fire cautery, then heat up the cautery as described here:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And place your hand in the middle of that disease which is called 'adubelati' as long as the cautery has penetrated through its center, and make them such cauteries that the patient feels to push out in such a manner that the progress of the corruption be arrested.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the cure as long as it is completely healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	The cure with fire using iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another form of illness is called 'corrodens', and it is nothing else but a gangrene of limbs, for it affects the limbs in such a manner as if the dry sticks were being burned.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	If you see this illness in the affected area that can withstand a cautery treatment with fire, then prepare small and large iron cauteries. The size should be determined according to which is necessary for the specific location or where the disease has spread. After applying the cautery all around until you remove the entire corruption, do not leave anything behind, ensuring that nothing from the affected area remains, so as to eliminate every bit of corruption.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	And leave it for three days, then apply healing herbs with oil on the treated areas as long as the scabs from the heat of the cautery are healed and all the corruption has been removed.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the treatment of ointments causing flesh.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if after three days you see that the healthy flesh does not grow, it is good; and if this does not happen, then repeat the cautery on the one that remains in place from the corrupted parts.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	And this method was once treated with an aqueous medicine instead of a fire cautery; but nevertheless, the fire cautery is a greater aid. And I have already spoken about the treatment of aqueous medicine in the section: take it as needed when you need it.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of the hairs that come to stones
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Many times, it happens that a disease starts inside the foot, which we call "closure" according to our understanding, and it is a large lump that irritates the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cauterizations for this disease do so in two ways.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	This is to know of fire cautery, and water hot cautery.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	The fire cautery works by heating it until it's glowing hot and using it similarly to a fine quill pen, made of well-cast iron that measures properly to be able to penetrate the wood from all sides, with delicate margins; after you place it completely hot on the point, twist your hand around the point as long as it reaches to the tip of the point; and leave it like this for three days until it starts causing gangrene; then make a plaster of ground wild mustard seeds mixed with honey, apply the plaster over night on the whole area, and when you pull out the point, it will be removed from its roots too.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the wound with oil until it heals properly.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	And if they are inverted below the chest and it happens many times in hands and under nails, then you need to use a hot cautery; and do this way: take an arnica stick or iron rod, or a goose feather, and place them on a nail and althelul, meaning for warts; place the stick so that its tip touches all parts of the wart, then add some hot water, hold your hand firmly, press your hand as you let the edge of the stick touch the base of the nail, and find the depth of the hot water until it reaches the base; make the patient endure the hot water's bite for an hour, then leave them like that, and all will be pulled out from its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Then do it for each one, until you remove all those that are in the chest, and then treat the ulcers which generate pus.
li cure dou trembler	The treatment for shaking
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When some shake from cold or nerves, or from the quartan fever or other ailments, it is necessary that you apply four or five cauteries on the spine of the back. One cautery between each vertebra; and one at the bottom, and one under the stomach with the olive cautery; if this does not stop the shaking, hasten their recovery from the cold illness.
des pustules puans	pus-filled boils
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	When once visible through openings on the skin, or pus-filled ulcers that come from large putrid matters.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	When they become visible, it is necessary at the beginning when one applies a cautery to each tip of the pustule: a fine reed stick from myrtle, whose point takes the fire, or from the long root of aristolochia, or on the lens-shaped cautery.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	And once they are cauterized according to this manner at the beginning when they become visible, it cannot grow any more pus ahead, but its excess is removed from which it comes, and it becomes healthy; but it should be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	When the artery has been cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many times great variations of blood flow from the artery that has been cut at the wound come to the outside or at the incision of an abscess, or in applying a cautery to the member, and similar things; it is much distressing for them to stink.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And yet, whenever this happens to none, if you quickly place your index finger on the wound of the vein and hold it tightly until the skin is relieved under your finger, and no more liquid leaks out; then heat several olive oil cauteries of various sizes as long as they are all red hot; then take one or according to the size of the wound and where the artery runs, and place the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, and keep the cautery there until the skin is completely dried.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it jumps out when you lift your finger from the vein, and the cauteries have cooled down, then quickly take another one of the cauterizers that are at the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not cease to perform this one after the other until the hair is completely grown; and beware that you do not burn the nerve which lies within, and that no other harm come upon the patient; and know that when the hair falls out of the artery, it cannot be restretched properly even if the artery is large, unless it's done by one of these four methods we've mentioned: by cautery, or extraction when it hasn't been treated yet, or by strong thread pulling, or by applying medicines that have the power to re-grow hair; and then tie and restrain in anticipation.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Who will administer the reattachment by tightly binding with cloths or placing something hot on it, or other similar things, if they do not benefit from this method.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this happens to anyone and they don't have any medicine or tools at hand, if one must put their forefinger on the wound of the vein as we've said, and stretch it out well until it's reattached above the wound and above the vein; and not move the finger but keep it moist with cold water often that is very cold until the hair is frozen, swollen and reattached. And make preparations in advance for those needing cautery and medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	This begins the second book on treatments for amputations
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have told you in the first chapter about all illness where it is necessary to apply a cauterizing heat or burning medicine, and we discussed the types of cauteries, their causes, instruments, and forms. I placed this chapter up until the knee, and I will continue through this chapter using the same approach as before for whatever seems more easily accessible.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And as I begin this chapter, it is necessary for you, dear reader, to understand that in this chapter there is greater danger and fear compared to the first chapters on cauterizations, hence extra caution is required.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and treating wounds, and extracting arrows, and making cuts into stones, and similar operations; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I urge you not to undertake folly.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For many people come to treatments.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	If they come from such people who died slightly due to the foolishness they found in their illness, and the severity of their disease; and one should have fear about these.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	And from those you understand its meaning, and says: "Wait, I am ready"; the disease is spiteful.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	It is not suitable that you consent to those who come to you in this manner, but give more consideration to your honor than to your greed. Do not act rashly but wisely about those whom you are certain of and can understand; use prediction and guidance in the treatment of your patients for their health's sake, and this will help you acquire a good reputation, glory, and lasting memory. This will assist you in gaining prestigious recognition.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Dear child, Our Lords give you good understanding and integrity, and if you wish to aspire from the holy inspiration of their hand, Amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or I have ordered this chapter to you in devising by chapters, according to what is before the chapter of cauteries, that I devised from the head up to the toes, for you find it more easily what you will need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	from the head filled with water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	Know that this disease often comes from childbirth in infants, and when the mother presses too hard on the head of the infant; and it happens without reason that sometimes it does not resolve.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this disease in adults or among all those I have observed, their deaths were hastened; and because of this, it seems to me that I must abandon the project of treating this part of the illness in parts.
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw one of these children whose shoulder was full of water, and the head swelled up each day until it could no longer bear it; and he thought so much moisture that he died, and this moisture is assembled all over the bone in the syphac, between the heart and the bone; and the wounds are thus positioned as if the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscesses are small, that you open a crack through the head a wide fissure; and it should be so long as two fingers, until the moisture flows; and see this shape of the spathile:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If there is more moisture present, and if the abscess is larger, make two cuts in a cross-shaped manner according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is all over the bone and you see that the edges of the head open on every part, and water sprays when you press it from your hand inside, and this does not subside: it is necessary to make three cuts through the head in this manner.
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, remove all moisture completely outside.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	After restraining the incisions from waxes and powders, and I place wine and oil, then leave it like this until the fifth day; then release it, treating the wound with bandages and ointments, and let the head heal equally, and afterwards have the patient eat dry meat of small moisture as long as the limb is reinforced and healthy.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another way of making an incision is to look at where the opening of the abscess is, and combine it with water; because it is never in front; it's never behind; not to the right; and never to the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Cut there where the abscess is open, and where water fills it, and make the incision according to what you can do; and be careful not to cut the artery; watch for blood flow so that the patient dies from bleeding and evacuation of moisture.
de reume	Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When it comes to any illness that is called "catarrh" on the eyes or at the anus, and this illness is old, and the cure with medicine does not help, then the last treatment is cauterization using what one cuts off the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	So then, when you can no longer see the hair, make the patient move their head; after that, rub their scalp with a rough cloth until the arteries are visible, then remove the patient's neck collar to all sides of it; then observe where the veins lie, and how both ears are after the ears, and they have recovered; then sign their ears, then treat each one with an acute spatula for two parts, until the cut reaches the bone, and this should be done by the width of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see it, pinch the clot beside the artery and above, cutting also as two inches through.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein has been cut, let the blood flow upwards continuously outwards.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not open upon feeling, it is necessary for you to measure out the space of three fingers, then pinch and press until reaching the bone; and what needs to be discharged from blood loss amounts to six ciphers, and perhaps a bit more or less depending on how the patient can bear it, as well as the reconstitution of the artery; then look at the wound: if there remains any point in line with syphilis, or if pus does not appear when probing abscesses, then tighten up the wound and bandage it, and apply ointment until it heals.
de emigrainne	This phrase appears to be incomplete or incorrectly written in Old French. There are several possible interpretations based on context, but without further information, a definitive translation cannot be provided with certainty.
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When old age comes, and severe coughing occurs, because of the moisture from tears and heats in the temples and on the ancient skin, and similar things, it is treated using methods for healing medicines, but this does not help at all. Instead, we should extract the arteries in the temples and apply a cautery treatment, as we have described.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the method of extracting them is such that the patient feels behind their temple hair, and listens to the artery which opens in the temple, for it opens well by its pulsation, and responds only in some people who are too cold; and if it does respond, you hold down the neck with some fabric pieces, then rub the area with a rough cloth, and heat up the area with hot water until the artery can be clearly seen; then take a spatula of which this is made.
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	Then lightly scrape the skin until you feel the artery, then elevate it upwards with tongs, and remove well all the sutures that are from each part; and if the artery is delicate, if you turn it at the tip of the nail, then cut out that section according to the width of two fingers.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if she isn't healed, neither escapes death from all its parts.
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And the drainage from two to three days, up until the third day; and if the artery is large, it must be tied with two loops of a strong silk thread for eight inches, so that infection does not occur before the healing of the wound, nor in the bleeding process; then remove the excess material between the two threads at that very moment. And later, should you see fit, apply cautery with an iron surgical blade up to the bone until the shoulder joints are cut. This is the completed procedure if the patient does not have fever and is of warm disposition.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For the cauterization assists in finishing off infections: because it provides more substantial help against infections.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	Or it is necessary for the extraction of arteries: that one fill the hole with old cotton and place well-made bandages on top; and when they are removed, if you apply dry medicines that produce pus and bandages until healing begins; and if there's no artery left to cut from the vein, then as soon as you see fit, cauterize with a hot iron or fill the hole with vitriol and press it with your hand so that the blood is coagulated; and if you don't have this available, put salt on the hole until the blood freezes, and remove the cold water from there when the bleeding stops, applying it as necessary; and what's easier and more suitable for extracting an artery is to cauterize the vein of this iron trenching in two parts, but make sure that each trench lasts longer due to heat.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instruments are too tight, they hold less of their heat.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it must have an inch between the two knives, and one should allow a good space, then when you intend to insert both of them, and you place the hot iron until it reaches the bone, and incise the vein in two places; and keep them distant from each other, because there is no weld with this cautery across its entirety; and this is the shape of the cautery:
des larmes	of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears from the eyes are flowing through the veins located on the back of the head, and no benefit is received from medical treatment as it is done, and you see the face of the patient turn red, and feel or hear fainting; and when they remain moist and damp so that the papers' hair falls out, and the papers become heated, and burned by the heat of the tears, then this cure requires this method.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	And they called the old "bruise healer", and when you treat the person suffering from this illness with hair on their head or forehead, then make three cuts evenly across the forehead according to its length; and let one cut resemble two coins placed in a row on top of each other going down until it reaches the bottom edge, while the others are at two places over the cheekbones and above the eyebrows. And avoid incising the arteries which are located above the cheeks. Keep your hand away from the continuity of the two jaw bones, and let each wound be about three coins in size; and have a piece of sponge and some cloth ready to wipe off blood, then use the sharp end of a tool made of two parts according to this shape:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	From the cut that is behind the temple up to the second cut; and burn off all the keratinous layer that's in between the two cuts on top of the bone, then make another incision from the middle cut up to the other second one, and then remove this pus.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	If in the first incision you insert an instrument known as 'cultellaire', it should be extremely sharp on one side and blunt on the other, not sharp, and its shape is:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And place the incision towards the fat beneath the skin and toward the bone at the knee, and make the cut as far as it can reach to the slightest crack.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And cut all the veins that descend from the head as far as the eyes until the incision remains continuous up to the one opening at the knee, and then continue the incision in the middle crack until it reaches the other opening; and then remove equal blood, express the skin for the taken blood; then place a piece of old cotton into each crack, and lay wet cloths with wine and oil and saffron over them, and ensure that pus doesn't appear; and on the third day loosen the bandage, and apply great cooling water, then apply the salve dressing with basilic oil, and other treatments for wounds until they are healed.
dou reume des eulz	And the extraction of pus
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When dealing with sudden fevers accustomed to occur, and you see the eyes strained and small, and weakening of sight, and burned papers; and hair falls out, and one sweats excessively in the face during fever, and the patient feels ague-like pains. Therefore, know from these events that those substances and that fever come only through many veins, and the cure to be given is this.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And you must instruct the patient behind their forehead, then make a large incision through the forehead, and another one quite wide near it.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And begin from the temple on the left to the temple on the right with the incision, and let the cut go until it reaches the bone; and move your hand away from the temples' nerves that move during eating. And when the bone is uncovered, bleed all the blood onto a sponge, then wipe inside both sides of the cut and place old cotton between them, along with linen. Then cover this with wet cloths soaked in wine and oil, and avoid incising. When it's removed, you should rub the bone until something starts to come out from its pores, then clean it using things that dry out, which are used for bleeding control.
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this manner: take two parts of the wheat flower and four parts of colofon, and make a plaster from them; and apply it to these wounds to encourage hair growth everywhere.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Regarding ear unclogging
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	Everything that enters the ears is one of the four things: or grains, or beast, or mine stone or similar thing such as iron; or seed, such as beans, peas; or flowing thing like water and oil and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When it comes out through the ear hole or any other way of thing that doesn't fit to the ear, and doesn't grow in the ear, place the ear under the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	If you see the stone, if there is no violet or saffron oil distillation, then proceed with extraction; and make him sneeze with consideration, and stop up his nose when the sneezing begins, and place pieces of cloth or wool in the ear; and have the ear on top.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	Many times it comes true with this cure; and if it does not come true, then proceed with the extraction using sharp tools, of which here is its form:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it jumps out with the pincers, that is good; if not, proceed with extraction using small sharp scissors. If it does not jump out through this, then make a spider's thread and pinch the end of the thread or the part of the ear very hard, and stuff it so that beeswax is between the thread and put in such a way that nothing can enter the wax with the thread; then pull it forcefully for it comes to be as we have said many times. And if it does not come out in this manner, then take glue from honey and take its waxes and put one tool that is suitable for this task into place, and put a little cotton there; then press the glue onto the stone or whatever it may be, and pull forcefully.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if she does not escape from all these things that we have said, then quickly cut the ear in such a way that pus and blood flow out, and twitching occurs; and the method of cutting is to first remove the cephalic skin and drain its blood along with the pus according to the size of its strength. Then place the patient's ear between your hands and turn the ear upwards, making a small cut at the base of the ear on the fatty part hanging down; and make the cut as wide as a crescent until you reach the bone. Then break the bone according to your ability and suck it quickly into your mouth; and continue the cure until it has healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if they are seeds and they swell up, administer evacuation; and if it cannot escape, then perform this: i.e., apply a subtle poultice according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and proceed with incision of that seed.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But do not do this when you think that the seeds are moist due to the ear's moisture, until you have made many cuts; then extract using sharp tools and suction as we said, so that the extractions go smoothly.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In the water therefore that the ear discharges, it is for the patient to perform sneezing with warm saline first and then generously wipe out the ear with old cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And may you sit over that same ear or where the water is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If it jumps up towards heaven, that's good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	And if heaven doesn't accept it, take many stones according to their lengths and gently, heat them slightly on fire; and place one or more of these stones in the patient's ear, and let it out from under foot from another side, and use another stone against the stone that is inside the ear; and do this interchangeably with stones by stones until all water comes out completely, and thus jumps out all water. And if you see, take a rush, and insert one of these stones into the ear, and place the other end of the firestone in such a way that even the hottest part of the rush is burned; then redo several more rushes until all water has come out, as we have said for stone.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the extraction of the beast, if it's of small size like a flea and similar things, treat it as we have explained in the division; but if it's of large size that can be felt, then perform an extraction with tweezers; this is the easiest thing to remove from the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of mites in the ears, when you are treating according to what we have explained in the division and using distillation methods, if the cure doesn't improve, it is necessary for you to look at the ear with the sun: if there's no opening for any mite, extract them using fine tweezers; and if there isn't an opening, take the type of cane that matches this description:
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And may it be narrow below and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	And let out the finest part of the ear according to the amount of pain it causes the patient, then form it into all the canal; do this often until all the liquid comes out.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if they do not want to come out, stuff the cotton into the canal as I have said in the stone; and if they do not protrude as we said, administer distilled fluids that the old ones have proven effective in treating worm infestations, and you will find many treatments for distilled fluids; and distill your oils and medicines in the ear using this device, which looks like this when you see it:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And be it made of silver or of lead, narrow below to a half-inch in size and wide above for distillation; and to press within the distillation use an instrument well made of lead appropriate for this task. And take one rasp and wrap cotton around its tip beforehand. Then pour your oil or juice into it, and whatever medicine you see within your canal, place it inside the ear canal. Then fill the rasp with all the cotton, press your hand gently until the oil is distilled or has reached the ear; and sense the patient's illness internally, and let the distillations boil slightly as you would when distilling in the ear; and ensure that it is not too cold, because the medicine would not be as good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Regarding ear unclogging
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born without any part missing in their ears; and the same thing happens to adults through injuries due to wounds or birth defects inside the ear. These injuries often occur unnoticed within the ear if one cannot see them; and they are not seen at any other time, and one never sees two parts come out of the hole, and one can see this well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	So for that which comes unseen from within, if one cannot see it, it involves several stages of healing, and in this situation, what you should do is place the ear under the sun; and look inside: if you can see the evident swelling, or the work has produced this pus-filled state as described:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And so and thus, cut in front of and behind it evenly all around, without hurting the ear; if there is an evident swelling or a bump from the inside or on the ear, handle it with your fine pincers, and gently pinch the area until you remove all the flesh.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the warts are completely inside the ear, take a fine, light scraping tool and heat it slightly on fire, then place it near the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	If you feel the irritation that the ears sense at their entrance, gently prick them and ensure you do not burden the nerves of the ear. Then, place a tent in the ear according to its size near the opening, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do this every day until the wound is healed, or you take a cloth tent and moisten it with pink water, and apply powdered vitriol. And if you see swelling of the ear, then you should remove the tent and replace it with another moistened tent made of rose oil and beeswax, until the swelling disappears; then treat it until it is fully recovered.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if bleeding occurs, soak an sponge and dip it in cold water, then place it on the ear, and use other treatments to stop the bleeding which are effective against distillations or similar conditions.
de la char des papieres	Of the ashes of the papers
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	It's the case that they come out in hair when they are wet and then dry, so it should be that you spread them with tongs and forceps, and take off its roots with a spatula; then place sulfur on the wet part of vinegar.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if they are not peeled, then apply the thin lenticular cautery, and after incision it will harden; and they return many times, but no part of their roots remains; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots burn up and do not reappear.
de la gresle	Of the gravel
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Many times, in the papers, come things that seem to resemble frost by their form and hardness. Because of this is this illness called "hail," it's an assembly of large moisture concentrated above and below on paper; the operations are such: be vigilant if hail moves from one side to another, and this is a simple thing to know; then make them wide, next, burn each part lightly, then grab them with tweezers, and remove them.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	If you cannot remove them without piercing the paper slightly, so as not to harm the patient; and if there's a large tear, if it has stitches, treat until it heals; and if she is small, do not apply too much force, because the ointments will heal her quickly and promote tissue growth.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the granuloma is descending inside the ear towards the upper part, invert the paper, and find the granuloma at some of the tweezers, cut it out and press from both sides; and if the paper moves away due to the incision, this does not cause any harm; and when the granuloma has been removed, pour in clean water, cure the wound until the tissues heal completely once the patient's condition is stabilized.
de la graisse des eulz	From the fat of gravel
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	Extraction is a type of fat that's trapped in sheets of paper above it and this happens more with children than adults, and causes much pain to their eyes. And the weeping comes to them in the mornings and they can't look at the sunlight because tears rush to their eyes; for this reason, they sleep on their sides right away, sleeping on them, and have their papers damp under their eyebrows which get covered by the extraction that opens in the eye.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press your hand onto it and feel the extraction between your fingers.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the way of the operation is such that the patient places their head in your healthy space; then take one linen cloth, and prepare a tent like a circle according to the amount that exirnach occupies for each part, then place it on it; press with your fingers from both sides so that the exirnach is gathered within the circle; then make a cut halfway through the moist area at the sharp point of the trench making a small slit, not larger than the wound as in the vein operation; and make the skin tight until you see the exirnach; and with multiple adjustments, exirnach comes out from the slit according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Remove then all together a piece of linen cloth between your fingers at the front, and turn your hand to the right and to the left until it is dispersed; make sure you don't stick in the slit that you reach up to the edge of the skin all the way to the eye, do not hurt.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the incision does not open at the beginning of the cut, increase it lightly just until it opens; then stretch it as we have said, then moisten with a wet cloth and water, place it on the wound, and wrap with bandages.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if there are such homes that grind salt and put it on to corrupt the moisture that has remained.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then they treat it as long as it is sane.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it comes to cutting out pus at the site, then the treatment with plasters continues until there is healing.
des poilz des papieres	The French phrase "des poilz des papieres" translates directly as "papers' hairs". However, this expression doesn't seem to fit into standard contexts in French language usage or literature. It might be a specific idiom or technical term of the time period and field (possibly paper-making), but without more context it's hard to give an exact translation.
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When hair grows in an unnatural manner on the face and body and when aging causes it, if it harms the eyes, it can lead to disease symptoms such as habitual tearing of the eyes and paper-like conditions and testicular swelling; all these are due to damage to the eyes. Treatment should be according to four methods: or by a fire cautery together with heat, or with herbal medicine as described in the section on cauteries, and this is done, or through incision and suturing, or with pins, based on what I will explain later.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	It is necessary that you place the eye's lid in its healthy position, then turn the paper of the eye with your left hand; if it flips over correctly, it's good; if not, insert a needle through one thread from both sides. And do this either under or at the edge of the paper where hair grows underneath these hairs, and pull that thread across all the paper, turning it with an awl; then cut in the area beneath the paper, below the raised hairs, down to the spatumile up until the small tear; then remove one thread, place a small cotton tent on the paper with some gauze, and draw a symbol like a bay leaf on top of the paper. It's important that the symbol be made according to how much you see the paper lifting where it's folded over.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	And if there is need to handle large quantities of paper according to how the paper becomes softened; then do it all over the area marked with two lines that you have indicated, and start from the larger cut gradually to smaller ones. And let there be one opening near the natural hair growth points during its growth, then place the ounce in one of the two corners of the cut. Then scrape everything off completely; afterwards bring together the two edges using a fine thread with one needle into a single stitch, and remove the blood, and ensure that nothing sticky is left on the stitches at both corners for as long as there are things that stick around. If you can do this properly, then do so; otherwise don't worry about it, let the stitches heal naturally until four days or five. Then treat the wound without stitches using desiccating and constricting substances, because paper hardens in response to the healing of the wound and its assembly, but stitches are vulnerable (as the old men said), and this is without fear; and there's another method: you should imprint the paper with a shape that resembles the leaf of myrtle as we have described, using three ounces cut according to the form shown here.
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	Then apply this to the smaller forces equally following the form which is shown here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	And if you do not have the strength to hold the tongs, and they are not equal, take a needle with thread instead, and put one end of the thread on each side of your nose. And place another piece of thread under the large nostril and the second piece under the small nostril, then join both threads evenly between your fingers; lift your hand evenly, lifting all the skin over which you have pierced, as we've described before, then stitch up both edges of the wound in suture, and do so until it is clean; and if pus comes out with your incision, treat it by soothing with wadding and balm ointments; and never let the paper's hair turn green: then you must use what we have advised about incisions; but the sutures on both sides are more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The treatment of canes follows this form: and you should turn the paper and cut it from within according to what I have said, then make two canes by art, and also two fine threads as long as the paper is wide except for the space where it is thin; and place two heads of each part where you hold the threads; then assemble them both finely atop what stands out from the paper of the eye, and pull the two canes from the two parts formed; and leave them like this for a few days, and the skin which has been pulled will heal and harden and thicken until it comes out by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it lags behind, if the cut has some strength, then treat it while still intact; and once the wound is healed, and when the paper is lifted, and no more hairs will grow; and this is the form of the two worms that you should make according to this figure, and with this length and width.
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	The surgical procedures are such that you must take a fine needle and insert it halfway through two thin silk threads; then join the ends of the thread finely, and let them be as long as one hand's length. Then set up another thin silk thread briefly in the chase, knotting its ends to the thread; then place the patient's head on your healthy side, and expose the procedure until noon so that all the surgical procedures are clearly visible because they are delicate and small tasks. Then push the needle fully into the base of the hair, piercing paper quickly as you pull it up from the natural hair. Then remove the hair up to the chase, and insert this hair in the chase; if there are two or three or four or more hairs, then extract them all until the hair appears completely out of the chase with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the chase has been treated and the hairs do not come out with it, then pull the chase away from its base with all the thread that you have set up, until the chase is completely out beyond the cut and visible through your vision; then pull the chase and the thread, and rest the eye for two or three days, as long as the hair hardens in place and a new flesh grows up; and if the hairs are small, then accompany one longer hair of natural horsehair, lifting it with that or leaving it to grow until it is fully grown.
de la porriture de l’oil	regarding eye infection
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	When it comes to this disease which is called "aleacrati" or the putrefaction that occurs in the eye, there are two ways: one natural and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And happens suddenly from wounds, or from surgery or by an application of a cautery, and through similar actions.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And the way of treating it in this is that you break up that seam and open the eyelids, and put linen strips inside, and keep it closed until the wound heals; and it should not be used in its treatment any things that dry out and restrict.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	For if you do this, the illness becomes worse than the first; but in the work of things that soften, like fenugreek; and the wash with water or vinegar and linseed oil cooked together, and garlic essence used in no oils, and a tent is made to cover it, and cure using this.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasures of your cure consist in being cautious not to heal it back into the shape it was before; and these remedies we've mentioned are all aimed at preventing this illness from recurring in its original form.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	The substance which comes to the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease that spreads spontaneously is truly called 'axacrati', and it is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	The accidents come from wounds and fissures and cauteries and similar things; and the cause of this disease involves veins. If you insert an awl with a double thread into the flesh, and pierce it on the left tear only up to its limit, so that the threads enter two sides of the flesh; then the flesh goes above the entire awl, and the cap is made wide at the tip.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the paper figure returns as it should according to what is necessary, that's good; if not, take a blade and put it in the seam, turn the paper, make two cuts inside the paper; and let there be two shoulder dislocations at each of the two corners of the cut you have made, and make angles so that when they are assembled, the figure is as like the figure of a letter which has not 'I griesche'; then remove that flesh according to the amount that its edges match with below it, from where the paper was held, then adjust the two missing parts in place, sew them with thread; then apply this cure for what we have said about softening medicines and ointments until they are healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the disease comes from a wound or stitch or cautery, it is necessary that you make a full incision across the hairs of the paper, and according to what was said earlier; then cut between the two edges of a tent, as I have described. And must do the work according to the shape of the illness because its form varies greatly, and the surgeons prepare various tools depending on how they can restore the shape to its natural form; and the patients themselves also need to perform actions using different instruments in accordance with what their condition requires for improvement.
dou soudement de la papiere	immediately from the paper
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this welding occurs using human hands in such a way that the paper above is bonded with the white of the oil, and cannot move or perform its natural actions, then it follows that you should pierce the corner of a shaver into the paper, lift it upwards; and stretch it across the stitches, until you reach what is behind the thin spatula that should not be too sharp nor too deep so that the patient does not suffer from the spatula being too sharp causing irritation to the eye; and make your incision, from which you remove the assembled paper gently, in such a way that the paper regrows according to its natural form; and heals all that is assembled, and do no salty water once in the eye, then rinse it with gentle water and cologne; then place between the paper and the eye a linen tent, and cover the eye with wet wool. And afterward wear for several days with a collar and other dressing until it has healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	Of the eyelash
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	Know that the eyelash can be in two ways: it is nerve-like and resembles one hard consistency, and another which isn't nerve-like but seems like a white moisture frozen, so when you touch it with iron or treat it using scissors, it won't; both of these appearances start from near the large tear duct, grow slowly little by little until they cover all the eye and all its light and movement.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the method of incision is such that the patient places their head in a healthy position, then opens the eyes; and removes the eyelashes; lift the paper with your hand, then place the nail of the eyelash using small tweezers, and place it above; then take a needle, and insert one horse hair, or cow hair, or ox hair, and one strong thread; and double the needle point slightly and insert it into the nail, and pierce through all the way with the needle, and fasten the nail with the thread and place it above, and burn along the entire length of each hair from near the inner corner up to the root where the eyelash meets the eyelid, until you reach the most delicate part and minor nerves; then leave the natural part of the eyelid so that through the incision there are no new signs of tearing as is customary; and once the nail has been placed above only, and attached with thread, in this manner it resembles what we have described:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And ensure that the cautery does not touch the fatty tissue and tear it, and that the probe is not perforated; after incision pour a little of the broiled fat into the eye, and make a collar out of stannous oxide, and leave it until tomorrow; then treat according to what needs to be done as long as they are well.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail is not nerve-bound and you cannot push the needle in, and the cuticles cannot enter it, this condition of a nail-like appearance from medicines is repeatedly treated; they develop as I have described in the division section, and if you notice that it turns red, the eye responds to the injury, take the tip of the cautery slightly sharper according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And remove the nail slightly upwards, and if you see that it does not diminish at all and the wound is pressing inwards, then apply drops from your mouth into the eye a collar made of stannous oxide and a red collar with broiled fat, and treat the eye until the next day; then restart another operation according to this same process, as long as there is nothing left of it.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If there is no opposition in the eye, such as pus-filled abscesses, then proceed to treat them. First, cleanse and manage the pus-filled abscesses until they are drained clean. Then resume work on them as before, until they are drained clean.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if there is an appearance of damage to the conjunctiva from tears in the eye causing great harm, suspend its use and cut off only part of it, not all at once, ensuring no tearing occurs; then apply red ointment to the eye which is made of litargirum.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh that comes forth on the pupil
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	Some people are born without any red flesh and cover the eyeball, retaining it under the eyelids and pushing it to the front, making it look like a candle flame; and in this case, there is that one eye such that when the eyes are opened, then the patient's head is in their full health, then he opens those eyes, and so on until that flesh has reached sizes fitting for them, and maintains its support with strength; then remove the first layer of flesh up to the edge using a razor until you reach the edge, and make sure not to injure the eye while doing this; and ensure that your incision is as shown in the work we described on nail incisions and small muscles' removal, just like it was demonstrated after this chapter's description; and when all flesh has been removed during the incision, if you apply oil of broiled grape or distill a red colander-like medicine onto an oil with an egg attached to ensure there is no pus formation; and if nothing remains and the eye is sore, and if you doubt about heat-induced pus formation, then leave the eye and treat for remedies reducing heat-induced pus formation; then return to your work until it heals completely, doing so as per this resemblance.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But still, it is necessary that you adjust the treatment of each weak oil in its natural way; and to accidental ways, in iron work. And do not thrust your hand into any of these works until you see that this limb endures that operation.
des voines des eulz	The veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	When the veins become red and cover over on the eye, and tolerate their operation on vision and weaken the eyes for several days.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	So, in the first step when you observe it, look at where the eye is, in which redness appears, and besides, there is no other disease except that one; then treat it this way: instruct the patient to position their head over your healthy part, and suspend those veins along every inch according to their skill, and let them be subtly doubled following this form:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And let them be two inches by degrees in one and a half turns according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then complete the operation by gently moving those veins, and let blood flow for another hour or until you see these veins removed from the eye; and be careful not to injure the eye with the points of the spathamills, and perform this operation at noon in front of the sun, and strive to be very meticulous in your work so that you do not damage those veins. And when you have done this, then apply a collar of green and red distillation to destroy what remains from the sebel.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you do not have the ability to deal with all this at once, then create a plaster from things that soothe the pain in the eye, and leave it for some days until the pain is relieved and the danger of infection has been assured, then restart according to this method which was mentioned previously until it's healed; and this is how the strength comes about:
de la fistule de l’oil	Of the pus of the eye
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The condition they call "arissati" fistula: when you treat it with a cautery and by applying hot medicine as I've explained previously, and if it doesn't heal, then the place where you incise on the abscess, let it be near to where it should die out, and drain all the moisture that is there, until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is exposed, and you will see decay and darkness, if you replace it with every instrument that matches its form; and it's called 'hard head', and should be made of iron about one inch wide, and should be pointed like a needle as it is in this present shape:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And place on it the piece of decayed bone, then press your hands against it slightly until you know that this corruption has been removed; and do this once, then return the site to its state after treatments with dry medicines.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	Let the veins be sewn up tightly, and if any pus emerges, and the bowel of the bone is sewn up, and remains like this for 40 days, and it does not heal nor becomes an abscessed state, and no bad incidents occur, knowing that it has healed; if this isn't so, then there's only one other attempt: to bring the fistula back to the joint at the root of the bone following this form. And then you need to expose the bone again using a tool and medicine, and when it is exposed, take out the bone according to this form, and ensure that the iron rod has three angles, and the shaft should be thin until the head where you see as shown:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then place your finger on the lower bone of the collarbone, and keep your hand away from the eye socket slightly. Then turn completely around the forest until it pierces the bone and the patient feels pain through that point; if you hold your hand on their neck; then return the position to dry medicines as I have taught you, and when the blood has appeared and hardened the limbs, let the matter go towards the neck; if a lighter thing appears to the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	from the exit of the eye
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the nostrils are fully open and there is no disturbance in the heart or loss of strength, if necessary to bind the patient's head. Then heal him, then attach suction cups or a siphon without piercing for suction, then place on the eye one made from laurel leaves and aloe and incense and sarcorrhagia, and then strain the eye, and plaster it with waxes and cloths; and the way of the cloths should be that you take cloths that are sufficiently soft, and double each one at four layers, and then place one on top of another according to the amount needed by the nostrils; then strain it from above with a hard bandage formed, and reapply the suction cups for suction without piercing; then remove the suction cups and let the eye be strained day and night, and if the bandages start to loosen, if necessary to strain more. Then remove the bandage after day and night, and if you see that the eye has healed well, it is good; but if not, continue with reapplying the plaster and cloths, the bandage, and suction cups until he heals properly.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	From the bursting of an oviductal membrane
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When disruptions come in the oviductal membrane, then opened, and comes forth with pieces like a grain of resin, and is visible; thus when you see its coloration, the organs are such that you pierce one as if you were sewing near the base of the part below up until half above. Then pierce another with two threads from this part where the oil gland is; and make them penetrate, and leave the first needle according to the arrangement; then sew this part of the membrane with the double thread and bind a portion of the oviduct internally, then strain it well, then extract the needle and place on the eye a wet piece of linen in abundance from an egg; and let it be until the threads along with the oviduct have been removed, then treat the eye with comforting substances until the wound is healed; and no time should the wound be restrained by the membrane each part of a circular bandage, until she is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the eyes have a significant appearance, then pierce them at the thin spatumile that comes by the surface of the eye, and drain out the moist albugine and let down the eyes, and enter into this immediately; then strain until they are healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	By the strength of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	This disease called "alcunnati" only involves bile that accumulates in the gallbladder, resembling descending spikes of pain but it isn't actual pain; and the way to recognize this affliction is by having the patient sit upright and straight on their seat. Then place your hands around their head from two sides, and move them until you see the bile come up above your eyes; then remove any residue, don't let it fall down again and clear out lightness, observe all visible symptoms in the patient just as they used to be; and if it doesn't descend there, know that it's pain, and when the discharge of bile isn't prepared like we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you are to place the patient between your hands, then take the delicate spatula and apply it on the corneal sheet, starting from the junction of the conjunctiva with the corneal sheet and the crown, until the eye water emerges; and once she has emerged, if you distill into the hot eye a mixture of vinegar and honey or a mixture of fenugreek boiled in water and honey, then apply further treatment until the eye is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	From the tears of the eye
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	We have the appearances of waters in division, and what needs to be pricked; if you work according to its health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	It is necessary for you to place the patient between your crossed hands outside of the light due to the sun, and have the healthy eye tightly bound; then place the paper over the eye on your left hand if the eyes are on the left side or on your right hand if the eyes are on the right side; then take with your right hand (if the eyes are on the left) the instrument called "almagda" or in your left hand (if the eyes are on the right), and put the point of this tool under the crown by the thickness of one finger through the meatus of the eye near the outer corner, then force the tool called "almagda" properly, and twist your hand until it pierces into the tear ducts, and feel that almagda comes to the empty thing; and it is necessary for the size of the way of almagda to be as full as the measure of the space which exists from the cornea to the end of the darkness; and this is the cornea of the eye; if you see bone in this paper through the transparency of the corneal sheet, then place the tool until it reaches or where the water is, then expel along a pathway after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	Let them feel it now, so they can see their disease before him and the tool in his mind.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	After resting for a while, and when the disease ascends to the second vessel, apply force with the tool. And when it's firmly in place and doesn't ascend further, gently remove it by turning your hand slightly back and forth; then put a little piece of emerald water on the eye again, and extract it from inside.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then place by the exterior the oiled or wet wool or oily rose water and plenty of egg white, then bind it with healthy oil.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	Yes, and those that belong to our time, let's use common broth with plenty of egg white.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if almagda cannot enter the eye because of its hardness, for there are some people who have very hard eyes, it is necessary that you take the tool called "alberit", which has this shape:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And puncture only the conjunctiva, and do not go too far inside, but make it subtle. Then apply the emerald water as we have said; and upon completion of the work, prepare for your patient a sleeping aid appropriate to this; let him sleep on his back in the dark; stay abstained from all movements, and consume light meats, and refrain from moving his head neither to the right nor to the left. Tie him according to his disposition until noon of that day; then release him within the same dark house, and have him tested for vision, if he can see anything, and then put the bandage back on until seven days later; it should not be done during the time of treatment or after now incision, but you should administer this, as the eye has ascended quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	Wound pus comes out, you should release the eye before the seventh day, and use the treatment for relieving abscesses; and when it has calmed down, then release the vision and place it on his face with a small gold strip to cover for a day or two, and be in that dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	And then leaves the house little by little, and converts into his clothes; know that no disciples should interfere in such a case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one came to us who was from the Iberian region and said that in his country they would take alum powder and apply it where there is inflammation, then drain out the pus but still, I have never seen anyone like this in our land nor have I read about it in ancient books; perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the signs of the forms of mercury, for those who do not know them see them; and they belong properly to ardent ones:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And these are the head of its own subtlety, and the rear at three angular aches.
de la char sor le neis	from the flesh to the nose
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	No times are born or emerge diverse josts, from which some seem like scorpions with the feet of pies; and if there are such or a jost is filled with a red color, and if there is a jost with a good color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	In this case with the jost that is scaly and not filled, you should make the patient lie between your hands facing the sun; work on his nose holes, pour honey onto those josts, and remove them. Proceed until you can support a subtle sharp stick halfway from one side to another, knowing that this jost has been entirely eaten.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if there remains no matter that we can't handle, if you open the body completely with all instruments very gently, ensuring nothing stays in place; and if it doesn't heal without forming pus or an abscess, treat the wound appropriately as needed. And if it's malign abscesses, act quickly and apply the cautery until the pus is drained out and all the flesh has healed, then wash thoroughly with water or vinegar.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	For the operation of this, and where moisture leads up to the palate, know that there is blood; and if moisture does not perforate in the way it should, know that there has been birth within the bone above, with tools unable to cut: then you must take a thread of linen somewhat thick, and tie it by hand us, and leave between each knot an allowance of space at least or less; and put the thread of the sick through their nose into their mouth so as to pull out odorously until it comes out from within their mouth; and many times children do this in schools, and it is a simple thing for anyone who wishes to perform it. Then hold the head that comes out from the nose by one hand, and the other head that comes out from the mouth with another hand, and know them one after the other according to us who are at thread.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	Perform it as long as you know that the new has corrupted that flesh, then take out the child, bleed it, apply moisture to the wound with Egyptian ointment, and place it back under the nose as before; do this for three days or more, until the ointments have corroded all remaining flesh; and then place a clove of garlic under the nose for several days until healed, if medicine needs drying is required use that too; and this is the form of the tool to purify the head, to which oils and dried medicines are distilled or mixed with vinegar:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And make it of silver or brass, resembling an open lamp, like a rod, and guide it in the same way; and if you can see it, make a closed rod, and fill the instruments to purify the head; and have two handles on the head so that when one heats oil or any liquid, you can hold them.
de la char sor le neis	from the flesh to the nose
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times a disease begins at the nose's head and is called "telul," it grows and becomes large enough to see; thus it befits that you take care of it at first, and remove all bone, then place the cautery or hot medicine under it; and if one delays caring for it until it is large, if it feels hard, changes color, has poor sensation: do not touch with iron as it contains an abscess, because when you cut once, it brings great harm to the patient; and if the abscess is due to heat touching, not just color change, and you see that it can be entirely removed, then empty the patient and perform surgery under fear, and treat the area with dried and restraining substances.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the nose has been cut and sewn
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Understand that when continuing solutions come into one of these open joints, profit is little, for in some people.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Hence it is necessary that this does not happen to anyone else; if the wound is fresh and still full of blood all over; then adjust the two lips to a stitch, then treat until healed. And when the lips are yellow on both sides from desiccation, you should cauterize all parts of their flesh until they heal, then bring together the two lips with a stitch, and tighten them up, and apply dragon's blood powder, as well as powdered frankincense; and place powders on top of each other a piece of plaster of great strength or any other welding plaster, and let it be until it discharges by itself, then treat with oil until healed.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The method of suturing is such that you join the solution: or with needles, as we have mentioned in the stomach stitch; or with thread, as I have informed you.
des apostemes des levres	from abscesses of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	Hands with warts inside the abscess area, resembling grains at times, both smaller and larger; so it must be that you remove the lips, and cut through each nodule, taking them with tweezers in each part; then use the hand after the vitriol incision, until the wound has stopped bleeding; and then lift the debris, clean the wound of dry substances until it is healed.
de la char des gencives	of the flesh of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times pus forms on the attached gum tissue, which the old would call "albulus"; it is necessary to hold this with forceps, cut at its root, and allow blood or pus to drain. Then apply vitriol to the wound, or other drying and restrictive powders; if that flesh returns after incision and repeats itself, then cut a second time, and cauterize: if it does not return after the application of the cautery; these are the forms for cutting them out.
des sordens	From the confusion
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Some times they are gathered at the top of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, and they appear ugly and rough. And some times they cause the tooth to be black and yellow with worms until the decay reaches the gum, causing the tooth to stink; it is necessary that you hold the patient's head in your hands, and have their teeth ready under yours, until there remains nothing visible; and thus create darkness, greenness, jaundice, and other colors, as long as they are completely removed. And if what is removed at the first instance is right, it's good; otherwise, start over again on the second day and third day onward, until you have everything removed; know that teeth need various tool shapes to be extracted according to how their work shows them, because the scraper used for extracting teeth from between others has different shapes than that used for teeth outside of gaps. And these shapes and others must accompany you in your preparations.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is necessary when you treat the tooth due to its pain that you continue to extract as long as you can, for this should not be done lightly; for it's a very fine substance up until then so one should not have any excuse for quick extraction.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Therefore, when the patient is forced to pull out their illness, it is necessary that you are certain about which tooth ails.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Many times the pain will visit the patient, and you should be careful whether it is tooth Saint or not, and pull out the good tooth; but even so, do not leave any pain due to this, until the bad tooth has been removed. We have already wanted to do this for these doctors; and when you are certain about which tooth ails, then you must burn around the tooth right up to a depth of one millimeter to prevent gum damage from all sides; then move your hands or with your fine forceps at first try and try again until they are well loosened, then firmly hold the forceps in place. And let the head of the illness lie between your knees as Saint, and keep your hands steady so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After removing the right tooth without breaking it, if it does not fall out spontaneously, take none of these instruments and insert them into each part lightly, and move it in exactly the way you did initially.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	And if the tooth is punctured and torn, it's necessary that you fill it with cloths where the injuries are. And if you extract it gently with forceps, make sure not to break it during extraction; and it must be done very carefully under the gum line to remove the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And always ensure you don't break it, and leave a part, and warn the patient of potentially greater pains from the root's mischief than the first.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And remember not to act as ignorant surgeons do, who break the tooth once due to haste and bravado, without considering our advice. They instead bring forth pain from this major disease caused by the roots that remain or by breaking the tooth itself, which we have often seen; when the tooth is pulled out, wash it with wine or vinegar and salt; if bleeding occurs, as often happens, apply vinegar to it; and should that not work, cauterize.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The shapes of the instruments, to which you first speak to set teeth, should have long points and thick handles, not doubling when you pull the tooth; these are the shapes:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And they should have thick members so they do not bend when pulling, and they should be made of well-made iron, and they should be toothed to hold things in place.
de la racine des dens	from the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	When the root remains after bleeding, it is necessary to place moistened cotton with butter on the site for a day or two.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	As long as the legs are soft, and tighten the pliers called "algefi", making the patient's leg seem like a properly cared for bird; they should be done in such a way as to resemble a file, and that is their form.
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if they do not want to come out with all these pincers, it is necessary that you expose the entire root of the object, and place the tool known as 'althali', which is called palainche, as described here:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And let it be strong and large so that it doesn't break at all, and if the root jumps out from this, it's good; if not, use all your tools, as their shapes are shown below:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if assistance is taken with this tool that has two points, which is depicted here:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and there are other tools in front according to the order of the teeth, and this tool that seems like large pincers, which is illustrated here:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And make sure this tool cannot be broken, and know that few tools made from bone exist; and also other tools, which are not commonly listed; and the skilled surgeons find their own instrument through themselves, according to what their work and the illness show them, for there are parts of diseases where old instructions do not teach a tool because of the variety among these and if it breaks part of the cartilage or from another bone, or if it rots, when they seek for the tools that suit him, that I have told you about, and help through gestures, as this is their form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And be them large and well-fitting so they cannot escape but can hold and remove; then return to the arm with medicines suitable for this, and if there is decay in the bone, and it's small, take all this tool and do it:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the teeth appear not according to their natural form, and the shape is ugly, and especially in virgins, it must be known if the tooth was born after this tooth, and it's not straight on him, and you can neither polish nor file: then take out; and if it's alongside with this tooth, take this tool which has this form, and resembles that of two small beaks, and should be sharp in its whole length.
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the tooth is inserted slowly into one's hand for the hardness of its root, and because you don't move the others, and if it appears that one could shave it off, then you shave it with a single blade in the manner depicted:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	And it is also like the needle file used for nails; and in filing the tooth slowly into one's hand lightly, so that you don't move it until it breaks; then smooth out at the end with a final polishing tool, and if it's too sharp it irritates the tongue, then it is necessary to file off the roughness until it becomes even, so as not to irritate the tongue or affect speech.
quant li dent lochent	when the tooth rots
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	When the tooth in front of the socket opens, or by percussion or impact, and if the patient cannot press against what he is eating that he does not defecate, and you have cleaned them with medicine-restrictors; it is useless. If they need to be restricted by an golden thread, because silver threads turn green and decay, but gold never changes; choose threads of appropriate size neither too thick nor too thin, according to the space between the teeth; and if you see bleeding at the other tooth, take the thread and twist both sides between two healthy teeth, then place the ailing tooth between the diseased teeth, if there is one or more, until you see clear up to the other healthy tooth; then continue covering until reaching the part where you have been restricted, and withdraw your hand skillfully and carefully, so that it does not move at all; and bind your knot at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	Then grasp the teeth with a thread on some pliers, and unite them, and place them between the healthy tooth, and set it so that it does not irritate the tongue; and then leave it thus constrained as much as it can last, if it comes loose, or if the threads break, if you replace them with another one; if lasts and serves thus throughout its time, and this is the arrangement of teeth and the position of the two healthy teeth and the two lower ones, just as you see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth falls out, if you put it back in its place step by step, as we have said; and don't interfere with anything that isn't gentle and bears it. And make no form of a bone tooth of a calf, and put it where the defect is and secure it as we have said, and remains and serves for so long.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	to cover the wound of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	No time does a thread come from under the tongue or nature, that we are born thus; or by accident of healed wound; and the operations are such that you work in the mouth with the aid, and has its head on your healthy side, and lifts up the tongue; then cut this nervous line as wide as necessary until the tongue is displaced from its place, and if there's stiffness or swelling, it's due to sudden injury, if you bend the uncinate and cut the larger one; and keep in mind that the wound should not be too deep by mistake, for the artery is under it; and when you have finished, then lift up until it becomes pinkish and moistened, or cool water, then place a linen cloth on the tongue; and fumigate with the herbs each night, so that the wounds do not adhere.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	And if blood loss occurs, place the vitriol rod in his hand; and if it doesn't hurt him, apply slow-cooking fire to the cautery, which is good for this; then treat him with other remedies until he regains sanity.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it has turned to red or black or hard, and the patient doesn't feel it, do not touch it as it's gangrene; and if there's a decline towards lung disease, and there is moisture, then use the hook and drain with a subtle puncture from both sides, and then release it on both sides; and if pus won't drain in your body part, then pour vinegar over it until it stops bleeding, then return to your procedure while you're applying all the force; and once you're done, lift it using cold water or saline solution, then treat with other methods until it heals.
des apostemes de la gorge	removal of abscesses from the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	No matter how often it occurs within the throat cavities which are called 'godath', and they are properly known as the second pair of amonds. And when you treat them, just like we have mentioned in division, and if they do not regain sanity, be careful: If they are hard lumps with a small point and a reddish color, then don't touch them with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if they are red and the root is large, do not touch them with iron either, for fear of causing blood flow; but leave them until they heal, then you will remove them when they burst on their own or by their own force; and if they have a white coloration and the root is thin, prepare your tool for removal but first check that the abscess has drained and calmed down.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Therefore make the patient sit in front of the sun, and their hands should be on their stomach, and have them open their mouth and grasp the surgeon's fingers between their hands, pressing the tongue down towards all the instrument, which is this formation; and it should be made from fine silver or subtle tin as sharp as knives.
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	Can't you press the tongue with all this tool, and see the pus? If so, take the onion and insert it into the almond shape, then pull it upwards as much as possible; remove nothing from the threads with that, then pull them away with the tool like this, seeming to be some strength. And both ways the head are curved, one place over another, and very sharp, and is made of either iron or tin.
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this tool now, then use tweezers like these.
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	And make incisions on both sides and the other side's name; and when you have performed one of the amandres, perform the other according to the same manner, and after the incision gargle the patient with hot water that is also cool or soothing, and with cold water, until bleeding occurs. Then gargle with hot water, or crusts made from cooked pomegranate peels, or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the throat is completely healed; then finish the treatment when it becomes well again. And do not let any other abscesses develop in the throat besides the two amandres, if you do them like so, equally with the two amandres.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And I treated a woman for an internal abscess that was located within her throat, which is what we call the small abscess; and had blocked off almost all of the throat well, so much that the woman could not breathe through the obstructed passage and thus could neither eat nor drink, and died if she continued in such condition for a day or two.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess had risen so high that it had been necessary to place two ribs through each nostril from the nose.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	I then hurriedly performed the operation, first inserting an incision into one side, then removing it along with a large portion of flesh. Then I made another cut in the other cheek near the nose and pulled out some tissue; afterwards, I inserted the incision into the abscesses, took away a part of them, and only let out a little blood from them. And thus they were opened up, freeing the woman's throat, and she began drinking water and then wine immediately thereafter without ceasing. I continued to cut through these abscesses over a long time; the abscesses grew back almost instantly, filling the space that had been emptied only until it was quite large again. Then I stitched her up and cauterized inside her throat: so she stopped growing there. And then I left those parts, God alone knows what became of them afterwards.
de l’uve	from the eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	When the oviduct descends to the uterus, and it is swollen and elongated, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is large and round, it is called "ovarium".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	When it is treated as we have explained in the division, and the cure doesn't help at all, and you see that the incision has healed and the pus is no longer there, but the wound is still subtle, then it's necessary to close it; and for the one that is round, compacted, not elongated; and if it is blood-stained or colored yellowish or black, then it's necessary to avoid making an incision.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger for the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	So, when you see it, according to the manner that I have explained regarding its size and length, you should have the patient sit in front of the sun, and press their tongue against the tool as we described earlier. Then insert the needle into the uterus, and move it around inside, then close it with one of the two tools I mentioned for cutting the two glands.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And it must be that you do not apply force beyond the natural limit; for if you apply more than this, you hurt the voice and speech. And after incision, use what we have said about incision on the two almonds, and treat until she is healed.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient is afraid of being burned, it must be that you use something to prevent burning when applying the cautery.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the way to apply the cautery is with an intense heat.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And let the patient focus on your health, then press their tongue against the tool we mentioned in the chapter about cautery, and mix it with very sharp vinegar, so that it is neither too thick nor too clear; and use the force of this instrument, as shown below:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let my head have hair where I put the medicine, like movements of a spoon, and place the instrument completely with the medicine on the eye; and make sure the disease stays stationary on its side, so that saliva and the sputum flow from their mouth to the inside of the medicine but does not go down the throat or into the ear; then hold your hand over the medicine and press it onto the eye for half an hour's worth, until you see that it dries and the effects of the medicine are calm; and if you see this, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, moisten the cotton with the medicine, place the instrument entirely on the cotton in the wick, until the cotton burns on the eye; and do this repeatedly, until the cautery is perfect, then leave it to dry, and then after four or five days. And if you need to start the medicine cautery again, then do so, and after that, clean around the eye with cotton dipped in butter, and clean off any place around where there was medicine; and rinse with cold water, and gargle until it is healed.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This treatment is safer than incision or using the cautery; if it is treated with fumigation in this manner, take valerian and sage and oregano and rue and chamomile and plantain and similar herbs, and gather all of them or any of them into a single pot, and place it inside, and bring it to a boil; and ensure the pot is well sealed with strong earth, and in the middle of the pot have one tool like hair according to this manner:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	And whether it be silver or arsenic, and let either of the shoulder bones rest in the mouth against the side until the vapor rises to the eye through the nose, while the eye is dead; after this often repeat, until the eye dries out, and make sure you do not perform this at the beginning of the appearance of pus-filled abscesses; for many things happen here; and do not use this method when the pus-filled abscesses are declining.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And if that instrument is not present, take a reed and place an eggshell in the mouth of the patient so that it does not become too hot; because the eggshell does not allow steam to accumulate in the mouth, and this method together with treatment results in salvation.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times it is in the throat bone or spine of fish, where nothing happens; therefore, you should extract what you can see and press the tongue to the sun with all the tool, so that you can see the movement; and anything that does not open and is still in the throat, you should induce vomiting in this way until the meat is cooked in the stomach; by chance if it gets out through vomiting; or if the badness swallows a piece of sponge, or a navel piece, or a lettuce root, or one dry bread piece; and tie a string to the sponge and then swallow it; and when she comes up to you, if she is being expelled, and then pull forcefuly; and if she does not come out with what we have said, take one tool of pitch according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And make the forceps at the nose so that it can more lightly enter into the throat, and have the nose raised high above the throat. And guard yourself not to touch the epiglottis, that nothing obstructs its movement, nor push any bone inside; and when you move, let the patient feel the forceps, because if they are moved or if resistance is felt; if it goes in with a push, or if you pull hard all along the forceps equally, until it pulls hard.
de la sansue de la gorge	Of the windpipe
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	Never is the blood treated with medicine as I have explained in the division through medication treatment; and when this does not benefit, then look into the throat of the patient at noon, then press their tongue onto the instrument that I told you.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see blood, guide it to run out completely with tiny twitches, or with delicate pincers that suffice for this task.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if that fails, take a hair comb, and insert it into the throat of the patient, then start to comb out any blood with the comb's teeth, and do this repeatedly.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if you wash the patient with water all day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Then take a full bowl of cold water and operate it in the patient's mouth, then pour it down their throat without letting them swallow, and move it around with their hand often. And as soon as the blood senses the water, they will defecate.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	And if they do not defecate as we have said, submerge the patient with Asafetida in the instrument used for fumigation I mentioned concerning the treatment of the eye; do this multiple times, because it will eventually pass without obstruction.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And the method for fumigation consists in taking a pot where there are charcoal embers, and let it be covered with a pierced cover in the middle, and on that lid place the joint of the instrument; then pour your fumigation, and have the patient hold the tip of the stick in their mouth, seal the mouth so that no smoke escapes but goes until to the throat; and the saliva will now come out, if it does not do so, reapply the fumigation several times; and let the patient be thirsty and eat salty things and such, and do not drink water; and then it is necessary for her to come forth forcefully through this method.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the shape of the instrument used to expel phlegm is such that when you can see it, it resembles half-moon scissors intended to enter the throat. It has a surgeon's beak appearance and has a grind on it, so whatever she takes, she cannot leave; and here is its shape:
li chapistres des apostemes	The chapter concerning abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	There are various kinds of abscess openings and sizes, as remembered from one and another in this book, and they vary in perforation and size; and it's done in two ways, where one is in its own form, and the other deals with moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second method is for those with lumps within their bodies.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	For, the abscesses on the head are different from those in the base, and the abscesses of the inner thigh are different from those that come at joints. Each has its judgment in action.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And if with abscesses one should not pierce them until the pulse is dead according to its accomplishment; and for those that must be pierced when they are grown, and do not die according to their accomplishment, such as abscesses that are at joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscesses come at joints, and it is left until it is rotten internally, by chance if the ligament and nerve of the joint are corrupted, which is a cause of constriction in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	The abscess lies within the main limb. If you delay puncturing it until it is necrotic, it will harm the main limb. The abscess lies near the base, if you pierce or do so when it's necrotic; it should not that you puncture an abscess before full digestion has occurred, except for one lying near the base which might become fully necrotic and stay enclosed, forming a fistula; it will not heal properly in a long period.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And it must be that you know the time for perforating an abscess that has grown according to its development, and this is when the pain has subsided, and the departure of fever, and diminution of pain and redness, and with the movement and sharpening of the head of the abscess, and other signs; and it should be that you place the perforation where the abscess depends more from above or below it, and at the point it opens; and make sure the perforation runs along the length of the body, whether it is on the arms or legs, in joints and nerves and arteries, and everywhere without any folds.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In such cases, according to that limb.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when abscesses are in the fatty part of the body, it is better to let the puncturing proceed until full digestion has been completed, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	For if you puncture it before that, it will spread throughout the body with its own venom, and be full of maggots; and by chance harden its skin and its interior.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if no abscess is pierced straight through the body according to its width, as suited by the limb.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And you must introduce small abscesses, small incisions; and in large abscesses, large incisions, and many cuts according to the appearance of the size of the abscess; and if there are such abscesses where it is necessary to cut out a piece, and cover; when they have become as soft as cloth, and are drained, then you should do this just like you would with small wounds: and those that split into three angles, and those that are cut like the leaf of myrtle, similar to angular abscesses; and those where a round shape is carved out, and other shapes and cutting techniques are used.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	Those who do not have a head, such as superficial abscesses, it must be that you pierce them completely; and when the abscess is large, and has filled with much pus, if you don't drain all the pus at once in that moment, but only part of it; then leave the abscess until to another morning, then do not apply anything around it; do this repeatedly from larger to smaller, until all the pus comes out; similarly if the body is weak, or pregnant women, or young children, or elderly and decrepit.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For when it tries several times with the release of the bow, that perhaps kills the patient, and you don't realize it.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, be cautious in this chapter and when you have opened your abscess, if a wound appears, and observe whether the abscess wound is small; and if it's a plain tailor's cut, apply linen or cotton wadding. And for large abscesses, with many pus-filled cavities, you must insert one wadding into each such that they are pressed against each other. And if you have incised part of the skin in the abscess, sew it together properly, fill the cavity with old cotton or linseed rag without moisture, and bind it until the third day; then dress and apply ointment to it as long as it is clean.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if there is bleeding in your operation, quickly apply cold and ease it, wet the cloth, and place it on the affected area repeatedly.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there is persistent bleeding, then apply control and treatment, and the powders I mentioned in this book are placed on your hands, and if it's about ice or pus, and the area is very nervous, then you should place wet cloths soaked in wine and oil on the surface; and if it's about healing, and the area is fleshed out, then apply wet cloths soaked in water and oil, or in cold wine and oil, for three days as we said, and then remove the pus and clean it up following the proper procedures until it heals.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And this must be known universally in treatments of abscesses: now I have told you how one should act prior to the treatments of abscesses, and here comes the chapter.
des soros	of discharges
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	For small abscesses in the head come, and are in our ways like those on cloths, also like a button on a catkin, and many have similar appearances.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	There are some that are fatty and others like these which contain moisture as with fat; and there are those that are hard and stony to the tailor, and there is no doubt that they have an artery not otherwise.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the tools of tailoring if you have proven with all the instrument which is called "intromissory", from which comes the form after this, something it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, you cut through long above.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And when the moisture has been emptied, you scrape without leaving anything behind that contains that moisture, for it returns immediately if you leave nothing behind. Then dip a cotton ball in Egyptian ointment if available; otherwise, in water and vinegar, and apply to the wound, leaving until another day; and those who are disturbed by night will calm down.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And repeat the cotton treatment as before, on the second day and the third, until you know it does not heal overnight; then treat the wound with ointment as is suitable, while it remains healthy.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the abscess remains somewhat full, cut it according to this form, along its length; and remove your incisions, and burn around everywhere, and apply all your treatment on the cloth where it lies. And if you operate in a way that contradicts my advice later, then do as I have instructed you.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And also treat the stone abscess if it is due to stones, and cut and cure it as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And when it comes to cutting the stone abscess and moisture, do so more easily, as there is less blood involved because they contain little blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if in any of these abscesses or lumps there is no moisture, and from these new abscesses that I observed or lumps from an old woman; and found the abscess to be like a soft stone, rough and white, and unable to break; and if one had pierced through any of them, it would have been treated in exactly the same way as with a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	In other abscesses coming out or near the head, if those that come from the neck of children and the roots of ears, let the opening remain open for as long as possible depending on the need, so that the pus can escape; and treat them according to what is appropriate.
des scrophules	of the scrophula (i.e., tuberculosis or similar skin disease)
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times these abscesses occur in the neck, and near the axilla, and under the arms, and nowhere else on the body or on the head, and they are hard, and they stick together.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And each scab is properly within its coat, like the nose and the abscess on the head, as we have said; and the appearances of these scabs are many.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some that contain moisture, and there are others that don't want to obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	In those where you see a good condition at the stethoscope, and it appears as a color of the chest, and is quiet from each part and isn't sensitive to the neck's nerves nor in the artery or through, and isn't too deep; then it must be that you hold it above, and scrape off each part, and expose the two lips at oncines if needed, as we have said about abscesses on the head; and pull gently and gently, and make sure you don't cut the nerve nor the vein, and avoid making a groove or cutting too far ahead, that you don't cut what you shouldn't.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	And if you cut the vein or artery and it does not allow opening, put sulfur paste in the wound, or any powders that stop bleeding, and restrain the wound; and leave it until the abscess has calmed down and the wound has softened, and begun to rot.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	And when the wound has healed, return to your work until you complete it; then check according to your skill if there are any small spots remaining, if you treat and cleanse them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if there is a large vein root in the spot, it's not right to cut that spot at its root, but tie it with a double strong thread and let it fall out through it without harm; then dress the wound with old cotton dipped in Egyptian ointment, then treat.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you handle the whole scrofula, it is necessary that you assemble both lips of the wound, and now suture them, then there should be no excess of material due to the size of the scrofula.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	It is necessary that you understand how to treat its root, drain the pus, and stitch it up as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Those scrofulas that contain excess matter, puncture where they open up; and puncture in the same way as previously described, by relying on it, then you administer remedies with ointment and similar things, so that whatever is caused by corruption is affected; and when the wound is properly cleaned, treat the ointment until it turns into flesh, as long as it is healthy.
de squinance	Regarding lateral deviation
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The old ones spoke and talked about the surgery of the throat; but I never saw anyone do it in our land, and this is their written word.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	For those with squint, it is necessary that the slit of the throat, called "epiglottis," be removed; and one should not assist in this operation, because all the veins and the lung are in these who have phlegm either in their mouth or in the throat or between two almonds.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the illness is within the bronchial channel, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis in order to prevent the loss that comes from suffocation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	Therefore, when we wish to cut the epiglottis, it is necessary that we cut through three or four small cuts across, between the two circles or by the amount of the cut at this site, not in the cartilage; and such is suitable for dividing the epiglottis so that there is no flesh and the vessels are long enough to reach.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	And if the masters are fearful, it is necessary that they extend the skin of the throat to the entire circumference, then cut the keur until it reaches the knee; and avoid any blood vessels, should you see anything, and then cut the syphilitic, as we have said; and this is demonstrated by the section of the flow of the knee where it jumps force through the part that has been broken, and due to the loss of voice; and leave the wound open a piece.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the time has passed that one doubts strangulation, assemble the two edges of the wound with care, and all the seam along the cartilage; then administer medicines which cause flesh to grow, until it is sound.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasis states that one should not perform this until the throat is completely swollen, and the organs are judged to be dead, and until the defect is filled.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	Then cut on the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe normally through their injury, and they are breathing through the wound so be protected from death. And thus it was commanded by the ancients to leave the wound open until the disease has passed, which lasts for three or four days, and then it was commanded to stitch up the wound after cleaning it when it is healed. I will tell you what I observed.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I saw that a maiden took the knife and stabbed it in her throat, cutting some channels from her heart; and I was summoned to treat her, finding her as dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I uncovered the wound, and found the blood that was issuing from it, and indeed, she did not have a severed artery or exit flow other than the throat, and the veins issued forth through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I hastened and dressed the wound accordingly, treating her until she was healed; and there was nothing that bothered the maiden so much as her hoarse voice, and she returned to her usual state afterwards; thus I say that in the operation of tailoring the epiglottis, one should not fear.
de la grosse gorge	From the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	Lumps in the throat are called "gullet hernia," and they're large lumps of a dark purple color, occurring frequently in women; they can occur in two ways: naturally or by accident; natural ones do not have any cause.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And accidents occur in two ways: one is similar to fat coming up from our stomachs, and the other way resembles lumps that come out of our arteries; and there's fear involved, so it's not advisable to cut blindly into them except for when they're small; test thoroughly and search everywhere with a probe: if you find them as hard as our stomach contents and unable to reach any vein, remove them just like we would remove stomach contents, and treat carefully while covering all parts; if there is no part covered by anything else, then you cut out the lumps, just as one would cut out stomach contents, and treat thoroughly until they're completely healed.
des nous	from bones
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	Many ways exist to treat us, so I will mention all the similarities; now it is fitting that I explain all the differences between our methods and those of others.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that fever and heat are present until the evaporation has passed and the corruption is completed; therefore, the fever and heat then cease.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	In "nout", there's neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains pus, which is its own sac and is in line with the body's color, and begins also like a boil, and becomes large; and they appear according to two appearances, oily or moist, and much of their color as I have said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary, when you come to the treatment of a new case, that you first test and inquire about all the instrument which is called 'entromissor', according to its form or chapter that comes afterwards.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	And the method of probing pus in "nout" is that you take it out to be as moist as you find within the pus, and twist your fingers little by little until you know that the instruments have reached the core, then according to the size of the pus; then remove the inner lining, and beware that it jumps force.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	Let the moisture be cut off, whatever its nature, if you make an incision as I have said for other abscesses; and if after applying a poultice no more moisture comes, know that it is oily, then cut straight across, and take hold of it with forceps, and lightly scrape all sides and guard the wound where it lies. And if you cannot pull it out whole, then remove it in pieces so nothing stays behind.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	If nothing stays behind, the pus will return many times; and if it leaves some behind, and you do not suffer harm from it, apply certain corrosive powders to the wound, hold the wound in place, and cover it with cooling substances for abscesses. Continue other wound treatments until it heals properly; and if the pus is large, cut two of the edges of the wound open, and treat any lingering infection in that way.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	And if the vein is too far or else you hurry and use the opening of vitriol, and leave it for two or three days, as long as the wound heals, then let it rest in blood heat; then return to using what has been held back from the new substance.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	Here are the forms of the intestinal forceps, and they come in three ways: large, medium, and small. And there are three quadrangular ones that are called "albaret", and one which is called "breb". There are also three types depending on their size: large, medium, and small; to encircle abscesses of fistulas and are similar to needles which people use to remove warts. They can be made from citrine amber or iron or silver. Yellow ones are preferred over black beeswax for encircling the curves of a fistula. There are also three types depending on their size: large, medium, and small according to the width of the ridges.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	The forms of the forceps resemble sheep's horns, as you see here: large, medium and small. There are also two-knotted forceps in three ways; those with three knots are also in three types; there are ones with two knots as well, they too come in three types; some have only one knot, these too are in three forms; all of them are necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	The head of this to which you make your cutting, and there are those who do not cut powerfully only from one side, where the skin is burned; for here neither veins nor nerves are damaged; and these introducers have blades put in sleeves, so that the patient does not perceive it at abscess opening; and they exist in three ways: large, small, and intermediate, as you see; and none of them use force only in their sharpened parts, like legs, arms, nipples, elbows, and in similar areas; and no other tool is made smaller than these, resembling the blades of woodturning tools, according to this form, to which bleeding is stopped.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	And it is placed in its proper position that aligns with healthy veins and arteries, and it is never done according to this broad form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	No longer do the nipples of some men swell when they begin to become corrupted, resembling female nipples; and remain swollen and puffy, and those who wish to cure them should proceed according to this form until this line .b. up to .g.:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	Then scrape the fat, and fill the wound with medicine that promotes healing. Then join the two edges of the wound for stitching, and treat until it is healed. And if there are breasts that hang down below, and are worn out due to their size like in women, if you make two cuts above them, through two similar incisions; so that one is attached to the other at the end of each, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this shape, up to the line .b. to the line .g.; then scrape off the skin between the two edges and remove the fat, and apply what we have said about stitching and powders, and what is necessary for treatment until it is healed; and if it is not healed, or the incision has not been fully completed due to lack of rest by the patient or bleeding, you must fill the wound with moistened cotton in a corrosive ointment; then leave it until it begins to heal, changing out the wet cotton and fat afterwards, after which you can continue treatment until it is completely healed.
des apostemes des asselles	removal of abscesses from the armpits
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	Abscesses that occur in the armpits are remedies for hard scrofula or swellings, and if there are any containing moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those who contain moisture need to be cut according to this form, from the line b. to the line g.:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the pus in the abscess is drained, fill the wound with old cotton and leave it until the next day. Then remove all the cotton and apply ointment treatment until it heals.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscesses resemble scrophula, cut them as we have instructed for cuts in scrophulas, and if the wound is a scrophula type, apply a cautery treatment as we instructed before.
de la routure de l’artere	regarding the rupture of an artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	When the artery is pierced, and the skin is sewn where it's above, there are many times when abscesses occur, and similarly happens with a drained vein and abscess; and if one knows this when it's due to the artery, then the abscesses extend perfectly straight; and when you feel it with your fingers, you sense that it's being squeezed; and when it's due to the vein, it appears swollen outward; and removing such an abscess is foolishness, and likewise when it's under joints and around bones in the neck or elsewhere in other limbs, and is very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, one must avoid the iron cure, and that on the head should also be avoided. In this case where the artery is swollen, they cut above the skin along its entire length; then work at the scale, and remove the artery from the coverings as long as it is exposed; then insert a needle under the skin up to the other side, and fix the artery with double thread in two places, according to what I have taught you regarding the extraction of two arteries that are in temples; then pull out the limb between the two threads with an introducer until the contents come out completely, and free the abscess; then apply the curing method described earlier until the thread comes out; then treat this ointment attached to this, until it heals; and if the abscess is due to a swollen vein, you must dye everything that your fingers can touch of the abscess on the entire skin surface, then insert a needle under the limb you are holding in your hand, and make it pierce again with two needles, so as to pull out all contents from one place; then tie up the abscess as I have instructed, or thread both parts of each in between the two limbs with a single thread; and if you doubt that the thread will not come out by force, insert another needle under all threads from every part of the abscess at the insertion point of the first needle, and fix the threads tightly again; then tie up the abscess until the excess comes out, then trim it with a knife and leave what is tied. Then place on one side moistened linen in wine and oil, then apply treatments for tenting and ointments until it heals.
des apostemes des ners	of abscesses of nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Also, when abscesses occur in the artery and vein, they also occur in nerves when they are cut, or due to too much labor, and similar occurrences.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And this happens more often with shoulders and elbows and in all places where joints exist, and it's the case for abscesses, and its color seems like the color of the flesh, and is felt in various positions without pain; and when it's tightened form-like, if the patient feels pain, it isn't exactly by feeling through the flesh but below the surface; and moves well from all directions, neither forward nor backward, neither below nor above, and what's jointed doesn't fit properly covered with iron: there might be a contraction in this case; and that which is on the head or forehead makes the skin feel tightness.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the abscesses are small, and you have tweezers, then grip it at its root; and if they're large, hold them until they rupture, then scrape them, afterwards remove the bone and stitch up the wound, and follow the treatment until it heals.
des grosses boces pendans	of large hanging masses
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	In every belly and nowhere else, it's a disease called 'fungus' due to its appearance, and has delicate roots, and big balls; there are small ones and of very different sizes. I knew a person who had two bellies that looked more like fungi than anything else, and there was no difference between them, they were white, had tiny roots, were easily split open, and corroded with moisture inside.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	I copied and found them in the one weighing 18 ounces, and in the other 6.3 ounces, and the operations during incision are such that when you look, the disease is moist, and the color of the artelul is white and moist with a delicate root; if you observe it at the large spatumile, and they are present before your fire cautery.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	For in surgery there are often many times when too much blood flows, and if one lacks courage, then you should quickly use a cautery; and if you see the patient alarmed and fearful from the incision with the iron, take a well-made plumb thread and tie it to the handle as we have said, and leave it for two days; and then apply force, not ceasing to pull the plumb thread until the handle copes smoothly without difficulty; and if the roots are large, and you feel fear when trying to cope on the stomach, but you can manage well to cope half of it, then cauterize it so that it does not reoccur; then treat the wound, and ensure you do not remove the plumb which is of greenish color, has little sensation, and produces milk-like discharge.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For this is an abscess that needs treatment, and I will proceed to the treatment of the sore after this.
quant li boude ist fuer	When the bladder is filled
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	If there appears to be the smell of putrefaction it comes from an infected wound or cut in the stomach and can occur anywhere on that organ. Similar occurrences might happen in other perforations like those caused by knives, or blood leaks originating from veins or arteries as described beforehand, or due to wind issues (likely referring to digestive conditions). And if this is caused by a tear in the stomach wall and an exit from pus, its color resembles that of rancid meat, and it's a relatively mild condition without pain, and opens through various exits.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it's through the opening of the intestine, then it's more varied, and when you press it with your fingers it recovers, and then comes back again, and by chance it might be squeezed, expanding greatly at the entrance of the bath and due to strong labor.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it's due to moisture, it's a simple matter and opens well when you press on it with your hand, not constraining it; and if it's due to blood, one detects the abscesses large and hard, and they are placed according to quantity; and if it's due to windiness, it sounds in the chest, and symptoms occur that you should observe whether their appearance is due to blood from an artery, or a vein, or windiness.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	It is necessary that you allow the treatment.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear with it, as I have told you in the chapter about abscesses, for both the artery and the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And if its appearance is due to an intestine or the liver, it is necessary that you command the patient to bleed their alvine canal, and stretch it completely straight, then cut it around the belly; then direct them to perform a thorough inspection between your hands, then move through the area as indicated by you throughout the entire spleen, then remove half of the abscess above the large hook; then bind it with a strong thread or a firm cord made of silk, ensuring that there is no loss of the connection; then spread the remaining half of the abscess above the binding, and hold your index finger in place while inspecting the intestine. If you find it caught by the binding, gently remove it, and place the intestine at the exit of the belly; and if you find the liver, take it by the hook and trim off any excess. And if the artery causes resistance or the vein, move them firmly through, then return to your task and prepare two needles, insert four threads on each needle, and attach these needles around the area that you pierced earlier; then pull the abscess with three pulls over the needles, if you see that it has been reduced, remove the needles and leave the area until it heals, and expel any dead flesh by itself. Or cut when she becomes subtle and cooked, then treat according to what is appropriate, and trim the abscess as we have said; and bleed or remove moisture if you find any, then treat the area accordingly, and sew up the area.
dou chancre	treat the ulcer
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have spoken about the appearance of ulcers and how they should be treated with medicine, and how to avoid iron treatment. Let it be known that ulcers are contained in the mouth or can be removed as with ulcers found near the nipples, in the cooking pot, and similar places. You must remove all when they are at the beginning; but when they are large and old, you should not approach them because I have never seen any heal from them; no one ever heals from them before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the operations, when they are in place or can be removed as we have said, is that you cleanse the patient of any black coal once; then make them clean if there appears to be clear swelling, then apply the cleansing agent .i.e. at a good distance from where surgery will take place; then remove all pus and debris thoroughly from everywhere without leaving anything behind; and allow blood to flow completely unimpeded while holding the area tightly with your hand or any object, and if bleeding inverts against the incision of an artery or vein occurs, if you cauterize it until the wound is sealed; then continue other treatments until they are healed.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	We have discussed in the division the signs of dysentery and how the assembly of water occurs, and the symptoms for each sign, as well as the treatment which is done through medicines, and that which is treated with iron: these are known only; and it should not involve using iron in these two signs: namely tympanites and yposarche, because this is a deadly thing; therefore when you treat this sign of dysentery called 'clamminess' medicinally and the treatment does not help, if you notice that the patient is weak or has another disease besides dysentery, for instance stomach upset and other such things; then do not use iron, because there's uncertainty; and if you see the patient with a very dark complexion, and they have no other illness than dysentery alone, and are neither too young nor too old, in this case proceed as follows: lift the body directly onto your hands, and the attendants press on the belly while pouring water to the lowest part of the backside, then take the sharp spatula according to this form.
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And let there be two divisions of this.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	Make a cut and still ensure it doesn't extend beyond reaching up to the intestines when inserted, without causing bleeding; then observe if there is inflammation around the intestines: should this be the case, you must make an incision above the belly at three inches from the navel; and if the inflammation is due to liver disease, your cut should be on the left side of the belly three inches from the navel. And should it be due to stomach issues, place it on the right side, ensuring that the organs do not lie over the incision so as not to allow excess fluids to flow into the weak area; then pierce all the skin with an instrument, pull it out, and lift your hand through the entire peritoneum space between the skin and the abdominal cavity as if you were burning hair off a certain length or up to half the width; then puncture the abdominal cavity until the pus reaches almost to the top, this is where the water comes from, then proceed with force and withdraw that instrument whose shape has been described here:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	And it resembles a thin silver rod, or a light spider's leg, and at the part of the body there are three small parts; and on one side, three parts; and on another side, two parts, and one more; and the shoulder is cut like a feather, and this is the shape of the incision that the writer cuts the feather in.
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	At the top is the liver, so when the instruments come to water, they begin to drip from the instrument now. Empty it then empty half or a third of it, for if you drain more than should be during that time, by chance the patient might die due to the resolution of his spirit from the weapon, or he could faint, or approach death; but drain according to the amount of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue in the patient signify, and their pulse; then remove the instrument and hold back the water, and it is held back now for the anesthesia that numbs the small part which is on the foreskin, as I have spoken about, that you puncture accordingly this way; then restart the instrument another day if you see the patient suffering from this, and drain a small amount of water. Do not do any more days and refrain from using too much water but leave just a little bit of water here.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	And if you doubt about the patient, and leave them with much water, so that you take care of burial or sand heating, and by a bit of sweating or bathing and in the sun, and if they darken to drink; and use remedies for drying until they are sane, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the removal of the water, just as I said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	Of the embolism of the penis
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	No child is born without foreskin, or if the foreskin is small, or it doesn't stay in its place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If it seems necessary right away that there be piercing of all impurities most delicately according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	Then place or cut the foreskin of plonc delicately, tie and keep it like this for three or four days, until when he wants to urinate. If so remove the foreskin, let him urinate, then put him back again; and by chance there's no need because the urine that comes out doesn't leave him closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	These are those who bleed profusely when cut, if they have a medicine for the cleft of the hip, as we have said, should it expand.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	These are those who do not have the testicles in their body, they are sterile because no one is born with testicles at the head of the penis, so they cannot urinate before lifting up their penis; and cannot conceive either because the matter cannot reach the prostate, and this is a bad disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the way to work is that the patient lies on their back, then positions the tip of the penis and the scrotum just like a feather's length, so that the cut pieces are in the middle, as it should be; and watch out for bleeding which occurs many times during this process, and if it happens, stop it using someone who can stop bleeding, and treat the wound until it heals properly.
des pustules de la verge	The pimples of the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times, lumps form in the penis, and there's an unpleasant appearance; and among them are good and bad ones. It is necessary that you remove these at a weight of .i. oncinia finely, then cut and clean all of them, afterwards place Egyptian ointment-soaked cotton; then treat it with diaphanicon ointment until it heals properly.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the pus is malignant, of yellow color and discharging, it is necessary to bring you to apply a cautery.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	When you have done this, and if the pus is inside the penis, and part is within the skin and part outside, it is necessary to remove the pus that is inside first; and when it is healed, then treat from the outside.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you treat them together, ensure that the head of the penis is not pierced, and darkness and corruption come into its penis and in the anus; it must therefore be shaved off everything that is black and corrupted, then spread on a plaster made from walnut shell and mixed with honey and flour, then cure with other remedies until it heals.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if blood drainage occurs, apply the lunar cautery according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	The cauterizations should be performed in two positions: that is to say, during blood drainage and in cases of corruption; if the head of the penis has become corrupted and removed, it must be rubbed or led with a stick of garlic on the penis and let the patient urinate among them. And when hair is present at the head of the penis which stands up for those who have not been circumcised, or there is a wound or abscess, then you should burn this area with a tool called the "cheveit" until all ties are undone and the head of the penis can be released from all sides; if it's difficult to do this procedure, then you should burn this area with another tool near the tip of the penis and the foreskin. Then cut cleanly between two, and apply a thin linen bandage soaked in cold water so that hair does not stand up.
de la circoncision	On the circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not merely about continuation like other wounds; however, when we perform this work of our own volition, and particularly on children, it is necessary that we accomplish the best work, and do so with the lightest impact for their health.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the old ones did not speak of circumcising their children, for they do not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	But I wanted the majority of masters and nobles who performed circumcision within one day, and at all strengths, and for every newborn; if it was wrong because there are two layers, and by chance we might leave this one above and retain this one below.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	The patient receives care and experiences doubled pain. In the process of surgery, where the surgical area is not entirely secure at the point where a limb ends; in the shaping of nails, sometimes the nail escapes the hammer's hit and runs through the work, and many times grow unnecessarily requiring shaping, which I prefer to avoid.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	The shaping that is done using all the strength of the thread, I have found the merit of experimentation because the strengths cut exactly as well above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	When you squeeze your hand, if you cut it in I all straight; but let the child's hair be well intertwined within the skin; and do it like the first operation so that it makes you think of the child, if it listens, that you are only tying the thread inside the verge alone, then make it move in all ways that you can; then put it upright between your hands, and distribute strength between your hands or under your feet where the child does not see them, nor any instruments; then thrust your hand to the verge and blow or keep quiet, and pull it up as high as the head of the verge is inside; then clean it well from the dirt that has assembled, then tie it with a double thread, then tie it under one link to another; and hold it with two dozes through the second layer at the pouch and the index finger, cut between the two threads, then lift the knee up quickly and pull out the head of the verge; then let the bleeding trickle slowly because this is normal; put powder over and over the powder with glueed silk cloth from a half-boiled egg tempered in rose water, boiled and fresh oil, and leave it for another day, and treat again until it heals.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of the forces during cleaning is as follows: both ends should be held and they should cut through, and they should have the same size as each other equally:
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error of the world's creation occurs when the kidneys inside leak during incision; hence, you must extend them to your fingernail, like making an abscess; and apply evenly, and if you cannot hold with your fingernail, use tweezers then apply.
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if they penetrate for three days, and the one that is under the penis is swollen, let it be as long as the abscess is calmed down when you have worn out its pus bag, and gently scrape it; apply it as much as you can move, and keep away from the part of the penis, this will not harm him.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore treat the place of things suddenly affected by disease with powder, as we have said about powders in treating them, and if you press too hard on the kidney and it goes beyond its limit, it will cause no harm; therefore treat it accordingly, just as we have said, until it is healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	The retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	The retention of urine results from the obstruction of a stone, or blood clot, or bowel blockage, or new growth, or similar conditions that we have discussed in the division; and if the urine cannot be released and you see it being retained by a stone located either within or at the neck of the bladder, then the patient should be made to bend their knees. And they should have their feet placed under their back, and stretch their abdomen from above the back area, and restrain them so that they barely move; and thus the bladder's neck is constrained to force the passage of stones upwards, thereby allowing urine release. If it doesn't come out as we said before, and if the patient feels great pain, then you should perform an extraction with a whole instrument called 'syringe', this is its description: made of fine delicate silver hair, similar to bird's feathers; and it should be long about half a palm and should be fine at the tip.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And the method of releasing urine is like this: take a double thread, tie it to the small part of wool or cotton at the head, and insert the head of the thread into the syringe; clip the excess wool and keep the thread until up to the head of the syringe. Then smear the syringe with oil or butter and hen's egg yolk, then let the patient sit with the syringe under their buttocks, squeeze the bladder and penis with moist oil and olive oil. Then gently insert the syringe into the penis, as far as its root, then double the penis upwards towards the anus; then push the syringe almost up to the bladder, and feel the urine coming to the void thing, and this is not fully done according to this order because whoever leads it goes twisted; then pull the thread gradually from all the wool bit by bit, and let the urine follow the wool, then squeeze it properly, and adjust the urine; repeat the syringe until the bladder is emptied, and adjust the patient's position.
des maladies de la vessie	Of diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When burns or blood come to the bladder, or corruption is gathered there, and you see distilled waters and medicines, do this with all the instrument which is called 'clepsidra', and it's like this in form:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	It is closed, and if there are three parts of it: two in one place, and one in another, as you see; and the legs through this part medicine cuts must be like it numbs well the penis without addition, if you can cure moisture, and thrust when necessary; and when you see your medicines flowing in the bladder, place the nose near the moisture, and wait for the one who is waiting nearby; if you pull out the moisture to the waiter, and then set firmly the one waiting back; if the moistures come back in now, and arrive at the bladder immediately, so that the patients feel it; and this is the form of the subtle catheter through which we catheterize the bladder: and it goes like this:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And it is made of silver or leather, and the shoulder is higher up; and from one breast to this part where they urinate; then take a sheep bladder and put in the moisture that you want to catheterize the bladder with. Then sew it between the two breasts forming a thick double thread, and heat the end of the moisture on fire. Then insert the urinary catheter's head into the penis, then stretch your hand onto the bladder until all the moisture has moved away, until the patients feel that this moisture has reached the bladder; and if you do not have a bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make a circle out of it, and cut it roundly in the center; then sew the thread strongly into these parts, then join the circle like you would join leather, and put inside what you see from the moisture and water, and tie it to the tool; and do this as you did with the bladder, pressing your hand until the moisture moves to the bladder.
de la piere	from the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have mentioned in the division of the methods for stone extraction and treatment as a whole; we have also discussed the differences between stones found in kidneys versus all others, and the signs to distinguish them, and when to operate on which type of stone; and I will explain this clearly and succinctly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I state that the stone within the bladder more often occurs in children, and this is a sign that an illness has sprung forth from the bladder akin to illness due to subtlety; and I open the anus and cleanse the afflicted person's penis many times, and then set them upright; and at some of these instances where it springs forth the foundation; and is more lenient in curing children until they reach four years old, and becomes much harder for the elderly, and lies between childhood and old age; and the treatment is more straightforward for those with large stones than for those with smaller ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to treatment, it's first necessary to cleanse the patient through purging, in order to remove all the filth that is inside them.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it clogs up quite often when trying to cut into the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	Then take the patient by their elbows, and lift and move them backwards until the stone descends to the bladder's mouth, so it comes out from under him completely; then have them sit between your hands, with their hands placed under their thighs, so that the bladder is entirely sloping downwards; then you examine and touch inside; if you feel the stone in the space, cut into the stone immediately.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	And if it doesn't pass to the tip of her entire length, moisten your left hand's index finger with urine, for she is pregnant, or with saliva, should she be in labor; and press into its base, touch the stone, and when you feel it on your finger, take hold at the bladder's neck; then press against your finger, and push out from where you see to cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	Instruct the attendant to press the bladder with their hand, and tell them to extend their right hand upwards and their left hand downwards. Have them hold the skin above the genitals in the area where you make cuts. Then they should pinch out the pus-filled sac; this is its shape:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	And make it between the one who is between the kidneys and the foundation, not midway but at the edge of the left snow; let it be straight on the stone, and your hands should reach to the foundation, and be in alignment with its size. Let them be close to or touch the foundation, and match the stone's size as you see fit, not too big; accidentally press your hand against the one that is touching the foundation, causing it to bend easily; remember there are parts of the stone that have angles and edges: it gets scratched when trying to pass through; and there are sections below that resemble a walnut and are round, where the passage is easy.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	And at the areas where there are angles and edges, make the hole larger; if it doesn't bend, it's necessary that you adjust using the tongs which are as sharp as a file to force the stone so it doesn't escape; or you push underneath with a small curved instrument like a hook; and if you can't work in this way, widen by just a little bit of the edge, then grind off with vitriol; and if there is more than one stone, first break the larger one at the neck of the bladder, then proceed upwards, then forcefully push it out, and for smaller ones after that if there are any.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if she is very large, then it would need to be sewn up, and make a larger incision.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	For two things happen to the patient: or he dies, or his urine comes out right away with the removal of the kidneys; but still strive to extract it, or break it using forceps, as long as you remove it piece by piece. And when you have completed your task, fill the wound with incense and aloes and dragon's blood, then bind it. And cover the bandage in oil and wine, or oil and rose water and cold water to soothe the inflamed area; then bind the patient's head onto his neck, do not release the tie until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you release the bandage, ensure that both oil and water are thoroughly washed off, then treat with a dyafinicon ointment and basilicon ointment until it is clean.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And if abscesses are present in the wound and blood clots in the bladder, and urine is retained due to this, causing it to be known in such a way that without jumping with the urine: therefore you must force your way into the wound, and remove that blood, for if it remains, it corrodes the bladder and ruins it; then cleanse the wound with water and salt and vinegar, and assist him in all ways as you can see, until he is well. And it should be that every time you cure him, you tie his two legs together, and gather medicines on him.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	And if the stone is small and it comes from where the penis goes in, and sticks there, and prevents urine from coming out; if you follow what I'm saying here, that you cut many times, and you compensate for this surgery's cutting.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I already have this experience like this.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take one iron branch of this form, and fix it three times into one stick:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	Then take a thread and tie it around the penis near the stone, so that it cannot return to the bladder; then push the stick into the penis gently until it reaches the stone. And turn the stick in your hand near the stone little by little, until you can pierce the stone from another side; if urine comes out, then press your hand on the one that is stuck inside the penis where the stone is.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it breaks quickly and the urine flows out, the patient's condition is alleviated. And the patient will feel relief; and if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents you, then tie a thread around the stone and another one above it. Then place the penis between the two threads where the stone was, pull firmly on it, and remove the thread, clean out the frozen blood in the wound; and treat until it is healed.
de la piere des femmes	of the stone of women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	Sometimes a stone occurs within women, and if it happens once, then it is treated with grief, and is forbidden for three reasons: one is that perhaps the woman is virgin; and the second reason is that one cannot find a woman who knows how to expose herself to view, even when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	And the third method is that by chance one cannot find a woman who knows this art very well; and the fourth way is that the stone of the woman is more forward than the stone in man, so it requires deeper cutting, causing great fear. And if necessity rises to this situation, you should seek an experienced midwife, place your hand where necessary, and if you cannot find one there, do not hesitate to consult a subtle specialist; then give attention to women who are well informed about part of the art, instruct her on how to handle the inspection of the stone, and carefully watch whether that woman is virginal: so she must press her palm or foundation point towards the stone; if she finds it, force her to hold that spot firmly with her palm, and advise her to press her palm or move against the disease, pressing her left hand onto the bladder in an upward motion.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	If she finds it, it is necessary for her to move it gradually from the entrance of the bladder until beyond it, up to the root of the thigh; then cut upwards towards the stone in the root of the thigh opposite the middle of the groin, where stones usually appear and you feel the stone in that part; and do not move your finger above or under this place, make the incision at first as small as possible; then push the kidney into this incision, if you feel the stone enlarge the wound so much that the stone can pass out forcefully, know that there are many types of stones: namely, small and large, rough and smooth, long and round, and those that sink.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	If you understand the signs to know the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if it does not hurt him, then apply vitriol powder, and hold it for an hour until the pain subsides; then return to your work as long as the stone is still intact, and have with you the tools I told you about in the extraction of stones at home to help you with your task. And if it does not hurt him, and what was cut off was an artery, then apply powder on the wound and the stitch and bandage, and do not repeat this process again, leave the stone and do not remove it, for fear that by chance it might kill the patient; then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of blood has subsided and your hands are ready, return to your work while the stone is still intact.
de hernie carnouse	From fatty hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Watery jelly is nothing else but a collection of moisture or white mucus, which is found in the layer around the kidneys, contained within an egg; and it is called "mucus", and it is not properly inside the egg membrane if one thinks there might be another egg; and this refers to the skin under the kidney where we have mentioned the white mucus; and that does not contain any hole.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the production of this jelly is due to weakness, which affects the kidneys, spreading out that substance.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And none other time comes from percussion on the kidneys, and this moisture has many colors: or it is a color that declines to jaundice, or it's without redness, or black, or aquous white, and this happens more often; and these are signs to recognize this assembly. For if it is or white in so far as we have said, then it’s an abscess, I wouldn't last very long like the figure of an egg, and doesn't open the kidneys, for there's moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if he has moisture in the own fabric, then it is an abscess with part of the egg, and for this we think it's another egg; and if there is moisture between the skin of the kidneys and the white thing as we know, you can well feel it; therefore when you see the color of the moisture, test all throughout the entire area that it encloses, as shown previously.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	Accordingly, whoever comes after the introduction, judge by this what is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when we treat it with iron, the patient should be cleansed according to our ability and the fullness of their body; then situate him in front of his back, on something a little high, and place wool under him. Then sit beside him and command the minister to sit at his right, and extend his arm towards one of the two ribs below the navel; then take the heated iron, and cut the skin among the ribs as far as where the knife is used, and make the incision all straight across the skin up to near the belly button, and gently remove the fat underneath by scraping it slightly according to our power; then puncture this white fat completely through with water so that nothing remains inside and then place your fingers. And do not touch the navel but only the fat; cut every part or piece of his side delicately from him in such a way that if you don't cut properly, it will return as fluid. And should your egg jump to work when you finish the operation by this fat, then return it into its place when you have completed the operation at this fat; and stitch up both sides with thread through the navel together, then treat him like other wounds until he is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the egg corrupted by another illness, it is necessary that you tie the muscles that are suspended, while wondering about the bleeding; then cut all the way up to the suspension, and remove the egg, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	And if the knife is assembled into two parts together, know that these are two branches; if cut the other part as you did the first equally, then let blood out, and put in the wound wet wool in rose oil; and place outside another wet wool in wine and oil, and put on both sides, and cover with doubled cloths, and bind over to all the bandage which is according to this form:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take II cloths, and use the torn wool according to this appearance and let them be assembled by sewing in the waist of the breeches, and one of the shoulder blades lie on the foundation up to the back, and the other at the part near the elbow; and the other two shoulders above the II joints, and make it all assembled with the restriction in the loop of the braces; and every time medicine is applied to this branch of the cautery with its iron size, and you take the fine surgical knife and cut the skin of the shoulder blades, and heat it as we have said, so that the white substance contained in the water is revealed; then take the cautery according to this form, and pierce the white part with oncines, and scorch it with this delicate hot cautery:
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And the operation in all manners that you can, until you extract everything; and remember that fire should not touch the egg; know that this work is safer; and beware of blood loss during incisions, and be sure to size your operations properly. And if anything goes against you, or pus appears or bleeding occurs or something else happens, then correct whatever goes against you according to what was said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And if the disease is too severe and can't endure this operation due to its horror, then perform a piercing instead as I instructed you, and know that once you're well convinced by our explanations that aqueous humor is there, make the patient lie on an elevated seat. Then perforate in the part below where the pus accumulates across a broad area of flesh, and place the puncture long along the body; and if the incisions are wide, such that all fluids escape; then put cotton on the head, bind it, and let it drain away any remaining fluid. Then treat until the wound heals completely. And if the bandage doesn't allow water to leak out of the wound's mouth, then you should apply a quill or tool used to drain water from dropsy patients as described earlier, and widen the incision site; know that water will return after six months or so, and when it is assembled again just like before, then the disease will pass its days.
de l’aposteme des coions	From the treatment of pus in the body
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	Know that in the section of this branch there is fear in various configurations, for which I believe it's better to leave them alone; and I will tell you about the work and the appearances of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	So, I say that many abscesses come from wounds or on the kidneys; and this can happen in different situations.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	This is to know about the sour and feverous excess spreading among members or through impact; and the color of the abscess follows the body's color; and there isn't any pain, it's a grievous abscess; and by chance, there might be a hard, lumpy pus-filled abscess with a dark color, and it doesn't come from the veins or arteries, nor does it swell up from within.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	When it's due to the veins, you can recognize an inflamed pus-filled lump by its texture when you press on it with your fingers; and you should not touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	Those who have swollen veins can be recognized by their position at the point of vein expression upon touch with one's fingers, and it is possible to do a measurement on this appearance and on other figures; and you should assess the health of cows, then they are in the top half, and the spine strength near the white spot is tested, and release all around the suspension from the egg.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	If the egg is already stuck with these figures, then you should move the egg, and treat it; and if it's near the white spot or inside the veins, you need to release all that tension, and treat it circularly.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birth of the creature is at its backside, then you should hollow out everything and remove the egg as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your work is finished, apply the wound with moist wool in oil and wine, then use other treatments until it heals properly.
de l’aposteme des coions	From the treatment of pus in the body
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	This is an abscess surrounded by a resemblance to the scrotum, with softening of the veins, and the patient feels pain as it grows; and the treatment for this disease is well prepared just like that before, but nonetheless we will tell you about the process according to what the old ones did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	You must have the patient lie on an elevated seat, then pull up their undergarments to your elbows, touching all parts near the genital region, and tug firmly at them, extending each part; next cut through deeply with a sharp incision across the vessels until they are exposed, and then burn from each side. This follows how we have described in blood extraction from arteries located in temples; subsequently, thread on a needle or double string and tie it where there is a vein, then tie firmly to the original spot where the thread was first placed, tying again at another endpoint; cut down the middle straightly, according to the body's length, and remove all corrupted fluids. Then treat the wound like other cases with bandaging, ensuring no vessel that wasn't pierced by your fingers becomes infected; for this way there's no harm, and if all veins are pierced, it is necessary to drain all lymph nodes together; so that the body does not lose its flow due to cutting of veins and dries without assistance.
de la routure dou syfac	from the rupture of the uterus
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	Events of this branch occur through the section that comes from obstruction, or stretching on the stomach in the part of the ribs, because the intestines descend from that passage into one of the kidneys; and this passage is where the obstruction occurs, or due to the stretching, and these are two ways of causing: by percussion, or jumping, or braying, or by lifting grief together, and through similar things; and the signs when it's due to stretching at obstruction, so occur gradually, in lengthened time, and do not come suddenly; and the abscesses are equal until around the front, because the obstruction presses on the intestine.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it is due to impact, causing a sudden onset of pain at the beginning, and there appear various abscesses close to the skin, because of the passage of the intestine and the body behind the impact area.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And at no time do the loops descend with the intestines, and they are retained inside, causing great suffering to the patient, especially when pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these iron treatments for fear, one must avoid them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	The method for this operation is such that you instruct the patient to gently pull out the intestine with your hand into the wound from within, if it can be inserted; then surround his neck with your hands. Lift the thighs; then raise the tail above, and cut all the skin of the tail continuously; then place inside the opening the size of a thumb according to how necessary for opening the wound, and do it such that nothing can stop the intestines from coming out; then remove the obstruction by cutting in the area where the obstruction occurs, as long as white bowel is exposed everywhere; then insert your index finger into the area where the tail joins the body, between the white tail which is under the egg skin, and between the second tail, and separate the one behind the egg, and between the second tail; and then pull the white part of the obstruction with your right hand from within the tail wound opening, and lift the white part in front to your left hand, and lift the egg towards the rear end; and instruct the surgeon to extend the egg upwards, and release whatever is behind the joining point; and check with your fingers if there's any piece of intestine or white part of the obstruction hidden inside, and if you don't find anything, remove it from under the belly; then take a needle that has been made of ten threads of thick string, and insert it into the rear section of the obstruction, which is after the skin of the tail; after the egg, then cut all the visible pieces of thread until there are four; then join them one on top of another like an X, and tie up the obstruction, as we've said that's under the egg skin with a strong string of two parts; then cover the tails with thread and join them firmly in two parts, so that no piece of fat can come in between them, preventing abscesses from forming; and place this string in line with the first longitudinal line of two fingers, and after these two lines leave the part of the obstruction which is under the tail skin as large as one finger; and adjust everything else according to the roundness that the egg carries; then cut in the area where there's skin, as long as you can see it clearly and the bowels, as we've said before; then apply moistened wool as ointment, and put this on wounds, and place the string that we've mentioned.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And afterwards, cauterize the white pus sac as we have said, after incising, due to concern for blood leakage.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	For this happens often, and let the bandage stay until it bleeds from him; and if it takes a long time to bleed, use hot water, and place upon it what we have said, until it bleeds; then dress the wound with another treatment, until it heals completely.
de hernie carnouse	From fatty hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this section, I never find anyone who dares to perform the iron treatment.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the old ones said that it should be done like a branch bound together with twine, in such a way that you tie the vessels, after cutting them lightly above; then cut halfway, and treat the abscess of the one who works, until the vessels bleed; and treat it as we have said, until it heals completely.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	None comes about a rupture in the intestines as we have said, and open them; and no parts of the intestines are discharged elsewhere than at the anus, and if they do discharge elsewhere, it is little, and be treated every hour; and always if it stays too long at this point, the wound turns or becomes inflamed; and this happens due to the expansion of the syphac which is in the intestines as we have said, because it is extended, then made soft and swollen are the intestines and open; and the treatment for this involves cautery, as we have mentioned before; and never treat it with a metal rod in this manner: and let the patient lie down on their back between your hands, then cut along the swelled rupture as wide as three fingers; and then remove the syphac that is beneath the skin where it continues, then take hold of the skin and place it over the visible part of the syphac; and press at the fullness of the abdomen, then cut both the two exposed parts of the syphac along its edge, and cut one after another; then remove the head from the edge, and do not cover or stretch the syphac nor any other thing as I have instructed you in the treatment of intestinal rashes; then treat it with wound care.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you operate on the children, if it heals and treats the wound, until it is cured.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The signal is constrained and lacks manifestation in the passage, and the cauterizations are wet in this location, and closer to salvation.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	from softening of the skin of the heels
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the skin of the heels becomes soft in some people, because the muscles inside are being softened and it's visible; when one wants to treat them, they must allow the ailment to heal on their back, then cut out the softened skin from the natural skin. Then join the two edges together for a seam, and if necessary, sew the excess soft skin into three seams or four securely; afterwards stitch between the seams, treat the wound like any other until it heals, and remove the thread.
dou chastrement	punishment
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	Know that punishments are abolished in our law, and because of this I would prefer not to discuss it in this book; and they are only necessary for two reasons: one is that the authorities should know how to respond when they are asked about them, and how to treat them; and the other, because we often need punishment of some animals to assist us, such as sheep and goats and cattle and others.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	So I say that punishments are carried out in two ways: either by attraction, or through a wound.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	In the case where we do this through attraction, we place the animal in hot water until its horns soften and are ready. Then we take them with your hand until you no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Apply the method of castration: you need to mark the animal, and press the skin around its testicles with your left hand. Then tie a ligature, and operate on each one separately when you have well scalded them; and leave no small orifice as well as this subtle orifice within the veins; and this method of castration is different than the one done by attraction because sometimes during the attraction process, something remains from the skin, which makes the animal crave lust. Then treat the wound until it heals completely.
des hermofrodites	Of hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	Hermaphroditism occurs in two ways among humans: one way is when between the two sex organs they are open just like the form of nature on a woman, or if there's hair present, and sometimes it can cause urine to flow.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	The other way occurs in women, and has something above the navel like a penis and two sex organs.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	And the treatment of the disease and the fame is that you treat all the joined parts, and treat them as other wounds; in the second way, for men whose urine jumps through the skin of the thighs, if there's no cure.
de la tentigene	of the pustule
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	Tentingene is a joined part above the natural place, as long as it's too ugly to see; and some women have it just as big as a hand, and this is its treatment.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	You must remove the excess of the tentingene with your hand or on scales, and treat it gently; don't allow it to spread too far as this might lead to blood loss, then proceed with another treatment until it heals. And for a different joint that grows at the mouth of the marriage bed, and the emplacement, and if it happens to jump fire, and follows the shape of a cow, thus they named it the old 'cow disease'.
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If it is necessary that you touch it, as we have said about the pustule, and the treatment until it is healed.
de erratique	Of cautery from fire command the sick to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	Erratic is when the nature of the woman isn't completely understood, or if the disorder is minor; and it is naturally born, or accidents brought about by sickness that have occurred; or it's due to bodily disorders, or subtle or dense pus, and is formed throughout the womb, or on the ribs, or underneath, or anywhere else it might be; and to conceive and give birth, and by chance bearing flowers for reproduction; and knowing this requires looking at the symptoms of the illness.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the stabs or punctures appear close to the surface, then handle them with your fingers or under pressure.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	If it's due to subtle pus and it appears close to the heart, if you hurry, proceed like this: place your two index fingers together, and have the woman lie on her back, spreading her legs. Then form both hands into a cup shape until the subtle pus is removed from each puncture; then take yarn or fat in oil, spread it over the wound, and let the woman rest each day until she can't bear it anymore, so that it doesn't heal too soon.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the place is hard and dense, it must be cut as if it were on the leaf of a myrtle.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it's a wound from metal, suspend it in the sun and cut; have the止血 medicines ready to stop blood, such as licorice, dragon's blood, incense, combined with plenty of egg; then apply a large patch of opium so that the wound cannot stick together; and thus let it heal for a long time, and cover it with a linen tent; then perform other treatments until it heals.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when there is metal wound in the armpit, if it suits to treat according to this manner, then if it's an abscess that has ruptured.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For an abscess that has burst in the armpit, one should not apply fire to it.
des emorroides	Regarding hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	Bleeding wounds are incisions in veins that without proper medical care, and when bleeding wounds become old they turn into ulcers; and we have talked about the symptoms of these before, and the signs, and I will now discuss those that suggest healing.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that the bleeding wounds and ulcers, when they become inflamed by heat in the body, do not show themselves through smell, except for the treatment with iron.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those that are at the opening of the body's heat source can be smelled and thus can be treated.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	So it is necessary that you put the woman in a cold house, then let the altar of the scales be present with her, and place the bed at her foot, then sprinkle medicines that restrain blood on its roots; such as juniper berries, dragon's blood and incense among other things. Then bind her hands to the wall for an hour, and then put her in cold water. And if bleeding occurs due to this, let her sit in a decoction of sumac and inner shell of pomegranates and gall and similar things. And then take flour of barley, mix it with honey and sesame oil, and make it into a poultice for her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if it stops bleeding, that's good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	If not, apply suction cups to the back and nipples without piercing them; then take wool, and the moisture in the juice of plantain or in the juice of agletier with old wine, and apply heat to it.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the abscess rests, clean the wound with ointment until it is clean; and that which is called "albathir" is red, and resembles a hard head, if you need to cover it as I said for thulul treatment; and then continue the treatment until it is clean.
des apostemes de la marris	The treatise discusses treatments related to wounds or abscesses near the anus. The specific mention of "des apostemes de la marris" refers to managing and healing abscesses ("apostemes") located around the anus ("de la marris"). This part likely elaborates on medical practices for dealing with such conditions, possibly including procedures like lancing, medication application, dressing changes, and wound care.
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many ways of abscess occur in women, such as ulcers and pus-filled abscesses, herpes, indurations, fistulas, hemorrhoids, and other sores I mentioned in the section.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	It therefore seems fitting that I should explain the removal of pus in this treatise which is not among the pus-sores that swell; and if you wish to know the work of iron, then observe whether the pus is full in the beginning of its arrival, and filled with heat and fever, and if it turns red when you can see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	So don't hasten to pierce immediately, but let it die until the pain is eased; and then place the patient on his seat, and have two small seats under which he can lean, and support him on his back and bring together his legs at the parts below the leg; and spread his buttocks wide, and place his arms over his knees, and tie them well with a good bandage; then direct the operation towards the right side of the abdomen, and have ready the instrument by which you work on the opening in the bellybutton, from which comes the form later; it is necessary that when you see this instrument being brought forward, you take up the first thread for knowledge of how deep the bellybutton goes, so that what enters into the instrument does not go deeper than its应有的, and does not hurt the patient. And if the instrument is too large, it should cover the depth of the bellybutton with cloths, so that the instrument does not bother him; it is necessary for him to place the nozzle of the instrument above, and to cut the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	And when the abscess opens and one does it by hand gently, if it is fitting cover with head, on the chest the oil's surface; and when the bowl is emptied, you should place wet wadding in the wound soaked in rose oil or in green vinegar oil; then put the wadding directly over the wax at the front of the wound, and place behind the wax and under the knife some clean wet wadding soaked in water or herbs cooked with vinegar; then treat it after two days with an ointment suited to this, until it heals; and each time raise the wax and the wound by aloe-water and honey, and then by water where roots of lettuce and long astilbe are cooked; then revive with the ointment.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound has been covered with wax, you should avoid heating iron but instead treat it as we have instructed in the division.
de l’enfantement	Regarding childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	The profession begins by understanding the form of natural birth, and the signs are that when you see a woman prepare to give birth internally, and desire to smell the womb: then the child hastens to come out through force. So you know that this birth is according to its natural form, it comes solely from its head, and secondly with it; and when you see these signs, you should gently press on their belly, so that the child can come out quickly; for when it descends through its head, it comes with its second part, and is cleansed of its excesses by good cleanliness. And anything else that does not follow this way does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	For it comes only through its feet, and comes through the body or shoulder blades, and hands, or through its belly, or womb, and is turned by chance around its neck, and through other evil forms; one must be wise and subtle in these matters for a midwife, and beware of error and deception. I will show you all the forms on how they should be helped.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	When the fetus descends through its head by natural means, and the woman experiences intense labor, and her strength is weak, she should sit on a stool or have women hold her; then take this from its natural source, where fenugreek has been cooked, and then apply the midwife between her fingers to the small spatula which has this form:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	And cut the second part [of childbirth], and remove until the moisture that is contained within has been expelled; and support the woman's belly as her child descends, if it does not descend then it is necessary to catheterize the woman with fennel seed oil. After this, make her drink and inhale camphor, hold her mouth and nose for an hour: now the child can be delivered.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And if the child's hands come out, it is necessary to gently and gradually push them back in; and if they cannot enter, you should place the woman on a seat, and lift her feet up. Then pull down the seat onto the ground, shave the area for her, so she doesn't urinate during this process; and if the hands can't be pushed back in, and the child has died, then cut the woman with the knife that was prepared beforehand, remove the child, and push them back in evenly.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	On the outcome of the child at its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	When the child arrives at its feet, if it suits to push upwards; and then turn slowly, little by little, until it is even; then grasp the legs and spread them slowly.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	Can it jump up to the thighs, if you command and let it suffer from confinement; if it jumps further, may God will it.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it doesn't conform as we have said, if he twists a bit and a bit more, until it aligns with the natural figure.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it is gently.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	And if it doesn't jump like we did, say you want to use a powder of height and oil of sesame, and melted gum, and grind everything in a mortar; and put this ointment inside and outside the body, then make her sit in warm water up to under her ribs; and when she is softened there, have her wear turpentine around her neck, and leave it on, for an hour; then make her sit on a stool, then make her sneeze and hold her mouth and nose closed, and gently rub her stomach, because the child jumps now.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	from the position of the child on his knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	When the child comes in this form, if you gently place their hands little by little; then secure it at its neck, and hang its feet below, and let it lie sideways on the bed; and bend its hands little by little, and then take its hands onto its belly, and lift out its buttocks until she is positioned below; and if the child does not jump, seize its feet and give a strong push, then move its head upwards, then I thrust my hands; and pull out the child gently; and command the woman to pray as long as the child comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	from the birth of the child that comes out with one hand during
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	It's necessary to try to bring back the hand: if you cannot return it, make the woman stand up and walk; if she can't walk, make her sit on the bed, and straighten her legs outwards; then perform the massage I've described. And if she doesn't give birth, make her sit on a chair, then try to bring back the hand; and pull out the child according to its natural position, and have her sneeze, and command her to pray until the child comes forth.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	From the exit of the child from its neck, and spread out its hands, and its face turned towards its mother's back.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	It is necessary that the patient raises their hand, then turns it gradually and gradually, and you gently guide it. And when they are even, you place them on the muscle toning area of the arm, as we have said, then instruct them to move gradually; and once you achieve this, make them sit down, and command them to pray; and get them to sneeze.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	In this same manner for all the second part
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	When it proceeds in this manner to complete the second part, ensure that the second part reaches your finger up to the nail; and while the moisture is drained. And if there's any remaining on her face or neck, let her breathe out from the mouth, not holding it back, causing a choking; then expel the child inside until you've placed them correctly, and command the woman to pray only once: thus gently guide her.
de l’issue des gemelz	Regarding the delivery of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	Know that twins are often born, and sometimes three or even four at a time; this is not an uncommon occurrence, it just happens.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	Two things are removed, and do not live on their own, if you ask me; I know this, that they multiply and are devoured by the fire which creates them, which is bound to the belly; and each time come out naturally like all under them, just as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And if they come out painfully, as we have said for the treatment, and it is the subtle wound, and do what she tells you quickly and lightly; and do so according to how well it leads to healing.
de plusors enfans	Of several children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	None of them are formed in the first, second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh or more up to fifteen times, and they are all formed in the shape of an infant through the measurement of their beauty, and it is necessary for the doctor to know all this because something similar might happen; do so according to what is proper.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	When you treat the pregnant woman with dead or breech baby, as I have explained in the division section, and if it doesn't come out, and you are forced to intervene surgically; then it is necessary that you know whether the woman has good health, and hasn’t had any accidents or feels fear of death; then it is important that the woman be straight on her back, and have her shoulders down, and her legs lifted; and lay the minister's hand in two parts, or she ties to bed if not being treated during childbirth; then rub the pregnant's mouth with moist olive oil mixed with sage and fenugreek seeds and linseed meal, then grease her hands with these oils and these spices; then gently put them back on the pregnant, then let the minister tie the nappies that are suitable for this to her, and guard that the baby is prepared so it can descend from its head; if you insert the nappies in her armpits or neck or mouth or under the tongue or around the beard or at the waist or near the ribs, and if the baby's descent is towards the feet, then insert or use a needle and on the sides of half; and it should be that you tie the nappy with your right hand, and put the fold between her left fingers, and grease them all gently, and insert the nappy into none of these places we have mentioned, until it reaches to the empty thing; and this is the shape of the nappy:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	Then look for another incision, or make the third if needed, so that the extractions are equal; and then move it equally from one side to the other, so that movement occurs, and ensure that the scalpels have teeth for holding during movement, as this is how it should be done:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if there remains a part of it, if oiling touches any of his limbs, and you place them in that part, then treat the other part; and if nothing remains, if set this incision higher up or even further up, and do so until everything comes out completely.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	And if one hand comes in front of the other and it cannot be pulled back due to being squeezed tight, then you should wrap around both sides until it comes out completely; then cut at the joint of the foot or on the blade, and similarly do this with the other hand, and for two feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	And if the head of the child is large and it is twisted at its exit, or it has an acute join assembled, then you should push the conical phlegm into your fingers, and form the head and extract the acute; or you find it on the tool that is called "almidach", from which the formation comes with the tools of this chapter; and do the same for the child's head naturally large; and then pull the bones out with forceps, and if the head jumps quickly and is held by force, as long as moisture or pus issues; and if it cannot come out, you cut it into pieces as you can; and if it is swollen in the belly or under the ribs, then you should puncture until the moisture flows.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if it appears in his feet, it is a light condition, and its extension to the mouth of the womb is also light.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	And if it is twisted in the belly or udder, then you should extract it through the stretched skin envelope on the hand; and form the belly or udder, until the moisture that is inside goes away. And if other limbs are osteitis, and the head remains, then push the lump with your palm upwards from the maris (a term possibly referring to a specific body part), and pull it up to the opening of the maris; then you push out or pull in I or II fingers, and pull forcefully; and if the opening of the maris is narrowed due to an abscess that came there, then travel through it is not appropriate, instead it should administer moist and fatty things. And provide the remedies with plasters, and apply a bath in warm water and emollient oils and moisturizers.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if the baby is under his ribs, and you can make him equal, then apply what we have said about live birth infants; and if there's no ability to do so, split the mother by sections, and don't leave any remainder.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And when you have done this, apply as we have said about the removal of abscesses that come during pregnancy; and if bleeding occurs, then place it in water while restraining, and apply other treatments.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman who had given birth to one child, then she gave birth to another near that one, and the second also died.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, there was an abscess in her womb, and it grew so much that she opened [it], and started experiencing severe pain.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was summoned for treatment, and I thought for a long time, and could not find the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I applied strong plaster to it, and out came a bone, and after some days another one.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was very surprised because a person's belly has no bone.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I want the wound to heal well and have my hands on the bone until the woman is in the best position; and I undress the woman for a long time like this, and it becomes somewhat bow-shaped from her left side. And I cannot remember having written about this chapter except because when the masters find an unusual thing, they should know how to give aid.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to reset the dislocated joint to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	Next comes the form of the pressure method, which is described in these books; and for each two turns use each of two arms with each of two fingers.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	In all ways, the horns are more delicate than a ring and should be made of ebony or boxwood. And make the mouth as wide as two thirds of the ring's diameter, and ensure the groove for the rods is one half that width or slightly more; and in the middle of these two rods place two attachments of this same rod, which must firmly stay in both sides, about a half palm long or perhaps slightly longer; and these two attachments are fitted into the groove on the edge so they open when you turn the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Another form, similar yet more delicate and lighter, should be made from ebony or boxwood, following the shape of scissors; it should have two heads each with two attachments, as you can see, each about a palm in length, and they should be one palm wide; when you see the clamp open completely on all the tools, make her lie down on the bed, her feet hanging and her legs spread apart, then place the two attached parts together at the clamp, holding the tool's head under her armpits. Then use your hand on all the tools in the same way as scissors, according to how you see the mouth of the clamp open, until the baby comes out as she desires.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	This instrument is entirely raised and multiplied according to its resemblance; and when you have prepared them, the work progresses faster, and they are higher for men in terms of their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	If you do not despair over the instrument but prepare it, because its necessity is not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	When the second child is retained during birth, it must be commanded that she retains her position, and then makes her sneeze with consideration, and hold your hands to her mouth and nose; and if she jumps through this, everything will be well.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	If that does not work, then take an emetic and have it ready, or prepare a cover or lid, and put in the pot herbs that can open the mouth of the woman, such as calamus, rue, anise, chamomile, cassia bark and lavender; all these herbs, or any of them, should be cooked or boiled with water on the fire. Then place a reed or a cover over the pot, and the other end in the mouth of the pregnant woman, and push until the vapors enter within her; then make her sneeze, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If you jump to the next one immediately.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	And if it remains after this treatment, and lacks strength, then instruct the patient to moisten her left hand in oil of sesame or musk oil, and then proceed naturally with the balm. And seek out the second application; and when she finds it, seize it gently and extend it slightly straighter, so that there is no obstruction during extraction; but must lightly move it rightward and leftward, and then pull; if this comes and loosens.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	And if the opening in her mouth is too narrow for us, we have stated the treatment of coughing and herb fumigation. And if she isn't relieved from everything that we have said, then be cautious not to force it when pulling; but it must be that whoever is handling the mouth of the patient ties her to the woman's cooking pot, then applies tetrafarmacological ointment enema after that; if this will bring relief and restore strength. But still, even if she finds relief, there may come bad smell in her stomach and head, and irritate the skin.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	Then indeed, suitable fumigations are necessary for this: none of the old ones have proven effective fumigation with watercress and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the tool with which one fumigates a woman during labor and delivery is as follows:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And it appears like a cane, and you place the delicate head in nature, and the shoulders wide on the fire; and apply smoking over the coals, and the leechcraft until she is exhausted, and then start another.
de percier lou fondement	To pierce the base
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many children are born without understanding the ground, instead they have a subtle misunderstanding: therefore in childbirth it is necessary for her to penetrate this misunderstanding according to its purpose, and not to allow herself to be pierced by sharp pain, and guard against contact with its placement; then apply wet wool in wine and oil, then continue with ointment treatment until she is healed.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt whether it will stay in place, then apply or insert a hazel rod, and leave the patient's hands bound for several days, and remove the rod when the child wishes to move about.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And it is not sudden scarring of wounds or abscesses that comes; if you need to treat the scarring, you should do this: if you must cure it, as we have said regarding the hazel rod.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the瘘管 from the foundation
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	Fistulas that originate from the foundation are nodules, and swellings that originate inside or in the space between two parts, whether for one fistula or multiple; and when this nodule is old, if it acts, and emits moisture yellowish-white or subtle bowels, and none of these fistulas are abscesses; and they are known by the fact there's discharge or vomiting when the patient expels, and sometimes a movement from one place to another.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if there are fistulas that extend up to the bladder, and up to half of the penis; and they reach up to the joint of the leg, and up to the root of the testicles.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And thus one knows the fistula persists at the foundation, and does not persist: and it is that you bend your third finger or foundation, and insert a subtle needle or spider thorn in the fistula when there's no twist.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	And if it has twists or curves, you insert a subtle tentacle like that of an octopus, or a horse's hair, as long as you feel the tentacle or hair on your finger; and if you don't feel it, and there's no dampness, airflow, or smell, as we have said: know that it hasn't pierced yet; so take care to cleanse it properly.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula is long up to the bladder or even where urine is conducted, if it jumps with urine, and cannot be sealed by medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	If it has pierced up to the ankle joint, then the tentacle extends up to the knee; if there's no twists and internal pain, then it means that it's at its end, and is not worth medicine or immediate ointment treatment; and for these persistent fistulas, there's no effective cure other than effort and useless meddling from those who interfere.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	In this case which is neither Persian nor ancient, there is an expectation of healing through iron, as I have experienced, and that the patient lies on their back; then lift their legs up to their thighs, and have their thighs inclined towards their belly; afterwards stick a spider's web tent, or a toad tent if there are tortuosity issues, until you know where the tent is coming from.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If the patient feels pain deep within, you must press your index finger on that spot; then if you sense that the tent is piercing through, know it's a Persian condition. And determine whether there's sand or gravel between your fingers, knowing this identifies it as Persian; otherwise, such injuries cannot be healed.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	Even still, it's possible to heal many injuries well, but this happens rarely. And when you assist, if there are any heat treatments that suit, they should be applied according to the size of the fistula as described; and apply them hot within the fistula until coming out from beneath the foundation. Do this two or three times until you know that these gravel-like particles have been burnt, which resemble a feather's tip; then treat any wet tents with butter until all the gravel comes out, and then proceed with a greasing ointment for the healing of charred material and joining tissues together.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If he is like this healthy, then indeed.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	If it's like this, there can be no other state of health; and if he attempts it between [the organs], not reaching up to the root which is or becomes the foundation, and in between your thumb and the probe you have an abundant layer covering or flesh, and you see the fistula at that point under the skin; when the pus begins forming into a fistula, and pushes until it hits the tenting layer before the probe, and then applies the cautery afterwards, as long as it reaches to the tip of the tenting layer; and the tenting layer will be released, and will discharge. Then remove all the fat that appears to resemble a bird's feather, and don't leave any residue.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the sinuses don't continue, and cut between you and the wound, then apply fire or an herbal remedy to it.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	For the fire cauteries combine two good things: namely, the burning of adhering fat, and the evacuation of blood and the removal of moisture; then treat wet tentings with butter or powdered substances, until they turn white in the heat, and when the burned fat has drained out; then heal the wound from the soldered joints filled with hard fat, and these are dried medicines.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	But when it is restored, if it is healed and does not return again.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula reaches almost up to the bottom of its opening, and is removed from the body, you must push on its top or its base, and inquire about it.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If you feel the tent, and between II is the weave or the mesh or the meshwork, where it's about to pierce, if there be only a way of fortune and hope, by administration of one of the III methods: or you cauterize it as we said, or you remove until reaching the base, or if you can do so by making incisions and cure according to first; and don't go too far beyond the limit, that you may not remove the holder of the foundation, and let go of the evacuations through it willingly; then treat it accordingly, as we said; in case it heals, or you lift off that covering and clean it after it's removed from under the base, or by probing or with another pointed instrument; then cleanse that wound-making flesh remaining in the injury site to the extent you can; then study to restore the injury, and to prolong the fistula at the end of the foundation: if it is easier thing for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And there are no times when you create a fistula in this manner: and when you puncture the tent at the fistula, and it is where the root lies beneath the skin above, take one tent pierced through the head according to this form:
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And it pierces two threads twisted together and lets the tent stay on all of the thread within the fistula until it reaches the head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	And if it is Persian in the margin of the foundation within, then extract that thread from the torn one, just as you pinch its base or foundation; and pull out the head of the thread, and assemble the two ends together, and join them together, and leave them for one day or two; and do not tighten it at all until the threads have fused these substances that are between the two and stick together; then treat the wound until it is healed and has recovered.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not perforate, make it pierce in all possible ways that you can, provided it is not too deep.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not proper to do by the setting of a splint just so beforehand, and then treat him, as we have said, until he heals.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	The shape of the spiny patch that is used to make a fistula is quite simple and consists of one part being cut; and on another part not, because you should neither create nor avoid creating this, as you can see here:
des emorroydes	from bleedings
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	Emorrydes are divided into two ways: when they occur within the foundation, similar to a grain of resin, and there are small and large ones. These often contain blood and at times one or more may be present, existing either inside the foundation or close to its edge. But those that exist outside have little moisture and only a little yellow water or some blood, with color like the flesh; in treating those who experience Emorrydes within their foundations, you should instruct your patients to expel them through chambers until they are fully out of the foundation and visible as strands; if they rush back due to moisture, take them again using tweezers or hold onto them with a finger, then dig into their roots. If one cannot hold them by their moisture alone, grab them in bandages, cotton, or a camel's wool piece; extract them with your fingers, then dig out the root area thoroughly, apply hot powders typically used for cautery procedures; you should cauterize them as it is said or described in the section about cautery, and treat them with other treatments until they are healed; and if the foundation cannot expel them naturally, have your patients take castor oil and a sharp, abrasive herb to wash out what's underneath until it can be expelled completely; once the Emorrydes are gone and the strands have exited the foundation, treatment becomes easier. You should grasp them with your finger or tweezers, extract, then treat as we have explained until they heal and fear of surgery has passed.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is necessary for you to sew according to this method: take a twisted thread and put it into an awl, then pull the thread outwards and make an incision with the awl from another side, twist the two ends of the thread around the awl, ensuring they are wide; and fix the threads in place before tying them together, remove the awl, do so for all others, leaving one to control blood overflow. Then place a moist bandage or a bandage soaked in rose oil or a poultice over the wound base, place it over the wound, and instruct the patient to rest; then leave him until he is healed, when they will be down, treat them with ointment and other remedies, until he is healed.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	With drying heat or on a foundation
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times, there is internal bleeding, due to nature's constraints, and when the disease has aged, and medicine no longer helps.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is necessary to trim at the tip of a spatumile or on your nail where the skin is above, do not let it dry out. Then treat him until he is hardened as it should be; and if he cannot harden, repeat the trimming more forcefully than before, until everything heals up, and has been scraped off; then treat him until he fully recovers.
dou fremit	with trembling
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	The text describes a small false appearance before the body and travels throughout; and whenever the pulse is cold, and one feels it also like death from tremors, it comes to the entire body, and more in the hands than anywhere else.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	And the treatment is that you take a stalk from a goose feather or a very strong vulture feather, and place this stick on the tremors, until the purple circle eradicates all the tremors. Then turn your hand completely around the stick as long as you cover all of it with the tremor, and place this around your body, up to your heart, and uproot the tremor from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see fit, make it in the form of a quill from an earthworm or iron according to this shape, and let it be finely placed below and sharply above:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	Do not pierce it, for you must hold at both ends and press firmly. And if you see fit, apply the cautery to the pulsation, as is described in this chapter on fire cauterization.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of the blister
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Never make a blister of silver or tin, or melted lead; and never use small and large tools depending on who they are for.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Therefore, when treating children and the weak and painful, they are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the blister, whether small or large, is like this:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	And if the belly is tied or pierced at one side, as you see, and the navel is inside pierced; it has two defects on one side, and one on the other; and the belly is filled with medicines from a beast's bladder or parchment, and completely pierced with small defects. There should be an inch of space between each defect, then thread I thick silk that is twisted in X or diagonal fashion into these defects, and stitch the belly as if it were a goat; and when the medicine is inside, fasten it with a strong string in front of the tool, then perform a cathartic; this forms like a circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And let the remedy be neither too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head with oil or butter of egg or something similar, then gently massage it. Then the healers should press both his hands together on him until he's completely seen, then remove the cyst, and lift the patient's legs to the surface; if the medicine is intended to come out, pull it as much as you can; and if he sleeps all night, that is greater help.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you are treating the disorder of abdominal drainage with this medicine, and it quickly wants to come out, then repeat it until it is effective.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And if the bleeding is from the root or base, or an abscess, then extract the cyst even as subtle as for a child's; and this is the form of the subtle cyst on which the skin is restrained:
des plaies	of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have spoken about the treatment of wounds in the previous section; now we will discuss hand treatments and medicines, according to their completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I state that wounds vary according to how they are made, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and why they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	The things that cause wounds are due to the action of stones and the size of a sword or knife, or lance, or stick, or similar objects; or they happen according to the parts of the body, such as a wound on the neck, or head, or stomach, or belly, or liver, and similar parts; and I will tell you how to treat each wound, starting with simple wounds of the head because the remembrance comes in its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	I state that when a simple wound occurs or a head injury comes about, and the bone isn't broken, be cautious if it's due to stone or similar issues, and even if the skin is entirely torn and the wound is large, you lightly doubt blood collection: if there's only little blood from the wound, immediately treat with the surgical snares on the same side as it comes about. And if blood flow stops after treatment in that area, treat differently for the removed part; and ensure the patient is filled with wine and rich meats afterwards.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if they don't want to be treated with surgery, let them weaken their flesh and not drink wine or eat meat. And place in the wound, should blood collection occur, wet cotton in olive oil or in rosmary water; and if there is no blood collection, place on the wound, provided it's full of fresh blood and isn't being disturbed by air, a powder that I will describe shortly; and should they have been disturbed, apply some ointments until it heals.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large like that of a swordsman and such, and the lips cannot be brought together by tents, then they are joined by stitches, as I will say about wounds of the abdomen, with stitches.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	If the wound reveals bone, and perhaps some dirt, but only stays in place for a little bit if you force it; then treat the wound with medicine, restore hard flesh instead of skin, and instruct the patient to eat large meats, such as testicles and cooked wheat or similar items.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if you find rotting skin or if it doesn't reach the bone and if you remove the rotten part entirely, then apply medicine; and if there is an artery or vein inside the wound or in the tissue, which cannot be stopped by medicines alone, then tie off the artery, and if you come across a dislocation, bind it with thread; and if this doesn't provide any benefit, then cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, the treatment should be light: and you should apply this powder which binds in such a way that when the heat has acted upon it.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And the way to make the powder is: take one part of incense; dragon's blood two parts; live charcoal three parts, and finely grind it all together. Then apply this powder to the wound, press it in firmly until it well ventilates and joins with all its blood thoroughly. Then tie it up tightly, leaving it to heal without opening it if it doesn't swell; for one doesn't remove medicine until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And this operation of cautery should be done only once, not when one lacks the charcoal or the blood from dragon, but when the art has healed the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient has healed the wound, indeed in that state, you must not apply this powder; but apply some ointments that have been digested, or oat flour made with water and honey, as long as it flows. Then treat it with other treatments until it is sound.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And if there is an osseous fracture accompanying the wound and it's small, pinch it with fine forceps. And I will tell you later about fractures of the head.
de la plaie dou col	from the wound in the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	This wound comes from the neck region, it is simple if there's no distinction between its parts and the head parts, but when it affects beneath the neck or the artery gets cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	If it's the nerves and there is no other organ involved, leave the treatment alone and don't put anything restrictive on it as this harms the nerves and causes them to withdraw; do not apply anything cold to the wound because the substance of the nerves is cold, and their continuation with the brain is through the highest part of the body; but use moist medicine instead, such as gently washed chamomile in mild water, mixed with rose oil, and also lice washed similarly in mild water, and other earthy minerals according to this manner, and wet ointments.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, then treat it so that it heals properly.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wounds are deeply cut and filled with blood, pierce them or even below them; and if an artery is severed, and there's bleeding, stop it, and heal and cauterize as needed; and if the trachea is cut or a bone, keep its place by guarding over the pathway where meat goes, ensure you do not touch the trachea but treat according to its natural figure; then apply an adhesive bandage, leave for several days, then cure with dry dressings until it heals; and if there's a pattern in the bone, remove it; and if any bone pieces exist, take out all that you can, and these unable to retrieve, let them be until the wound becomes infected, and fully heal from within; and if the wound is fresh, apply powder as I've said.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone in the wound and it has a瘘管, then the treatment should be as I have said in my chapter on this subject.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	From the wound of a spear or a knife.
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	If it's from a lance or a knife, and the wound is deep, examine whether wind blows out of the wound when you check the patient: if that happens, then know the wound is fatal; and if it isn't deep, and it still has all its blood, do not put any powder on it right away, nor bind it because the blood won't drain fully from beneath until it recirculates through the body and into the heart, and occupy the patient with this; but apply an attractive ointment instead, binding it twice a day; and if you don't have an ointment, put old cotton in the wound to absorb moisture, and make the patient rest on the wound for three days or four, or more; if no cramps or heart tremors occur as a side effect, then know that the condition of the patient is improving; and when you see good signs, understand that the wound has been saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	Treat with the other remedies as long as there is blood; and if it can't heal by itself, then understand that there's an ulcer; treat this manner as one should.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And if the wound is from a sword or knife incision, and it's simple or worse, or on the back, follow the treatment that suits the person in front of you; if it's large, stitch it up; and if it's small, apply powder; and if it's infected inside the bone and has broken pieces, treat the wound similarly as you would a wound on other parts of the body; and for other wounds on other members, make judgments accordingly as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	about the rupture of the stomach
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	The removals from the belly are large, medium, and small; for any major injury affects either an intestine or parts of intestines due to foreign body entry. Stitching up such wounds is more troublesome, and it's never worse than a smaller wound compared to larger ones, because with larger injuries, we can't place the intestines back properly without taking them out piece by piece; as when they feel cold, they don't return to their original positions completely, which makes small injuries better in this case. You should know that belly ruptures occur through four ways: The two common stitches take place on belly wounds and stitches of other body parts have other specific stitches but are also common with other wounds; however, all of them tend to be more effective when it comes to belly wounds. I will describe each type separately and explain.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	I say that when the wound is small and nothing of the intestine has come out, and if there's no serious injury, this can be treated through one of two methods: either due to the size of the wound as we've said, or because the intestine is swollen from cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And when it is cold, warm it in this way: soak a sponge or the center of cloth in only hot water, or cook it in hot water with vinegar and cypress leaves, and raise the intestine until the swelling disappears; and then after doing this wine for them to drain and cool down to relieve the swelling.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	And when you see the swelling depart, moisten the intestine with water or with cooked salted meat because through this the entry allows for a little more thing; and if it cannot enter, then make the wound a bit bigger using the tool one uses to remove stitches; and the first treatment should be made so that the cut is not long without a real need; and these are the tools to split it: if you cut inside at the bend and outward not, and see this shape.
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged, and the internal organs jump out, if you can put them back according to their natural form in their proper place, do so, because this matters.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	When the wound is wide, and it's in the belly area, it should be that you make the patient lie on their back, and put their legs higher than their head. And if it's in the belly area, place your head and buttocks higher than the belly parts, and similarly, when the abdominal rupture is in one of the two sections, make sure that the part that was damaged is higher than the other; and thus you should follow what I say for large and medium wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	For small wounds, use what you have at hand. Then take the common surgical tool to cut the whole wound, stitch it up with your hands and join the edges; this is how stitches are made, and you should either use one needle or more depending on the width of the wound. Leave an inch from the edge of the wound, then insert a needle with strong thread through that part. Penetrate both sides of the skin using both needles which are inside the skin until it's pierced enough to stitch this part together; join the two ends of the stitches three times in total; then tie them tightly using thread on either side, before joining the edges of the wound. Leave an inch after each stitch, and insert another needle; then sew just as you did with the first needle, without stopping until all parts of the wound are stitched; use needles that are neither too fine nor too thick, because thin needles cut through the flesh completely, while very thick ones may not fit well: these must be medium-sized. Don't let the stitches pierce or loosen during sleep by being too tight at the edges; cover them with blankets or cloths to help hold together until healed; this method of stitching is more suitable for small wounds, as you would use one needle and a second stitch in most cases when you join both sides of the skin and both sides of the siphac together on one needle with medium thread; once you've pierced all four ends together, pull the needle from where you started, doing it like you tie knots. Leave space between each stitch equal to about an inch; this stitch heals the person, and I sewed a wound that was caused by a knife in their stomach region, which had been cut open with a sword, being more than half a palm wide, and contained intestines several inches long, being in the middle of the belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I brought back the intestines until it had been 24 hours since they were removed, and the wound healed up to 15 days. I treated him and he became healthy again.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And when the doctors had decided that he would die, it was a miracle; and I did not treat him with ointment, for I was in a region where none could be found, nor any medicines; instead, I changed old cotton twice a day on the wound, and washed it with honey water until he recovered.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	Or I will tell you two proper sewing methods: take the needle and insert it from the outside of the wound to inside; when it pierces straight through the muscle in line, sew with your hand at the point where the needle pierced or near what you have pierced, then make another piercing on the opposite side of the inner part to the outer edge; and know that this sewing technique is like how a peltier sews fur, leaving once the insertion site from one side and taking it up again from the other, until all parts are completed.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	The second method of stitching, as Galen properly stated, is such that no one does it. They join the two parts together in their natural order and apply one end near another, like this: thread a needle or an eye near the middle, then pierce only the top part, leaving both ends joined at the middle; then turn the needle and make it pierce from below all the way to inside, through both ends joined at the middle. Then pierce both parts from below all the way to inside with two more needles or eyes that are on the opposite side; this is the manner of stitching and is the most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	Galen said this word and no one affirms it, that one must stitch the belly with two needles or threads in each; and should one pierce one needle on one side and the other on the other, like those who stitch corroies. And know that when the injury is halfway through the belly, the stitching is more painful than the others' bellies.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	The judgments on the wound are such as those of other wounds: and it is this way; when you find the fresh wound with all its blood, just like the flesh has had them, then return the intestines, and the belly; then put on a stimulating powder over the char. And if the flesh has had them, place no ointment until the wound heals; and clean the thread, have it sutured together the opening, and the mirror; then treat the wound as others are treated, until it is healed; and if you do not have medicines, put on, as soon as it begins to heal properly, old cotton, and stir it twice a day until it is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	For you do not need any other medicine besides several preparations when the wounds are simple; and if you suspect that the wound might cause communication with principal members, then it is necessary for you to moisten light wool in oil of gently heated warmth or in rose oil, and place it inside the joints, and around the armpits; and if there is pain or inflammation in the bowels, and this happens repeatedly, then catheterize with black wine, and similarly if the inflammation reaches up to the intestines; and puncture from within, and know that when it's large intestine, it's easier to heal than smaller ones.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestine that is called 'juvenile' cannot heal when it is injured, and this is due to the position of the veins found there, and because of the intricacy of the entire body's structure, as well as its connection with nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	And if the liver jumps out of the wound, you should place it back in the same manner as the intestine when it is fresh. But if it has become old and turned yellow or black, then it is necessary to tie up what is black, so that blood does not spill over, for there are veins and arteries inside; afterwards cut open where the stitches lie, and put both ends of the liver underneath the wound all the way out until you can ease the extraction when the livers fall down, and the wound heals.
de la routure dou boueil	Of the breach of the boil
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	When the intestine is torn and the wound is small, one can sometimes restore it in certain cases, as I witnessed that someone was wounded with a lance or had a belly cut by a sword; and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and became a fistula, causing loss of contents and gases; I applied treatment according to what I knew, and didn't stop refining until it healed, and sewed up the stitches.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	And when I saw him fastened down, I wondered if the patient had hurt himself inside his stomach; and he was not in any pain, but was doing better, eating and drinking; and told no experimenter that when there is a small injury inside the intestine, it should be handled like this: take large cloths, then bring together the edges of the wound. And when the cloth has opened the mouth, if she forces her mouth onto it, then place it between two edges, so that her mouth presses against; and then stick the cloth down, and this is held in such a way that it cannot be pulled off, then put another cloth after it like before, until the whole wound is covered; and thus is done the injury.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	For those who get involved in the intestine, and cause no harm to the patient, one can tie up the intestine with a fine thread taken from an animal's intestine. The method is as follows: take the thick part of this intestine thread and then bind it with a thin thread of linen, twist this together, then stitch this thread onto a needle and sew the intestine through this hole; this way of sewing threads only depends on knowledge and hope; even if the injury is large and extensive, particularly when it's in one of the smaller intestines, there is no obstruction or health issue as long as it remains fine.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	from a fistula or where it might be.
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Know that every wound or abscess, when it matures, is universally called 'fistula', and even when covered and healed.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	And fistula is according to the true condition of the thickened and white swelling, where one does not feel pain, and it is also covered like the feathers of a bird; and sometimes it bursts out clearly visible, and at other times it is thicker; sometimes it's small, and at other times quite enough; and I have spoken about this in the division of wounds, that every wound that isn't healed, and where there is no flesh, it leaves only through one of the nine causes: namely, due to the weakness of blood or pus; or because of its malicious nature; or because there is hard flesh inside, and on the edges, which doesn't allow new flesh to grow; or there is too much pus; or the veins are diseased, and the substance has a bad quality; or the medicine used in treatment isn't good; or because of the manner of infection being like pestilence; or due to the property inherent to its location, digestion being slow and recovery being delayed by nature; or there are veins or bones present: and I have already shown all these causes, along with their signs, and treatments with medicines in this division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	It is necessary for me to inform you about the treatment of fistulas which is done through manual work.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	You should know that fistulas occur in all body parts of the head; because there are fistulas that come from large veins and arteries, and nerves, or in the thorax, or in the intestines, or in the bladder, or on any rib, or in the spinal cord, or in any joint of hands or feet; and if they affect the main property of a limb's function, and similar to its anatomy.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And all the fistulas of this manner are a cause for concern during recovery, and there is nothing but negligence or ignorance; and if there's no fistula that does not reach as far as what I've mentioned, then you have initiated treatment correctly, and you can identify it. Take an arachnid web or iron tent, if the fistula is straight, use this tool; if the fistula is twisted, seek out a delicate spiderweb tent because the spider web conforms to the twists. If you cannot properly find the fistula through various tests, then treat with enemas from one of its ends, as moisture travels from one end to another and cleanses it. Then treat it carefully using your strength to determine if there's bone or nerve obstructing it, ask the patient about their pain when pressed and locate where they feel it; once you truly know its location and that it is far from joints, nerves, arteries or veins or any body part I've mentioned before, treat as instructed previously. Remove the pus and corrupted parts inside; then continue with treatment until it's healed. If the fistula is well-positioned straight, treat it fully at this position, then apply wet cotton swabs saturated in medicine to corrode the excess left in the bottom, then cover it with healthy flesh for as long as it needs healing. If it hasn't healed yet, cauterize it as we have instructed, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, remove it.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If the vein or nerves are not obstructed or main limbs are unharmed, as we have said; and if there is an exposed bone with decay and blackness, you should only operate until all decay has been removed, then cleanse flesh as quickly as possible until it heals; and if healing does not occur, resume treatment exactly as before. Then uncover and clean until you reach the bottom, remove all decay, and restore the place; and if it is well healed, it is indeed cured.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	If it's not the sky, know that decay has penetrated too far for recovery. If there is no other option than to leave it to nature; and if there's a little corrupted bone, you can remove it with tongs, use an appropriate tool for this task, and if there are multiple bones, remove them all, do not leave any behind. And if moisture causes it against your will, without error or fear, combine heat, moisture, and flesh, liberate the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	And if you cannot remove them within an hour, place something promoting putrefaction on the wound, and leave it until the flesh around the bones rots completely, and then they will have lighter bones; and if it's a large bone like in leg or thigh, only let the decay continue until all of its blackness is removed, then close the wound; and if there's a large portion of decayed material up to the bone; you should remove everything up to that point of putrefaction, and then treat the wound until it heals; and I will tell you about a case where this happened in someone's leg, so you may take it as an example and aid in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	There was a young man around XXX years old, who suffered from pain in his leg due to something that came inside the body. It caused a large abscess there, and they couldn't find any cause for opening it; but because of their folly, they opened until the abscesses burst, and they ate away much material, and became a fistula, causing immense loss such that all bones were swollen and filled with bodily fluid; and many doctors treated him for about two years, yet no one was skilled in the art of surgery as I was when I arrived, and saw his leg along with the remedies used to cure him, and what ate away through the damages inside the body; and the body parts became red like youth's skin color, and had a yellowish hue.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I set up a tent at one of these bumps, and then searched all the bumps, finding that each came against another from every part of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	I hurriedly did so, and in one of the bumps I copied it until I discovered a part of the bone. I found that it was corrupted and pierced inside, and the corruption went up to the bone; this is what appeared to me from the corrupted bone, and I thought there might be no further corruption other than the one I took out; and then began to heal the wound with medicines for a long time, but couldn't stitch. And then began again, and discovered the bone as before, finding that the corruption continued inside the bone, this is what appeared to me, and then removed it, and tried to sew the gap. But I could not because I had copied up to within a palm of the bone, and carried it out all its length, then healed with medicines; and it was quick to heal and stitch immediately, and did not need to start over again except due to the weakness caused by illness which could not bear, and due to fear of death that I felt towards him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For in the expulsion of bloody discharge often occurs, but it was completely bloodless, and from where the os occurred there grew a hard flesh, and it was well formed and had no harm or contrary at all everywhere, neither inside nor outside.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, should it happen to be treated this way: take a piece, and pull at the end of the bone that opens, and command that you extend it upwards; and place another bandage made of thicker cloth than the first one, and bind it on the rotten flesh inside the bone, and stretch its opening so that you can pull out the rotten flesh from underneath, and expose the fresh flesh where you need to cut, ensuring you don't damage the fresh flesh; put a hot iron or board under the bone to replace the removed rotten flesh; then do this as much as one can see and feel the decay, and repeat it again.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	And if the bone is corrupted and does not open, or the corruption is in the middle of one part or another, then remove all the flesh; after this, place a point there, then let the corruption be discovered from one part to another, and let the fire burn as long as the corruption lasts, just as we have said. And if the corruption is in the joint, you should cut through the corrupted joint, and burn the bone on the other side; and if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, there is no other angle but to cut that part; and if the corruption is at the edge of your hand or foot, it's very strong this thing, but nevertheless you must find out about this corrosion, according to how it opens; cleanse all parts with every method possible, yet do not allow the vein or nerve to hinder you. Know that the incision and fire are many tools for these bones depending on their structure and appearance, as well as their size and subtlety, and their greatness and smallness, and their hardness; so each tool should be tailored according to its resemblance to the work's requirements; know that practice will show you which instrument you need, according to the knowledge of this art, and testimony from illness patterns. If you think out which instrument is required based on what it ought to do.
dou feu	The fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	The limb is injured either from within or from the outside; and when you have treated that corrosion by the cure of medicines and it does not benefit, then one must cover that member up to where the corrosion comes, so that the patient escapes through death, or through malice, which is greater than the fault of the body; and the signs are that the limbs turn black, as if they were burned by fire, and after this, since this member corrosion goes throughout the body, it takes over everywhere in the person; you must hasten to cover it up, and if it's due to the impact from some venomous animal, such as sea scorpion and snake etc., then one should treat it when it is at the head of the waist, and do not give them any space until they reach the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	And if it comes up to the hand, if you cover the joint, so that the corrosion does not go up to the elbow; and if it comes on the arm, if you treat at the wrist; and if it passes the wrist, it is death, and there's no cure outside its strength until its amount; and similarly do this when the corrosion comes or in parts: If it comes in the first joint, if treatment after the other joint; and if it comes anywhere else, then treat everywhere; and if it rises to the leg, if you treat at the knee joint; and if it goes beyond the knee, there's no remedy than leaving the patient to die; and the method of treating or keeping the member is that you tie it up both above and below, spread one strip of linen along each line downwards, and another strips on the other line upwards, then remove the flesh between the two lines as much as the width allows until bone becomes visible; then treat or cure, and put a piece of linen from each side, so that the cure does not touch the healthy part, and causes no further injury or abscess to the patient.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	And when bleeding occurs while you work, if you see that it is coming, cauterize the wound immediately or put some restraining powders on them. Then return to your medicine until its completion and then bind the limb with an appropriate bandage, treat it until it has healed; and I will tell you what happened to one man: he suffered from a burning sensation which seemed like fire within his foot, this corrosion came first in his left foot, it consumed everything on his foot. And when he saw the corrosion he hurried to cover his foot, and became well. Later on, after several months, this corrosion returned under two of his fingers, he came to me and I placed things that could reflect light back onto him after cleaning up his body, but could not stop the corrosion. He insisted that I cut off his hand because he feared losing his life as his body's vitality was weak; he lost hope completely, went back home, hurriedly covered his hand, and became well again. And this is what I will tell you: do it like this if needed elsewhere.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	No time comes to the meat's cavity and stays so long that it creates a large mass of pus; and then bursts and leaks, causing an escape of pus, and leaves the internal organs like vessels; and the skin above is also as delicate as silk sheets, and does not extend up to the bone or nerve. And this disease is called "abscess", but it is not referred to as "fistula". However, if it extends all the way to the bone internally, then it's called a "fistula"; and regarding the skin, you must peel that skin completely off, even when it's delicate like silk sheets; and it does not rupture due to its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if you have determined that the skin is reddening, and the corruption isn't fully inside it, and the skin is filled with flesh, then use this method for catheterization: observe if the nipples are large, and the bowel beneath them has a foul odor; in such cases, mix Egyptian medicine as follows: take oil, lead tetroxide, and equal amounts of each, heat them together in a vessel over fire until the medicine becomes red and thick like honey. Then use an amount based on your needs to make a solution with water or honey, and catheterize the nipples while keeping them full; let the medicine sit for two hours, then strain it by pressing. Repeat this process as many times as necessary until the nipples are thoroughly cleaned out, and all pus is removed. If you don't have Egyptian medicine or ashes of vine wood when water-based medicine isn't available, mix water with a few drops of oil from aloe or wine for catheterization; the honey's properties help cleanse and wash, while wine causes the affected area to reddens. Once you've done this successfully and are sure that the nipples have been well cleansed, use catheterization for the formation of flesh within them, then apply plaster of Paris. Coat it with a blend of rose oil or wine. Alternatively, mix other medicines and ointments as described earlier, and if the opening to your nipple is too small for the catheter to fit through, widen it slightly using an iron rod; then apply some Egyptian ointment or basil ointment until it widens. If you're dealing with a larger wound area where no catheter can enter, make sure that there's only enough space at the opening of the wound so that the catheter can fit in. And if pus is located above the catheter hole, apply the ointment from Egyptian medicine or basil until it reaches below the catheter location.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	For when the bowe is in perfect condition, do not allow it to become contaminated with pus; and if you cannot cover the chest immediately as you see fit, equip yourself in such a way that the bowe moves to its lowest level possible within it. Because when the bowe is in perfect condition, do not allow it to become contaminated with pus and if you cannot cover the chest immediately as you see fit, then equip yourself in this manner: let the bowe move down lightly downwards, and leave nothing of the bowe; take consolidative medicines to place under the healthy side, and apply them on a linen sheet that covers all the healthy. Then set up forces at the edge of the pertus beneath the chest slightly wider than the first, so apply ointment with sulfur on the other sheet according to the size of the pertus, and put it on the pertus under health for relieving the bowe, and do not take off the large sheet except after many days once; and that which is under the pertus beneath the chest, often remove to relieve the bowe, and know what flows from the bowe, whether it's pus or less, or enough, or digested, or undigested; and be on guard if the patient feels pain or nothiing, and whether there's an abscess or not, and when your medicine has spread in this manner until you see the nature that jumps up on the pertus of health, then know that the chest is starting to heal, and approaches health; and then release the wound the next morning, or the third day, and when you release the wound, change the other sheet, and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if your breasts release an undigested substance after many days, know that your breasts are not functioning properly.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if poisonous subtleties cut after long tension, do not despair of health at all, for health is approaching.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	For there are individuals who take a long time to heal their wounds and those who do the opposite. And if one feels indigestion jumping in their breast after many days, know that their breasts aren't healing; and if their breasts take too long to breathe and are distant, adjust your medicines with dry substances and wet virtues, such as clear ointment, because a significant part of it is vitriol, which is the last medicine. Take clear ointment and mix it with rose oil, then apply it with old equal parts wine in substance; then cook it and use it. And do the same preparation for cooked honey fattening when clear ointments are not available, or take myrrh and aloes and incense, crush them, then add powdered sugar to the honey that is on fire; and afterwards make it into a paste and apply it over the breast, and give this treatment regularly, and if the healing process is long and not treated by this method, know that the corruption has spread inwardly, affecting the bones or hard parts of limbs. If you treat for fistula as we have said previously.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of cutting out the pus from the nail.
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	Panarice is an abscess that forms under the skin on the thumb or toe, or by chance forms in other fingers; and when it grows old, and one doesn't take care of it, then infection spreads, runs and spreads so long as it reaches the root of the nail, and by chance all its way; and corrosion comes up to the bone until there is stinking pain, causing swelling of both sides, and changes in color.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have instructed in the division, and if the treatment does not benefit, then it is necessary that you remove all the excess that has remained of the nail. Afterward, cauterize the wound.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	The cautery is very helpful if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy; but if the flesh presses against the nail edge and begins to protrude and swell, then it's necessary that you place the tip of the rod under the nail so that the flesh points, and hold it high. Remove this delicate and gently from under the swollen flesh. Then apply ointments with hot and corrosive medicines to remove everything; and after that heal it with ointment until it is healed.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	And if the corrosion is within the bone, you must remove it and apply force, because as much of the bone that has rotted cannot heal. And should you see that the bone needs to be removed, perform this operation in such a way as I have described earlier; then treat until it is healed. And if it has been weakened and broken, and it feels intense pain, then it's necessary to first make it whole. Then cut the nail from its spade-like tip diagonally upwards, and ensure that the cut doesn't go through to the flesh under the nail, because this would cause too much pain for the patient; if such is indeed the case, place something on top that will soothe him.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	The pain of the numbness in the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	I must adjust those that are born with large hands in some men by chance and are mostly muscular, and sometimes it has parts or bones, and at no time does it have a nail, and none of them are born at the root of the joint, where birth is in no way related to our knees.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	Those born in any part without needing to move, and those born at the bone joint perhaps do move; the size of the one that is strong so is light, this way: cut it at its root like a narrow spindle.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	That which is born at the root of the joint needs to be treated gently: hold it with your cupped hand.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In the one who is born or needs to be at the rear end corner, it's necessary that you first hold the fat curvature until the bone, then cut the bone with a thread suitable for this, and then treat it until it becomes clean.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The fusions that occur at joints are by nature, or through the healing of wounds, or due to cauterization with fire, or due to similar circumstances.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	If it's necessary that you fuse this seam, so that it heals according to its natural forms; then place between two wet cloths or pieces of moss in oil roset, so they don't fuse together. Or you place between two fine pieces of wax, until the wax sticks to them, as it should.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	When joining them, do not let any of his feet touch with the palm, instead perform this soldering in such a way that it is correct.
des vils	of the valleys
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	Veins are large and full of fleshy bulges filled with melancholic excesses, which come from various parts of the body. And more occurs in legs of those who walk on feet and work and carry things, than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore, you should give them an emetic for the bile once, and then treat it with basilisk afterwards.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	The iron treatment has two methods: one is to apply them and draw out black blood. And the other way is that you open the vein and force it all out completely.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	The treatment of the wound proceeds as follows: first, immerse the leg in hot water vigorously until the thick blood becomes thin. Then squeeze it from above the knee to just below the knee joint; then cut into the vein at I, II or III, with a large cut, then lift and draw out black blood towards your hand from one end to the other, as much blood as can withstand the effects of the wound; and then bandage it up, commanding it to dye with cooked meat that resembles this darkness; and then continue the evacuation and cleaning when the veins are full, which harms the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The treatment of an injury proceeds in this manner: grasp the leg at the afflicted area, if there is hair present, then immerse it into a hot bath. And raise the leg in a warm water until it turns red and swells; and should you not have a bath available, heat it on fire instead. Then apply it to the vein from its long end up towards the knee, or within that part beneath the ankle; then strip the skin layer by layer, and scorch the veins of each side, as soon as one perceives them upon touching; and when they are seen red and black, and when they seem like a white thread inside; then pull out the vein from underneath, until it is raised up through the skin, and thereafter stroke it with a needle gently, then strike it again on another spot three inches above. Then scorch the skin above the vein until it appears, after which lift it onto the stick as you did before, and raise it onto yet another layer, exactly like in the first time; then apply another size to cut off or more sizes should you require them, then lift it up, and strike at its heel next, then pull it along and lift it until it reaches the second size; then widen it from size by size until it completely emerges forcefully, and then strike on it. And if you are unable to pull it out and lift it, you may thread in a strong double thread, tie it up, and pull it like that; and if it does not stick, one will be unable to pull or lift it, causing harm to the patient; and when all is done pulling, you then lay on the site of the wound damp wool soaked in wine and oil, and cure until it has healed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And if the head is contracted and twisted all together, and it isn't straight, as we have said, you should cut it forcibly but do not twist it; treat it in this manner just as we mentioned before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	The form of the iron with which one cuts the screw is curved, and does not cut, so as not to pierce the artery; and it has a large curve because if it were fine, it would penetrate the artery, but be large as we have said, and this is the shape:
de la voinne civile	of the common artery
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	This vein is found in the legs, in warm areas where there are no herbs or trees, and in the ground where there is no moisture; and sometimes it appears elsewhere than in the legs, this happens due to decay that comes from under the skin, just as serpents and worms do inside a body, penetrating between skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the symptoms of this vein's beginning occur, so that there is a very large inflammation in the leg, then it changes the veins, and the vein begins to exit outside, like the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	And when the shoulder joint has been opened, it must be enveloped internally with a piece of leather that is three-quarters to one-and-a-half inches and then sewn up. Leave the leather on the leg, and every time there's any left over before sewing, envelope it again inside the leather and sew it up; if it's too long, cut off some part of it and re-envelop until everything has come out; because if you cut it, it enters the flesh and causes pus formation or infection in the area leading to a bad disease; so this thing must be treated gradually until the whole length is done, leaving nothing behind at all. And when this vein has been treated for five palms of length, or ten, approximately half a day later than when it started treating from that palm length, and when you cut it off, keep one raisin or piece of grain, then pierce until to the bottom, so that everything can come out; and evacuate all matter inside and administer medicine against putrefaction every day after that, then treat as abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And never at this vein use cold hands, and especially when it opens in the joint of the foot, or heel, where there's much loss and where the pain jumps; then therefore treat it as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	vers that spring up between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	This disease is called in our land "cattle illness", because it has affected many cattle, and it's a little worm that springs up between skin and flesh, and travels throughout the body rising and falling. The pain can be felt from member to member until it breaks through the skin where it was heading, and jumps out; and is accompanied by putrefaction of some bodily fluids, such as coming worms and snakes and maggots and roundworms in the stomach; and one wonders about its malevolence, for when it travels through the body, and ascends to the head, and reaches the eyes, sometimes it returns and destroys the eye; and this happens many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	When you see it being cured and treated, one cannot help but observe that when it's going: therefore, it's necessary that you bind the head above and below with a very tight strong bandage, then cut upwards and treat it immediately, and ensure it goes straight into the flesh; if you don't find any, then use fire cautery on it until it heals; and the greater damages it causes are when they go towards the eyes, as we have said; and should you see it approach or head close to the eye, then tightly bind under him the eyebrow in a form, cut upwards, and treat immediately; it's advisable to use the hand of purification of the body from medicines that dissolve for the illnesses produced by humors, and beware of cooked meat causing putrefaction.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	The pain comes from windiness.
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	This illness is called in our land "vakirir", and it brings about pain that comes to any limbs, and then spreads from limb to limb; and I have seen what I am telling you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	I was summoned to a patient with an illness, and they showed me their arms, revealing a small swelling in the vein of the arm; shortly after, I saw it rise like a worm on the shoulder, faster than anything else, like quick silver when cut from one place to another; the pain departed from that place, and settled into the shoulder, then later spread throughout the body until it reached the other arm; then they told me it was winding around inside the body, just as I saw.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I marveled greatly at how she moved thus member by member, for I had never seen this disease in such a manner.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	In any case, I wanted many times to move the pain from one place to another as well, but I didn't actually do it like what I saw in the woman; and I thought that was because she had a dry body, and her veins exposed, and due to this there appeared this constriction of wind; and they don't seem to notice according to this reason among those who are delicious and have moist bodies and closed veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	And when you see treat this illness, and the patients feel that pain, if it opens as we have said, quickly over and under, then press on so that the wind pressure released from the body comes out; and cauterize the body; and if you do not see it at your eyes, treat the one who removes the wind pressure, such as fetid pills, pill of serapin, and similar others.
des saiettes	Des saiettes" translates to "of arrows" in English. This term refers to objects that resemble arrows, likely used in the context of medical practices or treatments involving piercing or insertion into the body. In medieval contexts, such terminology could relate to various implements or procedures associated with traditional medicine or surgery.
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows vary, according to their appearances and according to the locations on the body where they pierce.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	The diversity of them is that there are some with large points, and small ones, and those that are barbed, and soldered; and there are some with two angles, and others with tongues, and those with pieces; and the one that excretes in any member does so according to two ways: or in a primary body it pierces, such as the brain, heart, liver, spleen, lungs, intestines, bladder, and similar bodies.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	When she coughs then in no part of these limbs, and the sign of death, which I will tell you later, appears: it is necessary that you be prepared for the extraction of this arrow, because death comes afterward in various situations; and when this bad sign does not appear and the arrow has not been fully removed, if you can, pull it out and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	And the sign of the brain when the arrow punctures and enters the bone, and a fluid emerges from beneath the head at the site of entry, is along with blindness, numbness, vertigo, redness in eyes, inflammation and reddening of the tongue, spasms and confusion of mind, vomiting of bile; sometimes without strength coming through the nose or ears; and sometimes loss of speech and voice; and a moist white blistering sign at the wound that resembles pus, and also burns like charred flesh; and if this sign appears, take it seriously and remove the arrow if possible.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	The sign of the arrow when it exits or pierces the heart is that it is close to the left breast, and feels also as though it were embedded in something hard, not empty; and by chance if the arrow stops moving like a pulse, and black blood comes out, and brings on coldness and cold sweat, and fainting: then know without doubt death approaches.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of an arrow that never goes into the flesh is when there's no foam spurting from the wound, and the throat swells up, and the patient has a changed color, and they sigh loudly with a hot forehead.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrow has exited through the buttock's cover, it is beneath the small ribs; and produces great pain and sighing; and moves all limbs from the shoulders.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if it's an arrow or stomach, by chance if there is no matter from the meat undigested in the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if it's an arrow or stomach, and in the case of a jump there is no dung passing through the intestines, then there is no hope in treatment, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if it's an arrow or stomach in the bladder, and urine comes out by jumping and leaves, and the patient feels intense pain: know that the wound is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other limbs, such as the arms and chest and neck and shoulder blades and the shoulder joint and the spine of the back and the ribs and the kidneys and the legs, and similar body parts, are safe according to various positions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in one's nerve or artery, and it isn't venomous, as I will tell you what happened to me, because when you do that other thing.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	It happened to one man that an arrow hit him in the left lung at the root of his nose: I tested it and pulled it out from another side under the ear's fat, without causing much pain.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And he pulled out an arrow that had hit him in the ear fat under the paper, and the arrow was stuck, but could not be reached beyond the head of the shaft. The wound was large like a Turkish bow, completely without ears; the player was healed and no harm came to him.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	And remove an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and that arrow was the Arabian ear one: I would cut off the stubble, then carefully extracted it until I pulled out the arrow, making the Christian healthy.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	And remove an arrow from the house, that it was stuck in his chest or belly, and I thought he would die; and then after passing thirty days, if it didn't change its position; I cut into the arrow, extracted it, and pulled it out, with no ill event.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	And if you see a house to which an arrow fell or was struck on its back, and the wound is sealed up; and the arrow stays inside, and does not change its natural position, nor does it find harm in any of its natural actions.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And look at another man, who got hit by an arrow in his face, and had stitches put into the wound; and ever since has suffered great pain; and many others like him.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	And there was an arrow in the king's garden for the princes, which stuck out through his nose, slightly tilted to the right side; and the arrow was already in place when I was summoned to treat it three days after it happened.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I found the wound severely constricted.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	I applied a subtle treatment to it, and did not feel anything penetrate; yet he felt pain and discomfort in his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	I thought it might be due to the tip of the arrow. I placed a moist adhesive dressing over his ear for this reason, as his ears did not swell up; and I saw the appearance of the arrow in his ear.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	I applied the plaster on the first day and treated the wound immediately. The patient endured long periods of pain, until the arrow was felt inside his nose on the second day; and he told me this.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	I placed corrosive arquebuse medicine on the wound each day until it opened, and I tested it; felt the tip of the arrow which was moving towards its location. Then adjusted within the opening using that corrosive arquebuse medicine until the head of the arrow became visibly apparent; passed through well for approximately four months, then healed the wound so thoroughly that I applied forceps on one side and the other, but could not remove it; hence began to refine and invent ways with instruments until I found how to use well-made forceps in accordance with its shape as described towards the end of this chapter; used these forceps while treating and healing the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	And the judges rule that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: I will restore it thus, and after the wound was sutured, he was completely healed.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	Or I have told you about the quality of extracting arrows, so that you should apply your treatment to what I do not say, because books can't cover everything; but wise masters compare well on a small number of things, and on what is current and lacking, they find new work and new tools, dealing with the removal of foreign substances that occur in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	I state that arrows enter the body or limbs through two ways: either from their entrance point or from another side; and if they enter through a muscle, it's an internal arrow penetrating flesh, and now it doesn't occur at all.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And if it doesn't jump now, let it be until the bone is rotten inside and has healed outside; and similarly if it's stuck in the bone and can't come out, let it stay like that for a few days, removing some each day; and then it will jump. If it still doesn't jump, puncture through to every small hole internally, as long as the veins are wide inside, and then extract it.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	And if the arrow is stuck in the bone near the head, and reaches up to one of the lungs inside the brain, or if any of the situations I've described happen to the patient: don't remove it immediately, but let it be until it becomes equal after a few days; because if the arrow comes up to this depth, it's a death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is only lodged in the bone and does not penetrate until its shaft, and remains with no injury to the patient for several days without any bad incident, then the device of removing it should be used.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it's firmly placed in such a way and cannot come out at all,
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And if the arrow is embedded in the body but not seen, if it touches all parts of you; and if you feel it, if you try to remove it with no suitable tool; and if due to the wound's constriction or the depth of the arrow, there are no bones, nerves, or veins, then make the wound larger; and try to remove the arrow when possible, and if it has ears that hold it in place, cut out any flesh that is stuck from two sides until you can, and then break or bend the ears of the arrow as much as you can while trying to remove it; and be careful not to break the arrow, so that you will more easily pull it out.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you can't remove it in one go, let the shaft be buried up to its feathers until it's broken, then pull it out, for the extraction is easier.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	And if the flow of blood goes against this, then carry out what we have said about treatment in our chapter; and be cautious about incisions near nerves and veins, and use your skill to extract the arrow without danger, quickly or slowly, firmly or gently; and place the patient according to the shape they were in when the arrow struck them, as this is their greatest help, and if you can't do that, then lay them down according to how the sign shows them.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	The arrow that came from the other side, or where something protrudes through him, or if the skin is swollen in a way that we see or feel differently: cut there, as long as the forceps can take hold, and then squeeze: if it leaps now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if she is held in the bone, twist your hand around it as long as it enters into the bone and widens the bone, then pull it.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	And if it cannot come out, leave it there for now, and then continue the extraction until it does; and if part of the arrow is inside him, force it all the way in; and if it's just lodged, and you see how to apply pressure, if I provide the instrument, so that the point of the arrow goes into the notch of the tool; and then press hard, and if the arrow is stuck, if I apply the instrument with a point entering inside, to ease the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrow touches the body, you should cut all the flesh around where it enters, if possible, then treat the wound as appropriate.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if the arrow penetrates or passes through the chest or bladder or abdomen, and it is close to organs, you should cut upwards, if possible. And take care not to cut into the blood vessel or nerve, then remove it, and then stitch up the wound, when needed; and treat until healing occurs.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the tongs used for arrows resembles an bird's beak, and here is the form:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And they come in sizes: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the arrowhead is also like that of a bird's feather, by puncturing at the tip of the arrow, as this shape shows:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	the shape like that of pincers for pressing and picking so is this:
des voinnes dou cors communes	from the veins of common bodies
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	The veins from which we bleed are thirty-one, of which there is or its head sixteen, that being: two that come after the ears, which are called "two herbs"; and the two arteries in the two temples visible; and two vessels that are in the two eyelids, those are called "suckers"; and the vein that is inside the forehead; and the vein that is at the head of the nose; and the two glands in the neck; and the two veins above the mouth's lips, and these are the veins called "augerich"; and two veins which are under the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	The veins that we usually heal are found in each arm: one is the cephalic vein, and it's on the left side, which people commonly call the "vein of the head"; and the middle one is called 'fascial', composed of the cephalic and basilic veins; people commonly refer to this as the "vein of the heart". The basilic vein is found either on the left or right side of the body, which people call the "vein of the belly", and it's located under the clavicle, and it's precisely the one that we heal, opening clearly over the abdomen.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	The salvatelle is the vein located between the little finger and ring finger, and it can be found twice (II rains). In the leg, there are three veins: one is underneath the elbow on the left side of the body; this second 'sophene' vein is found at the ankle on the right side. There's also another vein often called 'nesse', located in the ankle of the opposite limb; and in the other leg, there are three veins underneath these.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	The treatment of veins situated behind the ears aids in healing, and helps with migraines; it also discusses the qualities of a surgeon as you'll hear. The method is that you remove the head from the diseased area, rub the limb or vein area with a harsh cloth; then hold the diseased head against a pin until both veins can be seen behind the ears by two points below the head: then lift your hand all up to the vein and cut through it well twice deep, and pull out and clean properly as you go, making sure to let blood come out till you see it; then apply pressure and tie firmly, ensuring it's healed. And I've already mentioned incision and cautery in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	The healing of the two arteries that are in the two temples is valued like old mining and drilling, and accustomed to cutting, and in the eyes' water; and the quality of a surgeon is such as I say: and it seems that the patient constricts his throat until the two vessels appear clearly open; and feels the pulse under your right elbow, then presses on it gently; then lifts the hand above the vessel at your right index, and pushes the knife through, then lifts the vessel up high, and cuts it, just as you have done in other veins, and adjust according to your necessity; then release the patient, put your hand over the vessel for an hour, then place cotton; and then tie it firmly, leaving it until it heals; and we have talked about this along with their extraction, or where the book begins.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	The treatment of the vein on the forehead is as valuable as that of the cephalic in the old diseases of the face, and for migraine, and for redness; and its quality is such that the patient twists his neck until he feels the vein. Then take the tool which is called 'digger', whose shape is as follows:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	And place the tip on the vein, and press with your hand or some other tool, letting blood flow according to how much you see; then release the neck of the patient, and tie the vein as long as it is healthy and no scar has formed from an operation involving a wide flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	Always, it is not right that the flames be too fierce and directed from side to side; instead one should use gentle heat, for the bone is close by. By chance, if the flame were sharp, it might break the bones when they are brittle.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	The treatment for the two veins located in the two eyelids helps with eyesight problems, conjunctivitis, redness, and ear pain when it affects the earlobe and the face; and its quality is such that the patient twists his neck by bending some link, as previously described. Then you heal them, and choose a sainie that goes through slightly from the side, about half the length of a flame being somewhat wide, for there is no meat involved.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flames are subtle and accidentally break, then make it correspond to the blood flow up until you need to do so, and then bind it with cotton, and bind it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	The healing of the nose by means of an incision from the nostril up until the brain, and at a separate surgery, for diseases affecting the face, such as headache and redness that comes on in the face, and similarly when it's old; and the quality of this healing is such that the patient presses their neck, then stretches their nose to your left hand, and takes the subtle flame long, and sticks it within the lip in the space between the two nostrils, for the nasal passage doesn't open well thus, and air will now start to flow; and don't go too far into this, and do the surgery gently according to your need, then leave them overnight as she is very quickly restored; and this is the form of the flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	The healing of the second intestines helps with constriction of the bile, and the beginning of mixing, and for many diseases, and in jaundice, and corrosion, and herpes, and abscesses; and the quality of this healing is such that the patient presses their necks, then stretches their intestines to either side just as we have said; and let the master stand on the head of the patient, and the intestines lie at one end, then heal the passage along a bit widely long, then remove gently according to need, or just as is necessary; then do another part in the other passage, then loosen the tie, and hold the passages moderately so they don't constrict; and let them rest until morning, so that the wound heals.
de la sainie des leivres	In the treatment of wounds
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The healing of veins above the lips aids in collection within the mouth, and decay of gums, and tears in lips, and nosebleeds and congestion.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	And the quality of this treatment involves having the patient sit in front of you and restraining their neck as I have described; then turn the cheek, and look at two veins, one is on the right cheek and the other on the left. You can know which ones by noting that they are black, and because inside them there are thin black veins: then cut both of them and if you don't recognize them and you're in doubt, cut the larger one from each part and follow the same procedure for both veins as above since it's a similar method.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	In treating under the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	The treatment of veins that are under the tongue aids after the treatment of the cephalic region, and this is at the constriction of the throat, and for diseases in the eye, and for diseases in the mouth; and the quality of a surgeon being that the patient's wounds should heal between your hands under the sun, and raise the tongue, then look underneath on each side there is a black vein: so treat both veins equally, and do not go too far in this operation, because under them are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	The veins of the arm that are commonly treated are cured in two ways: either by placing them over a large reddish flame or an olive-tinted fine flame, such as surgical knives, and are called "aneil"; and they are wide and fine according to the width and narrowness of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The shape of the iron needle is much celebrated, and it is wide as you see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And it requires opening the veins filled with large visible blood and that contain thick blood and disturbance; and this is the form of the olive flame:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it is more slender and pointed, and it aids in thin veins or has thin blood of a citron color.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The treatment of the basilica vein, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases that affect the throat and neck, as well as the chest, abdomen; and it's important for the surgeon to treat carefully, and be aware of the artery that's nearby.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And if he touches the artery and blood starts flowing out, it is necessary to stop the bleeding as I have said; and it should not be touched with fire but cut in the same manner as "aneil".
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And if the basilica is not clearly open, it is necessary that you extract it, and change another one; or you want none of it, or you cut into the place where it is on the arm: it opens clearly; and the cavity in front of the flame anesil, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And if you recognize the site of the surgery, then it's necessary that you extend the arm, touching it until you can feel the pulse; then mark the site by the edge, and then bind the arm, and cut the vein in front of the flame anesil; and be careful not to cut into the artery when you see the site inflamed, because this is part of the artery: so listen out for that.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it protruding upwards as much as a child's urine, and the veins are red and delicate, know that these are veins of the artery: hurry then, and place your finger for some time, then remove your finger when they stop bleeding, which happens often; tie the arm, and leave him like this, do not move the sick. And be careful, do not move them until he is cured.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the wound has not sealed and you need to do something, and the medicine is not at hand, then cut the artery if it opens, because that's how blood flows out; and seal the wound.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	And take a slice of the dog walnut, and cut it, taking one half and tying well up to the other side; if it is unsealed, that's fine; if not, treat as we have said, with powders that seal blood; and the sealing processes are neither hard nor awkward in many dispositions for the small area of the wound, and the strength of the bond between the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	The treatment of a vein injury in the middle requires knowledge to handle blood from above and below the injury site, as it is made up of basilica and cephalic veins, just like we've said; and the surgeon must be cautious about the nerve which is located nearby, if he goes too far down, and should find the nerve and then swell and cause distress, and may not heal; this nerve opens many times, and if it doesn't open in any individuals due to its delicacy, then you should seal off using the silencing tool beforehand; and listen with your power to that nerve.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is a vein between the two fingers, cut it as long as necessary.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	The treatment of the cephalic injury assists in bleeding from the head, and helps with the eyes; it is necessary to perform a bloodletting using an olive oil lamp or a myrtle branch fire, as this is the safest of all veins, because there is neither nerve nor artery near it.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	All right, it is necessary to do the lighter version and not to cause any harm even if one has to repeat it, and for some people, their legs swell when they do it for the first time, but it doesn't cause any harm.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of health depends on your thought.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	The first thing you need to know about bloodletting is that it is performed only for the purpose of maintaining health and avoiding future illnesses; bloodletting should be done through one of the three veins: namely, cephalic, facial, and basilic. It should be performed at the beginning of prayers on your knees, in autumn and winter after eating, when signs of being full appear; it should be done on the first or third day, after two or three days.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	The treatment for diseases has no fixed time, but rather when need arises whether in the morning or at night, all hours and every time; and it is not suitable to treat children until they are twelve years old, nor pregnant women just for a quarter of their pregnancy until seven months.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	Neither should anyone over sixty years old be nursed.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	And when someone wants to be treated in any way, it is fitting that they cleanse their intestines with light enemas if they have stored up feces, if the veins do not draw out excess substances harmful to the main parts; or rather one does not treat such a person who is overly full of meat, nor drunk, whether male or suffering from dropsy; and avoid treating after colic, vomiting, abdominal cramps, frequent menstruation in women, labor pains, staying awake and fasting, and what leads to harm through excess food or bodily ailments; then subdue the humors, if they are too large, due to meat and beverages and medicines, should you have it necessary; and then bathe oneself, unless something prevents it, to subdue the blood, and treat yourself of the vein from under the third part down towards the buttocks, as we said; and guard yourself on this day of work, of pain, of excesses and similar things; and keep yourself bound and joyful, and make sure that the one who is treated is higher than the person treating themself, and rub their arm twice or three times, then press your hand slightly upwards over the vein near the elbow, so the vein does not heat up before being pricked.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	For there are veins that behave like cords to the surgeon, and there are such that are full of windiness, so when you place them over the flame, they pull away from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus belong to these. And if it burns the vein, then the wound is too narrow, for which reason the surgeons must be informed about these matters.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein opens for the first time, it's good; if not, try again slightly under or at once near that spot, where the limb is swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And if the limbs are swollen and the skin is pale, let him rest for one or two days and do not bind his arm: by chance pus-filled abscesses will come out. Do not bathe in water afterwards but start the bleeding again if it pleases you; and if your wound is small, or if the artery is thin and you doubt that there isn't as much blood loss as you see, then pierce the same wound directly over the flame; and do this operation a little quickly, so that the limbs are swollen; because this happens many times when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If you see the body swelling, if you do not start to heal immediately, and place a bit of oil balm there, because it alleviates the body's distress from the blood flow, and makes it easy for that part under the oil; and thus apply the oil balm in each healing session when you treat veins, to stop the blood flow; and similarly perform garlic juice and wine rinses, when you place them on the body; so delicately does the wind flow and disperse when it's too thick.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if it comes about that there's a large abscess, which happens many times, even when you didn't heal him just once or twice due to the small opening of the vein each time, then don't hesitate, and soak an sponge with hot water and wine, apply them, hold for an hour; and do this after the blood flow from the vein has stopped. And if it stays in place on his body for several days without any blackness or greenness, it does him no harm; and should you see it, put aloes or myrrh that have been made into a calamus juice, mustard, or similar substance on it.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And many times an abscess and appearance to the healing of the basilica occurred: then place your hand there, and if you find that the area is soft upon pressing with your hand, then this indicates a bad condition.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, do not apply anything of what we have said to the affected area because you might inadvertently touch an artery; but instead, apply two layers of dry plaster to harden the area, then treat it with other remedies until it heals.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And lead each one to blood according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	And if the blood is black, let it flow until it becomes red; and if you see it thick, let it continue to flow until it thins out; and if it's too thin, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And it is suitable for the one who is full and strong, needing blood extraction, to make him a larger wound, and have his flames wide; and for the one who is weak, do the opposite, and this suits the healer more mildness often, and he must be healed cutting across, not straight; and this way of healing saves from bleeding continuation and nerve congestion, and it values more than a long cut compared to a wide one.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And for the one whose body requires healing, it is fitting to give him a decoction made from the juice of pomegranates; if he is heated, let him undergo three or four bloodletting sessions. If he has a cold complexion, before starting the healing process, give him a moilless soup in syrup mixed with musk, or flavored honey syrup containing spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, making sure the syrup has a pleasant aroma.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if it fails in surgery, after the flow of a little blood, it is necessary for it to inhale broth of meat, and pleasant aromatic syrup, and use other things that we have mentioned in the division or chapter on fainting, for the evacuation of veins.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wishes to strengthen his arm, and improve it again, should it be necessary, when he is weakened by excessive improvement, he should improve slowly and gradually, according to the amount of its strength continuously.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And if one wishes to strengthen their arm after the first improvement, and they have robust health, then they should improve for seven hours after the first improvement, or even after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And if one wishes to strengthen themselves on another side, then they should improve the second day or the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	For there is much blood within the body which has been heated, causing fever; so it's necessary to remove a large amount of it, and expand the veins until they bleed at their edges. Then that all conditions for healing are met, and you place your hand on his pulse when he heals, making sure death does not come instead of bleeding. This happens many times when the surgeons are careless; and it is not good when you see the arm being released, and blood coming out a second time, and the veins are closed, pressing down firmly; nor if it is broken, having him stretch his arm quickly, because that would be ill-advised; but let him rest until he heals for the second time. Or place your finger tip at the point of the flame, until the cold blood from the vein begins to flow out and then put a small piece of salt in water and gently press it.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is swollen, let it be alone and don't compress it, until the abscess subsides.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if there is a need to bleed again, if it can be done in that place itself, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein is located on the arm where it overlaps with the head because it's made up of that part.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the way of healing is that the patient dips their hand in hot water until the veins become red. Then they should bind it moderately, so that blood can be seen clearly, then heal right through now, not wide nor long; and make them slightly wider, and heal very close to the joint of the hand, and if unable to do so, then return the hand into hot water, allowing the blood to flow in the water as much as you need; and if it is like that, then do not dip the hand again in hot water because it should be put more in winter than summer; and healing this vein saves more from all other veins than there are arteries or nerves.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	The healing method for the right hand's salvation from liver diseases is as follows: hold the hand and immerse it in hot water until you can see the veins if they are filled, then heal across it without causing any discomfort; do not go too far through the middle part because the nerves are all exposed underneath the skin. Then return the hand into hot water if there's a freeze in the wound area and is unable to disperse.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated the blood as much as your skill allows, place over the vein there and seal it to rapidly fuse, and thus do for each case.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The treatment of his left hand corresponds to the disease in the mouse, and do everything as I have instructed you for the right side.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The healing of the scalp is useful for all diseases that affect the body, such as ailments of the spine, retention of urine, and diseases of the kidneys, as well as ancient leg diseases, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	And the quality of this healing is that the patient bathes in hot water and rubs on the body until it heals, then ties over the joint below the leg. And the body is at the ankle, and above the leg they go down to most of the kidneys; so heal where wider kidney or at the ankle, than healing would be effective.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you heal it on the leg, be careful of the nerves which are nearby, and also make your incisions as when sewing; may the flames extinguish themselves.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if it cannot come out without causing injury, immerse the limb in water, and let the vein drain well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	And if you apply the healing for the first time, then start again on top a little more for the second application because the feet are salty; do not doubt about nerves as we have said, and thus proceed with the spine of the other foot equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The leg of the sciatic nerve is at the knee of power, and its health matches with pain in the hip, when it's due to hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And the quality of its healing is such that the patients go in or bathe and stretch across the ankle with three to four turns because otherwise the vein doesn't open; and if it does open, then you heal it in all possible ways that you can, including by crossing it; and it's good to do this while you're holding it, as your hands are free, and it responds well to human hands.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And if you can't find it, heal none of what opens or behind the foot, and look toward the little toe, and guard against nerves; and make sure to correct the flow of blood as you see fit, then loosen the knot, and place cotton on top and tighten; it is now healed.
des sainies de ventouse	of suction healings
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Ventouses are made of horns, or spiders, or glass; and suction treatment can be performed in two ways: by piercing to draw blood, or without piercing.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And this suction method which can cause injury is done in two ways: either with all fire or without fire; and the suction performed by causing injury and bleeding takes place through fourteen parts of the body, from which one part is completely under the head; and another is inside the neck; and two others on both sides of the neck; and one suction point below the chin; and one suction point on each shoulder; and a suction cup on the spots with pimples; and the suction cups inside both arms; and the suction cups on both legs; and the suction cups on both ankles; and this suction does not involve blood, because small veins that are scattered throughout the body do not weaken anyone, as in bloodletting treatments; and it should not be administered anywhere with fire or without fire, in any disease caused by overfullness, until all parts of the body are emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And if suction is needed due to diseases or for habit, we will do so each hour in the beginning of the month, or at the end and throughout; because there are such who, when they need to be sucked, have great heaviness; and those who find fullness and redness on their face, and on their head, and around the neck, and darkness among them; and those who find a drop of blood in their mouth, and have swollen tongues, and cough up blood; and there are such who think, see by nosebleeds and nose cramps and deaths, and things like that.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, indeed even during the month, we instruct to suction after three hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	The suction of the nose helps with ear infection in the head ... the patient experiences this, and it should not be done after eliminating everything from the body; this suction is part of the treatment for the cranial suction, and it should not be used by those who have a cold constitution, or who are affected by vomiting, because this harms them greatly; and it should not be used if someone uses it, nor to one with cold diseases in the head.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And he who frequently uses it becomes forgetful, for this reason it is necessary to place the suction cup somewhat further down due to the possibility of forgetfulness.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	Ventosation in the neck is located under the head's and basilic veins' health, and because of this it matches well with squeezing at the wrist, and incision on the channel of the lung, and everywhere else, and for repletion; and for this purpose a little force suffices, as if one holds too tightly, then one can strangle or damage stomach and heart.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	Ventosation at the second costal area of the neck matches with head pain, eye disease and toothache, as well as strangles and pain in the roots of teeth. It is found under the health region of the basilic vein; you should instruct your physician to move his hand precisely when needed, not to press on the artery, and to avoid sudden spurts of blood.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	The ventilation of the chin leads to illness in the mouth, and decay of gums, and similar diseases which occur within the mouth; and it is related to the health of the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	Ventilation of the shoulders leads to illness that comes from heat and congestion.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	Ventosations in the elbows match as much with three veins of the arms because they draw blood from those large veins; instruct your physician not to press too hard downwards, for the elbow is naked of flesh and sensitive to nerves and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The suction cup on the buttocks is suitable for bleeding from the bottom and diseases underneath, it requires that the suction cup be large and made of iron, as it needs to be well treated; if it were too thin by chance, it would break; I make large wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The leg suction cups operate openly, because they drain blood from the entire body, and are effective for old pain in the kidneys, and the liver, and bladder diseases, and promote menstruation; they are located on the inner knees and ankles, and all over the body; also, after long use, they weaken the body and cause fatigue in various situations.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The method of applying the suction cup is as follows: you should apply it after checking thoroughly and ensuring a continuous sucking action. Apply it quickly, move it evenly, and keep doing this until you see the skin turning red and swelling, then release the suction. Afterwards, put the suction cups back on, take care with how your body is positioned since there are some who have very thin flesh and clear pores: in such cases, one should pierce only once, and make wide cuts but not too deep; apply light suction.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the patient is large, it's appropriate to strike twice: the first time for the purpose of making a small incision for the sake of the thick blood vessel.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the patient is very dense, it's appropriate to strike three times; and when we wish to drain a little blood at a time, we only need to make an incision once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if we cannot drain much blood, we often repeat this procedure. And when the abscess is shallow, we pierce it deeply, and the ends are such that they pierce immediately and completely through the skin. This applies to those with thick skin and hardness, who have been strained a lot, you need to smear their wounds with suction cups from which an opening and dissolving oil is used: if it is in this state, from a purple oil, or from sweet almond oil, or from pumpkin seed oil; and if it is in fever, use oil of watercress, or of lilies, or of chamomile, or other similar oils.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the excess is large and cold, take oil of wormwood, or of balm, or aniseed oil, and similar substances.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if the person to be treated has tough flesh and large pores, it is not appropriate to use oil but they should be washed after suction with pink water, or cold water, or mulberry water, or pumpkin water, or porcelain water, or other similar substances.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And for those who have some moisture, if they rise from rest or from water of myrtle and sumac, and other similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And those who have large excesses may raise their heads from old wine, or water of sulfur, or decoction of nettle or chamomile, or other similar things; and they should not be treated with suction cups before the bath or in the bath, but one hour after the bath; and they should not sleep afterward, they must warm themselves when they should be sucked and when they have been sucked.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And watch over those who are being treated and are hot-tempered, and if they get too much and inflamed; it should be that they eat cold things, such as pomegranates, endives, lettuce, and similar items; and they should fast, and pork flesh, and meat from castrated animals, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And those with a cold constitution should drink honey syrup and half of an aromatic wine that's between old and new, and they should fast for a little while, then eat small pieces of pork, and young birds, and baby pigeons; on the day when they are being suctioned, they should drink more than they eat. It is good to give some people triamcinolone or muscatel before suction therapy, or after, to strengthen their main limbs; and cool down his head, but it is not recommended that those who are hot drink.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	The suction cups that are placed to cause irritation are those that are placed on the liver, and on the lungs, and in the case of podagre (gout), and on the abdomen and belly button and kidneys, and hip. For this member doesn't suffer from being pierced by needles, and we do it only to draw blood from one part of the body to another, just as when we place them on nipples when a baby is breastfeeding; for removing the viscosity in the body, we place suction cups on the abdomen and belly button to decrease its size. And removes pain when there's swelling or stone, and by its attractive power it may remove the swelling accidentally, or empties the stone from its place; thus it does when you put it on the liver and lungs where there is retained viscosity, and these suction cups are administered empty solely for the purpose of sucking. They are not given together with heat applied, and they are filled sometimes with boiling water, as in diseases such as pleurisy, and in this manner we fill the suction cup with hot water or water in which it has cooked useful herbs to that end.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The shape of the suction cup used over fire is like this:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	And take two fingers of half a palm each way, and place it at the cost of one thousand in the middle, just as to push a needle out, whether iron or silver, before doing so ensure that it doesn't hurt the sick person upon placing it on the limb; have a rod halfway across either from an iron frog or iron, for placing a candle holder, and they should be great and small according to diseases and the condition of those who use them; because suction cups for children are different than those for adults, and lighter ones for skinny people compared to fatty ones.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And we should thus place this suction cup onto the limb: take the candle holder or a line of wax and place it inside the suction cup through the rod that is inside the suction cup, ensuring that the light reaches the bottom of the suction cup to prevent burning the sick person; and then put it on the limb, and hold your fingers over the part we mentioned, so when you wish, if steam comes out, remove the suction cup; and take the wax line as before and repeat this often, should you need to.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	In the suction cup then, administered in the illness of pleurisy, there is no need for a needle or a lancet at all stages, and it should only be used when full of water, and placed on the limb solely; this is its form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	Without needles are administered only to limbs where suction cups cannot be placed due to their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar parts; and in their clean state of flesh, like thigh or calf bones, and other similar parts; and the quality of use is that when you find withouts in sweet waters free from debris, take them; and place one in sweet water until they are familiarized, and have nothing inside the womb; and then lance and suction them, then rub the limb until it turns red, and place them on the withouts; and once they become full, and start to leak, if there is a limb where one can put a suction cup, put it, for this lasts not long after.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	If not, raise the shoulder in warm water and cool water very well, then rinse it. And when the skin is well on the body of the wounds, moisten a linen cloth with cold water and place it there until the wounds are dry; and if the wounds are many, put powdered vitriol or garlic, or similar things, until they are dry; or you put half of peeled beans under the shoulder and leave them until they roast on the shoulder, which will stop the bleeding now; and if you need more, take other wounds.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And if the wounds do not close properly, rub the shoulder with fresh blood, or you insert a needle there until some pus comes out, and then put it back in. As soon as they start smelling of blood, they will dry; and when you see that they are expelling pus, you can sprinkle a little myrrh and finely ground wheat flour, or ashes, which should heal now.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	This begins the book of fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	These chapters are often necessary in the art of medicine, and are useful for restoring breaks and alleviating suffering.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	Know, dear son, that the people who are reading this chapter were never shown or read anything like it in old books; for this reason, this knowledge has been hidden in our land because I have never found anyone skilled at it. And I know nothing of this skill other than through the studies and experiences from ancient texts and through my own practice and understanding over a long life, also based on experiments. Herein, I've outlined what's contained within this chapter clearly and summarized it for simplicity in conclusion, also making sure to explain each tool being used so as to be easily understood; similar to how I have done in the two chapters preceding this one.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	So it is necessary that we introduce or give an outline of the content of this book and the chapters in which wisdom places its understanding, staying on the truth, so that those who have experienced it can know and learn this noble craft, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	I state that when there is fracture or dislocation or twisting or strangulation in any part, it's necessary to attend swiftly to the patient from one side and another, without letting anything hinder you, such as weakness of limbs, children, old people; or if their touch is too hot, or too cold; and refrain from consuming cool meats, this means chilled cuts, liver and venison, and do not drink wine, nor consume any fatty meats. And don't fill them with too much meat that fills the veins with blood until you're sure of no pus to come out in an abscess, or spreading of matter inside their limbs; if they recover under their first regime of treatment which they used.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary for the patient to consume meats that cause excessive swelling or have viscosity, such as cooked wheat in water, and rice, and peas, and pies, and beef, and eggs, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	And with such swelling the break begins to heal more quickly.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And know that bones broken in old or decrepit people cannot be healed or sutured according to their nature due to the drying of limbs, or those which are too soft, such as a child's bones; but apply first aid, set the bone broken and press tightly against it until it is reunited with the limb, as it was before; do not rush in completing your work, for this requires large meat to nourish him afterwards, just as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	Know that breaks are various in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For a break in the head is different from a break in the heel, or of the leg, and I will tell you all ways of breaks in this chapter.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there are breaks that occur at the elbow, and others when striking, as when sharpening a feather to write with.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if there's breaking with injury, and breaking at all a small crack.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	And in each way it has its tool and proper instrument for restoration, according to what memory brings back to his mind; and he recognizes the breaking of the bone by the twist in the limb and the good opening through which well comes out, and the pressure from the hand; and when there is no twisting or injury to the joint, and the patient doesn't feel much pain, if there's no breaking; but it can have a twisting, or a small crack.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	If it is not suitable for you to move it by hand, but apply the remedies that follow, and then gradually tighten it now in a subtle manner.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	And know that the breach which went in the arm, and are the two parts separated, now they must put them on equal terms, so that abscesses dress at both ends; and if abscesses become hard again, you let him not stay one day, until the abscesses are relieved; then put it evenly with the muscles that you can gently and wisely apply, and know that his restoration is easier than those of whom he has pieces; then tighten as described later.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And if there are pieces broken in the bone, and it is divided into two parts, whether it's hands or feet, or near your hand with a small member, or at two strings, or at one string and by your hand; place the limb according to its natural shape, so that when the injured parts of the member are healed, you gently adjust all additions in their places as much as you can, and take care not to cause any injury or pain through your work. And properly align both ends of the bones according to the best shapes.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And feel well with your hand if it doesn't seem to be in the right place: if you dress it beautifully, and don't pull too much, not squeezing as those who extract by their own surgical method do, pulling at the abscess and contraction of the limb, as we have often wished.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And when the limbs are healed, ensure that you do not move the patient, neither while awake nor asleep, nor on changing position or in any other manner; and make sure that the limb is securely set so that it does not feel any pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	And when the patient no longer feels any pain, it is not yet fully healed. It must be placed in a suitable position so that they do not feel any pain; and you should ensure that it is put straightly, making sure there is no twist once restored; and this quality of the injured limb depends on what I am telling you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that limbs broken are varied in smallness and largeness, and in shape.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	And for smaller limbs, such as arms and legs and alike: it is necessary to envelop them in soft and delicate linen cloths; and for those that are large, like stomachs and thighs: it is necessary to wrap around with a broad and firm bandage, because the broad bands embrace the entire large limb evenly from all sides, making sure there's no twist. Then tie up light bandages around three or four times depending on the size of the member and keep your hand firmly on each band until you reach the broken area, then move to above the break and apply less pressure, so that the break can move slightly away; and gradually soften the bandage little by little, until most of the healthy part is covered, then start again with another layer of bandages around the broken limb. After this process, return to the area below the break and apply moderate pressure without being too tight or too loose, as we have explained in the previous chapter; then place linen or cloth strips between the bandages until they are evenly spread out, and finally secure everything with a belt and properly made pins if there's no pus or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	And if there is swelling or an abscess, apply something soothing to the area, which reduces the swelling and leaves it thus for a few days; then press upon your points, and they should be of half the width of a thick rod evenly sharpened, or from wood used to make joints, or palm fronds, and align them according to this pattern:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	But it is necessary that the points you place on the break be slightly larger and wider than the others; and should be as long as appropriate for the size of the limb or its magnitude; then press upon the points in the same way you did with the first application, then tie them above with a supplemental string as was done with the first application on the breakage; more tightly at first, then less so; and it is necessary that the string be medium in size, neither too thick nor too thin, and made of soft linen; because if the string is large like those who make their string for sewing linen cords, which is a great mistake, as the application cannot be even if it is too fine, and it does not suit having less than half a finger's width between each point.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the wounds are irritated by the pins after compression in their healthy areas, then you should apply linen or matted wool to them, so they do not blister.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is irritated and the ribs are broken, I will tell you the treatment afterwards.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it is not fitting to constrain all broken limbs on their first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	For when the limbs are large, it is not suitable to use these hot plasters for more than five or seven days, or according to the severity of the abscess, depending on its occurrence; and here is the way of using ancient plaster methods to restore fracture, dislocation, and torsion: you take flour that stands near mill walls and mix it with plenty of egg, creating a mixture not too thin nor too thick. Use this concoction as needed, and this is the common method of restoring fractures in various ways, even for women and young children, as neither too hot nor too cold should be used.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another way of making a restorative plaster for fractures and dislocations: take three parts each of garlic, dandelion leaves, rue, asafetida, and Arabic gum, totaling nine parts; add five parts each of myrrh and aloes; use seven parts of vinegar. Make this into a powder, mix it with plenty of eggs; if the mixture is warm, apply this plaster, for it has good composition, it quickly heals broken bones, and benefits many people.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another plastering method suitable for torsion: take mastic and myrrh oil, each in quantity of XIII parts; myrrh and aloes in quantity of IX parts; castor oil VI parts; Armenian balm in quantity of X parts. Grind them well together, mix with vinegar or plenty of egg, then administer.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Another method of splinting joints and fractured bones at their sites, and alleviating the pain arising therefrom, and when cutting bone and making incisions: take new wool, and grease it in oil and cooking fat, and place this on the affected area.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	Bandages do not heal completely, but they are better for soothing abscesses and properly relieving pains.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another method of plastering that sets broken bones: take dried fig leaves and terrestrial poplar leaves, grind them together, and make a plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another method of splinting for the repair of bone fracture and to ease the removal of pus.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Take root of sweet basil, chamomile, violet flowers, tansy flour, one part from each; and grind them, then mix with wine. If the affected limb is heated, mix it with moist coriander water, or water, and use it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another way to reattach more firmly than the first, when an abscess-hard comes to repair on the member.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Take roots of vismalve, and sesame seed, balsa wood, melilot, and sansucius, and flowers of violet and chamomile, from all take one part; grind and mix with the water of salt, or sweetened water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb, and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	In his book, Hippocrates instructs that when restoring strength to a broken limb, one should only apply cerate made from wax and oil, and not any other substance. He states it should be applied between two layers so as not to be too soft or too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems like Galen suggests we should apply something on the broken limb for restoration, with somewhat dry but slightly warm substances, such as myrrh and aloe and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another method of plastering suitable for injury and pain: take the fat and feathers from cooked chickens, or bird feathers, and vinegar, and equal parts salt, and grind them together to make a plaster mixture.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then loosen it a little later, and be careful so that the patient does not feel any pain or is hurt by his own bone in its place; if you do not remove it with your hands and when pain comes to the member, or itching, without rest or swelling, if this happens, act quickly and remove it, and reapply the dressing now. Take a light cloth and a wet sponge, dip them into water, then soak up your limb until the itching stops, and the pain is eased; then let the member rest for an hour, then place it on dry bedding, moistened in water or rose oil, and secure it with a bandage, until you are sure that the abscess has cooled. And calm down the inflammation of the limb, and remove any pain, then start applying a subtle reattachment, and a little more dressing, but do not apply pressure as before; and continue to handle carefully until they heal properly.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that pus has formed and turned red, along with pain and swelling, indicating bone inflammation throughout, then you will need plaster and bandaging, so restart the process as you did initially.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	And if there's no effect on the limb that we have mentioned, or it wasn't freed until after three days, four, five, seven; and each time leave it for twenty days, according to what you see, until the swelling subsides, and approaches the alignment of the flesh; then tighten more than at first, and let its body grow, as I said previously; and if you notice that the limb has dried excessively beyond what is necessary, know that there will be no new ones here; take it out in hot water every time you free it, and each third day, clean a bit of the wound; through this process cut off any remaining tumors on the limb, and quickly correct what foolish healers do who bend the limb improperly: it's bad practice, and this is shameful work, and I don't see anything else than to let it dry properly and open it directly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	Regarding various methods of breaking up
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	Many methods of fractures exist, and they come in various forms. Each has its specific causes; for there are fractures caused by the impact of a sword, where the collarbone breaks up to just below the shoulder joint, as happens with an axe or staff hit; due to this kind it is called this fracture method "ax-breaking".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	Or the sword cuts through the bone from above without piercing it, and this kind of fracture is called "absolute"; and these are the large or small injuries from these two kinds of fractures.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is sequential impact, or crack, or fracture in the bone, or through stone, or on stone, or other similar cases.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a break halfway through, reaching up to the membrane that surrounds the bone or above it, and this wound is either large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if the wound is healed within the bone just as thin as a hair, and the crack small, this kind of breakage is called "hairline" fracture due to this reason; and if the injury occurs by hitting with stone or falling down, or through similar actions causing part of the bone piece to enter from below, resulting in its edges cutting so deeply like the candlestick when it's heated on the candle holders; then the rock inside penetrates.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	This happens more often in those with soft bones like an infant's head; and it occurs through all these types of fracture resulting in small bone fragments being dislodged, such as pips; and I will discuss this in its appropriate section.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And know all the ways of breaking through extraction from them, and the examination with rods, and through the putrid matter which is above.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The hair's appearance is known by this: when one has uncovered the bone and rubbed it inwards, if the breaking is blackened, then it indicates the break.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of fractures, be careful about any adverse event involving the organs and if you do not see any harmful incident such as vomiting bile, loss of consciousness, extension, pallor, fever ague, and if the eyes start to come out and turn red, or other similar signs in various conditions, then cannot be cured without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see an alarming event, yet still hope for salvation, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when winter comes before you, and it's time for surgery, then you should remove the bone fourteen days after the operation.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it's summer, hurry to remove the bone on the seventh day, so that the flesh around the bone becomes gangrenous, and let us encounter the events that we have said.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And if breaking of the bone reaches up to the membrane that covers the brain, it is necessary for you to split the broken part in this manner: and take hold of the skull at its soft spot, and uncover all along the bone in every way possible, and along the shape of the wound as much as possible, and when bleeding comes with uncovering the bone, or if there's pus present, assist yourself with what is necessary, and ensure that you fill the space with wet cloths in olive oil; then let the wound rest until the pus has subsided and the bleeding stopped; only afterwards may you begin to remove along the bone, this is done according to two ways of operation: one way is that you trim at a tight cut upfront, and that's the shape:
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then do another larger cut than the first one.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second way is that you have several different cuts, some narrow and others wide, they should be pointed and made of iron; and apply them lightly, making sure not to pierce the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is far and hard, you should pierce it internally, in such a way that you administer cuts with needles, not completely piercing through the bone but ensuring there's a margin of about half a circle above the tip, so as not to let the tip pass beyond the bone; and you must have more than one, so that each goes into its place under the thickness of the bone, in such a way that you have needles for all parts; and this is the form of the three ways of using needles:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The quality for piercing internally through the bone is to place one needle on the bone and turn with your fingers until you know that the bone is pierced. Then put the needle elsewhere a little later, and do this all internally, then scrape out the space between the fragments of the bone using the incisors, doing so more finely and gently than possible, as we have said, just until you bring the bone to your hand or none of the instruments that you are using such as forceps; and make sure not to touch the brain or the spinal cord.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And when you have pierced and cut the bone, it is fitting to prepare an incision tool that remains from the bone to all other tools similar to a tooth cutter. But it must be more secure and more delicate than another tooth cutter; if there's nothing left of the small bones or no scales, then lightly scrape with some instruments; afterwards treat the wound with dressings and applications as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And another way of operation is this, which Galen stated, it being more secure; and he had the strength of a lion, and that's his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first to expose a portion of the bone, at the place where the fracture opens and moves, so that once you have exposed that part, you will place under the edge of this lens-shaped incision, as described below:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	And do not cut from one side, and the part is divided into two sides, so that when cutting it faces the bone; then strike with a small hammer on this side, so that you gently hit the entire bone, and take good care of the cloth that is nearby; if it sticks to the bone, lightly pull it, because you will pull out the bone well without harm, and without fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the bone breaks without piercing through the membrane, and only part of the bone is cut from above, with small pieces remaining, it's necessary to address that roughness afterward. You should remove the scales using a finely sharp razor tool, which you must have in various quantities, to apply according to each location, considering both the method and the appearance of the breakage.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	When dealing with large razors, and then progressing to finer ones, you should continue this process until it is done properly.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	For each other kind of fine hair trimming and delicate breakage, you should proceed according to its direction; this is something that cannot be adequately handled by someone who has devoted their studies to this craft.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	And if the boil is uncovered, then it should be covered with a linen cloth according to the size of the wound. Then moisten it in olive oil and place it over the wound; take another double layer cloth made from two or three layers, moisten it in wine and olive oil, and place it on top of the first cloth; do this gently as you can, without burdening the boil, then apply another bandage above that, using force only enough to touch the wound itself. Leave it like this for one or two days until the abscess becomes calm, then remove the bandage and administer medicines such as rosemary roots, flour of vinegar, incense powder, arnica, and similar substances; from these make a powder, apply it over the wound, and administer further medicinal treatments that do not cause discomfort. And watch that the wound is always clean, do not leave any ointment on it, nor let anything assemble into clumps because when such things assemble on the cloth covering the brain, they corrode and rot, causing great harm to the patient; for if something is placed on the boil that is irritant, it will burn from above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Therefore, be careful, should no mishaps come to the patient as we have said, if there is doubt then you must consider it doubtful.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if no danger arises only because of the medicine we have applied, and this virtue has been effective, then you should take one part of honey, three parts of almond oil and a drachm of glue, and place it on your face; then treat it in accordance with appropriate treatments until it heals, as long as it is clean.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Know that neither of the two parts near the nose, or even one alone, is broken, for these are two bones. And the one below is cartilaginous, and does not break, nor will it allow force to bend or twist it, then heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And if one of the two parts is broken, you should pinch your little finger or nostril and apply equal pressure to that break inside your index finger, and through your nose outwardly until the nostril revives according to its natural form; and do this gently, and be careful not to allow any pain to affect the patient with your actions.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is in the part above the nose and can't reach the nostril, it's necessary that you place it level with the tip of a finger slightly thicker.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	And if the break is of two parts, redo the process, and hurry to restore it on the first day, if you can; if not, after the seventh or eighth day when the abscess has healed, then pinch at the nose's tip with lint bandages, if the break is in one part.
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Or you apply another poultice on the other side, if there is a break; and make them large enough to fill the depressions around the nose.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And they say no restorative suggests mixing with butter, and changing each day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	I believe it might not be correct, but they should be moistened in the preparation of a mixture from an egg and powder of mill; then let the tent stay until the bone is hard, and the cartilage tough.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And once put on or use goose feathers instead of tents, and if you have one egg's worth of down covering them, and if the dressing stays intact, let the wound be exposed, letting air flow through; now do as you see fit.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if the abscesses come to the nose as you treat them, then apply a poultice or wet cotton in oil, or a small portion of garlic juice.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the abscess has not burst outwards, then apply a plaster on top, made from sandalwood powder and incense powder, mixed with an egg yolk. Then place it under light bandages, without tying them too tight; and should any breakage occur due to pressure beneath the nose being small, and if broken into tiny pieces, then use instruments suitable for this purpose, then cut along the wound line, applying healing things in a sequential manner, and joining tissues back together. If there is no injury within the nose itself, and nothing needs curing on the tent, then insert cloves until it's healed.
de la routure de la mandibule	Of the rupture of the jaw
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jaw is fractured externally, and there's no wound outwardly visible, only the breakage occurs externally. It isn't broken into two halves solely by cracks internally; one can easily recognize this.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	It is necessary, if the fracture is in the right part, that you press your index finger into the mouth at the patient's chin; and if the fracture is in the left jawbone, then press your index finger of your right hand, gently pressing the fracture internally, and push it outward with the other hand, ensuring both are equal.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if there is an fracture of the jawbone in two parts, it then requires that you perform an extension of both parts, ensuring they are equal.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And when the movements of teeth occur, or breakage, hold them with a thread of gold, silver, or silk. Then place on the broken mandible some wadding, and put over it one double layer; then place upon the layer a large wedge well made, or a piece of leather equal in size to the length and width of the mandible. Secure this to the muscles that you can, and command the patient to rest, eating light meat portions.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	And if you see that the figure changes, if it loses its shape by the third day, and then return to fixing what has become loose; apply plaster over it, made with powder from the mill mixed with enough egg or flour of wheat, after removing the wadding; place over the plaster a light cloth, and if the plaster sticks and the patient's position doesn't change, leave them as they are until they heal. Many times they heal in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if there are incisions that become infected, then apply what we have told you many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is breaking together with injury, reward none of the bone pieces that are removed; if such delicacy requires tools suitable for this task.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, widen it with fire according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all these pieces, and there remains none, if the wound is large, place one dressing suitable for it, to promote healing flesh, until it heals.
de la forcele	by the power of
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The force breaks many times in front of the shoulder, towards it, and the breakage occurs according to three ways: or it is broken and separated into two parts, and there are pieces, making it easier to restore; or there is a breakage with injury.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And when the operations are such that the breakage is with injury, have two assistants, so one pricks the shoulder where the force breaks; and the other extends their arm towards the affected area. Then match the break to your hands, making sure the form is as it should be, and there is no appearance or movement.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you need to extend further, place a round sponge of cloth or wool under the shoulder towards the hair, and make it as large as your need requires; and support and lift the force, and hold the sponge in your hand so that you can match the break evenly, as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot draw the head from the strength at the back due to its position coming forward, it's necessary that the patient lies on their side with their shoulder lifted, and place half an ear under each shoulder, and push the shoulders down as far as the strength bone is elevated.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And place your hands on the breakage point, and if you find fractures, it's necessary that you cut there; then gently pull the pieces apart. If the bone cannot join even with any pressure, then use one of the incisions you've made; but put this tool near the strength location to ward off the excess.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	It appears like a spoon, and isn't within him, and is as wide as it should be, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the work; and has two heads, as you see, and one being broad, and the other narrow, as is the cut made in the wound when you treated the bones; and once you are sure about pus cavity each time, if it cuts into the wound, and if the cut is small or you doubt there's pus cavity each time, if it cuts into the wound with draperies and tents, according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if one must stitch them, if moistened, soak the bandage in rose oil and wine, and place it on top.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	The process of bone fixation, when it's over wounds and by size requirements, involves placing the powder from the mill and enough egg whites on the bone. Light splints are then applied, along with a stick if necessary; one should then take a very large band that is about a palm wide, and place a double cloth layer above this, followed by plastering it over. Then take a delicate stick of three fingers in width and length, wrap it around the band as much as possible, so that the top of the band hangs down; put the stick on the bone fracture site, turn the band up to the neck, and around the clean part of the fracture, and also around the dirty and infected part; then remove each part gradually, once you see that the paste holds the fracture in place, and clearly see that the stick isn't moving above the broken bone anymore. Reward every day until the ligaments heal, and when the strings are removed, keep restraining it; let it rest against its back as much as possible when sleeping with a small pillow under the neck to lift the shoulder up; if you lighten the bone bruise by aligning the shoulder blade or if you tie the arm around the neck, don't release it unless there's bad accidents, for up to twenty days; then repeat plastering if necessary and keep applying pressure until it recovers. It gets fully recovered in about twenty-eight days, and faster than this in some individuals.
de la brisure de l’espaule	On the breaking of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	A situation might arise where the shoulder is broken or badly hurt in the middle and not at all its joint; if it happens due to impact alone; when dealing with this according to the break's shape, and resetting it according to its natural form, in every way you can do so; then sprinkle powdered malt from a mill over it along with plenty of egg whites, and apply gentle bandages, then place another layer of bandage on top; then lay out a large flat strip wider than the shoulder somewhat further away, such that there are no places where the strip meets any part of the shoulder, so cover this with linseed oil wads for padding, ensuring the strip fits evenly; and then press it tightly into one huge loop firmly, so that the strip does not move from its place, and check every day if the connection has healed; and whenever it relaxes again, press it further, making sure the strip is perfectly even with shoulder movements and positioning the patient on their side; by this method, the shoulder will be restored within 20 days or 25. And once this number of days is completed, remove the cast if everything seems healed well, because it's not bone that easily sets lightly.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of the bone should protrude and not be covered by the skin, then cut above it and below, and treat the wound as we have said in treating the dislocation of the elbow.
de la brisure dou pis	Of the breakage of the foot
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	The bones are broken at most halfway, but this happens rarely; but they break often at the end.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in the middle, if it bends downwards, causing great pain for the patient, loss of consciousness, and all, and by chance, blood is vomited out, and opens up inside the broken bones, and the person can feel it very well.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And for the restoration, if it is such that the patient lies on their back and you place one arm under each shoulder, then press the shoulders together, and join both ribs to your hands, and gently put them in a way that feels equal to all possible ways until the shape of the bone fits as it should; then place plaster strips and poultices above the delicate salt subtil, or another light substance, and cover it with one cloth, and bind it around the broken bone so that it doesn't move; turn the bandage around the back roundly and tighten it slightly, and reward each hour for the treatment of the limb, and if it is loosening, you tighten it; and if it feels right to let go due to corrosion or itching coming up on the body, or pain or abscesses, act quickly, loosen it, remove the plaster wrap, and treat accordingly with the remedies provided; then cover the plaster again and tighten it until it's healed.
de la brisure des costes	On the breaking of ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	Know that the breaking of ribs occurs only after great blows on the back and within the chest, and it only happens because they are brittle; one can feel this well during examination at the doctor's.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And for the treatment, if you place the break equally, just as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And then apply plaster, and secure with one bandage, if you need to use it.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the breaking of the ribs is occurring internally, then one feels great pain and stabbing inside, like from sobbing, because the bone pierces the tissue; and they have aches all over, nausea, immediate vomiting of large amounts of blood, and it's a severe health issue, and the old ones had to endure great suffering.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if some say that it is necessary to serve meat that swells the belly, in order to expel the indigestion from within.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	Let us not do this; that pus and sulfur do not enter where they have not already been.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it has entered, then heal it.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And let no one say that we place suction cups on the body in order to suck out forms, for this is what it seems like in reason; nevertheless, there is doubt whether the suction cup attracts excesses towards the body due to its weakness.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they say that when someone needs to cover the chest with wet wool in hot oil, and you place cloths between the ribs to make sure the heat is evenly distributed inside. Then apply the treatment for pleurisy, meat and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels intense pain that cannot be tolerated through the hole made in the skin, there is doubt for the patient whether it is necessary to cut at the site of the broken bone from under the rib, and you should place an instrument inside to keep the flesh in place; and then one must cut into the bone, gently drain, and then stitch the two layers of the wound if it's large, and dress with plaster until healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if they are pus filled, place them on moist cloths in oil rosed, and place them above the patient; and treat while adjusting to what is needed for pus, and apply steady ointment wherever it should be, until it heals.
de la brisure dou col	from the breaking of the neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	None of the time does breaking occur at the bones of the neck, and there is no bending when they bow; similarly for the spine in the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to any individual, and you wish to determine if they will recover or not, take heed: if you see that their hands are softened and swollen and dead, and that they cannot move or extend them, and when you poke them with a needle, if they do not feel it.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	You understand that it can be fatal in various conditions, and if they are insensitive and feel well when they are held without movement, you understand that the bone joint is saved, and that the disease has been cured, if a treatment is applied to it.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And if a similar thing comes to the spine of the back, and you need to know whether it is sane or not, take care that his joints are softened, and that any accidents affecting them occur when they are warm, and in front of the back a gusty wind and expulsion without wish; and when it has been observed on its belly, it expels without wish.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when it is examined on its back and it wants to sit up, it cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	Know that they are mortal: if you do not work diligently in their treatment.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this misfortune does not come to him, then it is a matter of lesser concern.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the treatment is such that you should apply it if there's pus or fat at its source, place on the spine oil from rooster's egg or hen's egg oil, until the pain subsides; then apply one of the soothing and drying plasters, and bind with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest. And do not sleep on that part where they feel pain until it heals.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any bone should break open, you must cover it with your elbow; and set the bone, then align the two edges of the wound, if it's large, with a stitch, then apply ointment that hardens to flesh until it heals; and if the bone chip is broken, which is called the "chip of the knee", put your left hand pouch against the other at your strength, then place the plaster and paste over it; then tighten it. And if there's a broken bone, you must cut it out, and set it again, and treat the wound until it heals.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	Of the breaking of the bone of the hip
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	It happens that the bone of the hip is broken, and if it happens, should there be a slight discomfort in the thigh; and stretch long, and decline to the knee, and comes to the patient pain in the leg, and bruising, and swells what is broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And for the restoration, you should extend your hand up, as far as you are above the bruise; and learn where the break is and its shape. And if the break is only in the thigh, then make it equal to that break, as long as it maintains a natural shape.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the break is along the length or it declines towards the inner side, then guide the patient lying on his stomach, as long as you are able to restore that break.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have placed it evenly, put it on the plaster, then place it on a stake of wood or charcoal, and hold the burn so that it does not move; and apply heat all over the back until the wound is even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	Instruct the patient to sleep on their right side or on their back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if abscesses come out, do not touch them until the pus of the abscesses is relieved, and place it on what we have mentioned before; then return to treatment, apply as needed so that no bad incident occurs; and this is how it should be done.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	regarding the breaking of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The assistants are those that are between the handle and the shoulder of the arm; if it is broken, one must restore it according to either of two ways: out of which one way involves taking a single solid rod with medium thickness, in such form:
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And fasten these two heads together with two threads, and weave them upwards, then place the wound on one spot; then pour the broken arm onto the rod until it reaches halfway, having formed half of a rod's bend, then position above anything or where helpers are below; then place the eyes of the fracture equally among their hands, so long as the broken part returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other way is that one must place the wound on his pillow and tie his hand to his neck, then instruct two helpers that one should cut near where the fracture is with his hands, and the other cuts over all two threads and extends each to their respective parts.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is more severe, then restrain it against the irritation, and on top of the irritation, and extend each minister to their part.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the irritation is close to the top of the shoulder, you should put one end of the bandage halfway between sitting up and on top of the irritation, and the other towards the knife, under the irritation; and also if the irritation is in front of the knife, you should place one end lightly, without effort, until the irritation is even under the left side and on the right side; then apply the irritation evenly as necessary, and extract, so that no pus comes out.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if abscesses come about under the wound, do not strain it until after seven days, and place on it moistened linen in oil and rose water, until the abscesses under the wound are soothed; then strain it, and how to strain it should be that you put plaster over the wound, then join the arm to the shoulder support, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the breast; place the bandage and hold it tight over the shoulder support, and over the arm, so that the arm is in its usual position, if nothing prevents it, or if the bone has not moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone does not move, use weights and place an extra large and strong weight over the tear, and leave one space of about two inches between each weight, and let each weight be big enough to pass through the wound three inches from both sides; then strain on those weights as I said at the beginning of this chapter on tearing wounds, more strongly but less when pulling apart.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	And if you see the base of the bone and its constriction, as we have said, in the place where you are restoring the broken limb, and you doubt about the abscess at that spot, if you let it be bound for a whole week, as we have said; then check every three days the bond, to ensure no itch spreads over it or any pus cannot come into the limb because it might be too tightly bound.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If the address, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And if no such accidents come about, or if the dislocation takes more than three days and then heals on its back with hands on its stomach; place one cloth full of equal wool under the shoulder. And each hour during day or night, check whether the figure of the broken limb is still intact or if the bindings have softened; if the address responds through medicine's virtue, and it gives meat as we have placed before you, in such a way that the meat becomes fine and tender at first; and when it starts to heal back, if it becomes large.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	And it is customary that the shoulder and the leg should be repositioned within forty days from the start; then one must loosen them, give baths, and administer ointment medications for the pain to subside.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the constriction is ugly and tangled, it should be kept for untangling for one or two months.
de la brisure du bras	Regarding the breaking of the arm
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is made up of two bones, which are named the 'foscile' pair. One bone is small, it forms the pocket; and another one is large, it rests under the small finger; by chance if only the large foscile breaks or the small one, or they both might unite together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When the small bones are broken, the restoration is light, and the healing. And when the large ones are broken, the healing is poor, and more painful than when they were broken together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If it's only the small bone that is broken, then it should be stretched slightly and made equal.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	And if it's the large bone that is broken, then it should be strained harder; and extend to the first joint, and hold the hand pouch higher than the others, and place the smaller fingers lower than the other fingers, and have the bones cross themselves against themselves, and the first joint in front higher than the bones so they do not suffer any strain; then extend your attendants' arms up to her wrist or elbow, and another attendant above.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then place the eyes even, according to their best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if in the breaking into pieces, you place each one of them back in its place, and if there is no bone pierced that touches the skin, and you cannot restore it to its place, then cut through the bone, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if in dealing with wound injuries, I've spoken about them individually; take the treatment.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	And if during the beginning of the reattachment abscesses form, then apply a poultice made from oil and white beeswax, so that it is neither too hard nor too soft; and bind the poultice in such a way that when the abscesses are relieved.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	And apply the wax, then put on the plaster made from powder mixed with plenty of egg whites. Place the needles, and if necessary, increase the force by one more than usual; make sure it's a bit wider than the other ones. Know that there should be six or seven needles arranged in various positions: either inside an osseous structure, two needles can do this; hold them closer to the sore area than elsewhere, as you did at the start of this chapter; and keep the plasters covering the sore moist and soft, they should not harden or become abrasive. The threads used for sewing are made from linen, neither too thick nor too thin; these details were explained earlier.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And heal the member and the bond after a few days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And if any bad incidents happen to the member, such as itching that comes to the member, it is necessary for you to immerse the member in hot water until the itch subsides; and let the member not be left to rest.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then continue the process of traction. If the ligaments are torn and the bones are exposed, do as seems appropriate.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if precautions are taken so that no injuries can occur to the limb due to it being too tight, it is necessary that you soften (the material) a bit. leave like this for several days until the injuries heal, and then start compressing again.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things we have said happens to the patient, or if the release does not occur up until the 20th day.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	Or elsewhere, then place their hands on his neck, and if his necks are equal, and take care of movement and restlessness, and sleep on his back; and know that this cure is restored in thirty days or forty-five, and sometimes in twenty, according to the compositions and the complexions of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	from the breaking of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	You know that on the back of the hand and in us, there are few breaks, and it only results in many foldings.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	And when the heel of the hand is broken or folded, it is necessary for the patient to lie with their head crossed and facing straight ahead equally; then they should place their hand on an extended table, and extend the broken fingers, placing them in a straight line as much as possible. They must be well aligned, then apply plaster and wafers if there's no pus. After that, place one stick according to the size of the hand; and wrap it with a piece of linen, making sure to cover it with one yard of linen.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the breakage is in the part around the belly of the hand's heel, make a sphere from cloths, and instruct the patient to stretch it towards their broken heel. Then stretch it with a long cloth, and place the stick straight down as much as needed so that its height matches the heel of the hand, and stretch it accordingly.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the breakage occurs at the front, it is necessary that you place a splint above, and another under on the sole of foot, so that the hand remains open and upright, then tie them completely around the hand, and seal the connection between fingers.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the breakage happens at one of both feet, which is a sprain, in such a way as it should; and you press with the sole, and if you see that placing a small upright splint helps to lift the breakage and keeps it from moving. And if the breakage occurs on other toes, like in the index or among others, do it similarly by pressing evenly and then tie them using a healthy toe afterward; or tie all of them together when walking as well, holding firmly, or place a splint over it, like one would with a sprain. Take care in preserving the position and location of each dressing individually, and prepare for those who come after you, just as I said.
de la cuixe brisie	Of the broken leg
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	The bone of the elbow is often broken, and one can see this when it turns forward and backward; and the restoration comes in two ways. One involves tying above the break, and another involves tying below it.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patients lie on their face, then extend each minister's joint equally to their equal part; and this is when the break has entered into the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the break is near the root of the thumb, then let one ligament be towards the knife, and the other ligaments under the break.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And if it's near the knee, then let the ligaments be inside the knee, and let it be a flexion downwards; then place the points of the bone to its two hands until it is according to its natural figure, and then apply plaster, and bind it, should pus not come.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is an abscess to remove, let it heal then return to your work and treatment; the wound has been treated in this manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is necessary for you to wrap around the break with a two or three times doubled strip of hard bandage, and leave the excess. Then turn the leg until the heels reach the root of the ankle, and insert a long thread along the thigh under the knee. Let the head catch the thread above it; then turn the leg and thigh bands over and over again. Then place plaster around the break, put an asterisk on the bone of the leg; then insert eight strips between the leg and thigh with a wet cloth to make sure there is equal tension. Begin by wrapping three or four times around the break; and as you go above the break, loosen it less. Then pull two threads that you have inserted between the leg and thigh for three asterisks above it, turn back down to under the head of the thread until you reach below the foot; and tighten it, so that it doesn't move from its place, then leave it like this, and should there be no pus or swelling or other symptoms.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if this happens, should it loosen, and address what comes out, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that catch, then they must be extracted when possible; and if one cannot do so, it is necessary to cut the skin open and drain the pus; and treat it as we have said, until it heals.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And never is the flesh broken when these rods are applied in places like on the shoulder and arm; yet still, upon completion of such treatment, there is no damage to the patient.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	Know that the flesh is restored within one month or perhaps slightly more or less, depending on the variety of constitutions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	from the alley of the kidney
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	Know that in the knee joint area there is little cracking, but it bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, except for just a crack, or if the joint is dislocated, it affects every wound and senses of pain, and this can be felt well.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is such that you place even what is round on its thumbs until it can move. Then apply the plaster and put a round stone if needed, then bind properly as necessary. After all these arrangements made according to our previous instructions for other injuries like abscess or similar occurrences; for each incident, use what fits accordingly while he remains healthy.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the breaking of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	Know that in the leg are two bones, of which one is called straight or "mustelz", and the other is called "foscile"; and there occurs every injury or breakage as it does in the arm. And its restoration is similar to that of the arm alike, and the techniques are all the same. And if both these bones get broken together, then the leg turns in all directions.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the finer bones are broken, turn towards the front.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	And if the large bone is broken, one feels great pain and sees it clearly; then it twists around.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	So proceed with stretching, and make it even, then evenly tie the joints; but still, if there is roughness in the breakage, and there are several fragments, that the stretching should be less and more gentle; and align according to your skill.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed your task, take two ropes of fust that support the leg on both sides, and let them be as long as the leg from the knee to below. Then wrap these in two layers of cloth, one above and one below, bind them in the middle, and at this binding ensure that the leg cannot decline towards the right or left; it should be well done this way; and no one administers a belt as long as the leg, made of fust, and puts on the leg to prevent movement. It must be done precisely where there was injury; and move the leg each day to see if there is an abscess anywhere else; treat until he heals properly.
de la brisure des os dou piet	From bone fractures due to impact
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle it does not come from fracture, but when bones are struck, there is always a chance of fracture and in the limbs, there can only be pain in various positions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if a fracture occurs in the bones of the foot, and you see these bones rise over each other, place such bones on the ground like they want to go, and then put your foot under his at the point where the bones are raised, press it so much that they come back to their senses; then apply plaster and cover it up, and underneath the belly of the foot put a small board about two inches thick, then fix it against the foot arch, then wrap it with blankets around, and other things you need.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days have passed, you should release the bandage because you will find that the bones are even, whether they were broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if any of the ribs are broken, restore them, as we have said about the ribs of the hand; then place on each broken rib a splint according to the length of that rib, and slightly larger than it, then set beneath the rib the table I mentioned, and apply the joint support over this. And if there are two or three or more broken ones, break them, placing on each one of these ribs a splint according to its size, wrapped in one piece of linen, and hold the table under the rib; and being placed at the head of the table facing the abdomen beneath it, ensure that it cuts well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And you should not forget the other things I've said about other injuries, once we have discussed them; and assist each incident according to how it should be.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	regarding the breaking of the bone in the hand
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bones of her nature break during childbirth, if she is allowed to sit in a larger position, then incline her towards the lower back section, and hold her at the rear. Next, fill the natural cavity with cotton from her condition, and also insert it quite generously; then stand up the woman, and lift her back slowly bit by bit, and then let out the cotton until it reaches the entrance of nature, and brings the bones back in line; and when she needs to urinate, if you remove the cotton, and when she has urinated, put her back as usual, and repeat this process for seven or more days: then the break will heal. If you see fit, take a goat's bladder, tie it with a stick at one end, fill the bladder inside out according to nature; then blow into the stick until the bladder inflates internally: nature will correct the break; then fill it with cotton and leave her like that for some days, until she is restored.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	And when the bone of the hand or arm is broken, or in the case of a woman if it's the bones of her arms and legs, then restore it as we have instructed with regard to the hipbone; and these nearby fractures should not be overlooked by someone who applies their effort and use, and listens to my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	And the breaking means in many positions the correct way of restoration: thus understand it.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the case of the penis being broken, take an oyster shell and fill it with the penis; then wrap it in linen, and leave it for three days or as long as necessary, and it will heal quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	By fracture with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for the one who has a fracture with a wound, even if it's large, like in the thigh or shoulder or similar places, that they be treated now, so that the treatments we have said can bear witness.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is healed, use vitriol to bandage it up again, if you don't have anything else, then resume treating the fracture at the same hour or day. If no pus appears in the dressing, then proceed with restoring the fracture.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if pus appears in the dressing, let the restoration continue until the third day, as long as the pus is subsiding. Don't touch it on the third or fourth day either, for you might provoke a bad outcome.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if you can see the broken bone above the opened part of the knee, it is necessary that you place them slightly together with your hands, in a small extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extension is not visible for you to place them evenly with your hands, take this tool made of iron that measures seven or eight inches in length, and its width should match the size of the wound; it's necessary for the surgeon when needed three or four tools according to what they require for each treatment of broken limbs; make sure they are round and slightly larger, so they don't bend under pressure on your limb while working, and they should be sharp in front, and large at the center towards the front, like this:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And it is called 'palainche' because it requires that the curved heads be placed on the top of the visible bone; and push it once so that when it heals, it is equal to each other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the breakage is subtle and the instruments cannot well grasp the bone, it requires that you hold the top of the bone as long as the instruments have power over it.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot return the bone to its place as we said before, if one has access to an appropriate instrument for this task, such as a file or saw, with your power; then remove what is remaining in the bone's roughness and small slices.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is returned, and the flesh feels great pain afterwards, know that it has not been placed in its natural position.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	If you want to do so that it is in its place, then spread with meath oil a black, sticky liniment, and if it's for an external wound; and don't put any plaster or other thing with ointment on the wound when there's no pus, to prevent the development of gangrene and decay; then give this treatment after you have set the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, applying a complete covering according to the size of the wound, and be very careful not to restrict the wound with pressure; many times people have done it this way, and they have caused either death or corrosion in the flesh. And make sure that the compresses are softer and more pliable than other injuries.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	And if the wound is deep or large, and you doubt that some injuries have occurred, as we said, and you find pain in the limb, it does not seem right to apply ointment; but cover inside, instead of applying ointment, wrap with hard cloths, and secure them.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one or two days that the pus has increased at the wound, remove what you have put in all the wine, and apply a healing ointment to the wounds, such as a tetracycline ointment and similar.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it must be that you dislocate the limb twice a day, at morning and at vespers, until it is joined and healed.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it should be such that the limb be adjusted in this manner so that the bone moves down slightly without impediment.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if this persists day after day and the bone cannot be joined back immediately, you must know that there are small fragments of bone causing this, so it is necessary for you to seek out the wound with a probe, and remove all these required fragments that cause pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a sinus tract comes to the limb, or any other manner of corruption, it is necessary that you treat it, according to what he stated in his chapter before.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And when the bone is broken and exposed in the limb, such as the bones of the heel or shoulder, and others of the large limbs, you must not treat it because many die from it; but let it heal as long as it heals; perhaps it will drain out after twenty days or thirty, then you can treat the wound if possible; and if you cannot, leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	The bruises that come from sweat
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	The bruises often appear after the healing of the wound, especially near joints. A strange thing to see is the shape of the limb; and by chance cannot perform its natural tasks.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Take care therefore when this condition appears: if it is necessary to administer stomatic medicines such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, along with sarsaparilla, caraway, and other similar substances; do so by choosing any of these things or all together, and mix them with stomatic wine, or enough egg whites, or vinegar; then apply it on the nodule in poultices and press well, but don't remove from hands until days have passed; after that remove it, and start again with another application as long as the swellings are gone. Or you can apply it over a well-made piece of plaster; because the property of plaster is such that it removes all swellings on limbs; if the swelling has turned into hardness like stone and needs to be removed, cover it, show what is superfluous, or bring it to any surgeon until it is removed, and treat it until healed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	The limb which becomes weak after a siege (or prolonged period of stress or effort).
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the breaking of the bone is restored, and after it stays, the limbs are weak and subtle, this happens due to various causes: one reason could be that it was bound too tightly and not released as it should have been; or because there were too many bindings, thus preventing the proper movement in the limb; or perhaps from excessive bleeding; or due to overly large movements that didn't occur at their time; or because they lack blood within their body, making them weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the treatment is that you eat the meat in him, and make the body tender, until the abscess multiplies within it; then give baths to him, and provide joy and ease; afterwards apply grease on the limb, so that the grease attracts to the large node, and washes it frequently with water, until the node matches up with the limb; and restore its natural figure.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	If the member is bent after recovery.
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limbs are twisted after restoration, and if the bone is broken open, and the form of the limb is ugly afterwards, it loses none of its natural function: do not believe those who say one must break the limb entirely anew. Many fools have done this in our land, and these procedures are criticized; they cause great harms and even death. Nonetheless, when the swelling and torture are fresh, you should use hot water to make them rise or cook mildifying herbs such as leaves of mallow, roots, and marigold, among similar treatments. Make one emplastre of a mildifying nature, like well-made aqua vitae, take mallow extract and mix it with grease from pork fat or oil of safflower, then make an emplastre. Alternatively, you can take fatty figs, grind them with buckwheat flour, and other medicines that reduce inflammation.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And never is any bone moved by constant rubbing for long periods with wet hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And let the member have some movement every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the dislocation has hardened and become tough like bone, requiring treatment with heat, if it's suitable to cover up until reaching the bone in surgery; and apply care and diligence in the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	This begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing great pain and injury to the patient.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation affects none but suits for immediate repositioning without hesitation.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	For if one delays, they swell the limbs, and by chance set them in bone; because it is not good to move the limb when it is swollen: many times pus and other pains are brought about. Nevertheless, when this happens, have a surgeon treat the patient, then leave him until all the pus has subsided; then immerse the member in hot water and oil, then gently reset it, and cure each member as it comes to its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have arranged the chapters on shoulder dislocations up to this point.
des mandibules	of the jaw
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	Sometimes the jaws become dislocated backwards, and the dislocations of both occur in two ways: either they are somewhat bone-like at their roots, and slightly softened; or they are completely dislocated, hanging towards the bottom of the body, causing saliva from the mouth to escape, unable to contain it, and unable to close his mouth. Also, he envelops his tongue with his speech due to this condition.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it returns by several positions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And if it is complete and accomplished, you must reset it immediately without hesitation; and in such a manner that the servants cut off the head of the sick person, and insert needles into her pocket under the dislocation of the jaw within the mouth, if the dislocation is two parts. And the other hand should be out from the hands to make them equal; and command the patient to soften her jaws and move them in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And keep pushing until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if returning it is painful, just the same, even when they are both mandibles together, if you heat with hot water and oil, as long as you gently reset it; do not overly force the repositioning, just as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And when they are brought equally, and the mouth of the patient is well closed by being mollified, if you place moist cloths in a poultice made of rose oil and beeswax on them, then bind them lightly with moist threads; and let the patient lie on his back, and have his limbs between two cushions, so that he does not move or to the right nor to the left, nor tries to bend at all, but eats light food until the pains are eased, and the jaws are sewn; and then eat what he wants lightly, and do not try to open his mouth for eating and drinking until the jaw is well stitched and healed.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two mandibles cannot be properly aligned in an hour and are not turned back to their original positions, fever and settled discomfort result, often accompanied by bloating or vomiting.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	And when you see this, then you know it's a loss; many times, death has befallen those who have experienced this within eight days.
de la forcelle	from the forcefulness
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The forces cannot alleviate from within the continuity of it and the bottom, and is dislocated every single time at the front, and one feels this well.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And the healing process is as follows: the patient lies on his back, and extends his arms. Then press your hand in the shape of his palm, and it will return; then place it on a plaster cast and tie it, and tighten it; and the elbow facing towards the cut does not dislocate; but if it does dislocate once or twice, then you need to reset it back into its place, as we said; then put it on the plaster cast and the bandage, and tighten it, and command the patient to rest until he is healed. And in this manner, the shoulder blades of the spine are brought back when they have been removed from their place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	On orders concerning the shoulder joint,
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	Know that the shoulder is dislocated in three ways: in one way it dislocates towards the side of the armpit downwards; and in another way it dislocates at the bottom part; and by chance dislocates upwards, which happens rarely; and does not dislocate behind for the shoulder or inside for nerves; and dislocates repeatedly down to the armpit, even with those who have little flesh because it goes quickly with them; with those who have enough flesh, it jumps over and comes back over.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And by chance happens to some people a percussion or a breaking, and inflates the shoulder with an abscess, and believes that it is dislocated due to this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	So then you must prove it, as long as you are certain of it; and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And it is known that the dislocations occur when one goes towards the armpit, and there's a distinction between the diseased shoulder and the healthy one; you will find various evident differences between them. You will discover a hollow in the top of the shoulder and from the armpit to the collarbone; just like if it were an eye. The patient cannot bring their hand back to their nose, nor can they move at all. And similarly, if the shoulder is dislocated upwards, it doesn't disappear completely because you find it clearly at the collarbone. This type of dislocation can only be resolved, when new, or when a person's child is underaged; for this manner of dislocation cannot be otherwise removed.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the method is that the ministers lift their hand from under the malady at the top, then place their palms underneath it and lift the joint up to the shoulder with force; and they lift the hand, stretch it upwards, and put it back down under it; if it comes quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	And if it doesn't come about as we have said after a few days, then the patient should be bathed in hot water. They should be treated with soothing and calming remedies: decoction of tea, fenugreek, and milk thistle in water should be used for bathing; they must then use this treatment method. After that, the patient's back should be wrapped with a warm cloth. Place a piece of soft but not too soft wool under the patient’s buttocks during this process, neither too soft nor too hard. Then place your fingers on the bottom of their foot against the wool, and gently raise their shoulder up, pulling down on their hand; others should cut the head of their shoulder softly to prevent it from moving downwards. This way, they get their shoulder back in place immediately. If you see that you have successfully reset it this way: and then make sure there's someone bigger than the patient present at home during this process. The patient should be straight towards their side, pushing their shoulder under the wool against the body, lifting the body upwards so that the patient hangs down; other helpers pull your hand down towards the belly of the patient.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if they are too light for the patient, there is nothing he can carry, and the dislocation simply returns immediately.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And to reset it can also be done in another way: and you stick the long coal into the ground, so that the patient is held as if by a pistol, and not too thick or too soft; then place it under the body but let there be a shield underneath, and have the patient hold the position for the entire length of the stick; and extend your hand from the other side to form the joint again, and the dislocation will return to its place quickly; and if it doesn't return by all these methods that we've mentioned, then do this cure: take a firebrand of two arms long and four fingers wide, which has a handle that allows for movement through it near its base in front against the wall, according to this shape:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	Then cover the head with a cloth beneath, so that the head does not bruise the patient, then place it on the pillow under the patient; and stretch out your arms along the body of the patient, and place the shoulder in front, and lay the arm at the head of the hand, then put the arm on one end of an inch of a board of about the width, and let the hands hang downwards on the other side: the joint is now restored.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when she is like that, in any manner, so long as you must put under the pillow a stick of yarn equal, then place the plastered dressing with powdered flour from the millhouse, together with incense and beaten egg yolk, over the whole shoulder and around, then pull under the pillow additionally, and fasten the tie on the plastering, and hug the hand to its neck, and let the hands remain like that.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it must be that he eats a little, until the limbs are strengthened, for then they will heal faster; and after that, eat more after five days or seven, and move them; and if it is firm and not softened, it has healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is out due to moisture or for another reason that it came forth from its place, then you should apply three cauterizations to it, as was stated in the section concerning the use of cautery.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this, and it dislocates after seven days, and the joint does not stay in place, and cannot lift your arm up, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is cut or extended or weakened; and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Dislocation that is towards the buttocks, and breasts, or behind, if it occurs due to pushing and stretching of hands, and you administer treatment elsewhere; and continue the cure until it heals.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after healing there are still pains in the limb, and later with movements, if they submerge the patient's bath many times, as long as that pain is alleviated, and returns to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	From the dislocation of the shoulder joint.
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	Know that the shoulder joint is dislocated at points and returns to them; if it has been dislocated from all sides, as well in front and behind, and the dislocation is not resolved, for you can see and feel it very clearly; and it gets dislocated according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you connect the sick side with the healthy one, if you can see them clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is twisted, and cannot bend the arm, nor reach his shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it must be reset as the pus flees and moves away, because if pus were to flee and return, there would be blame for having re-set it; and perhaps it can't be brought back completely from start to finish, even when it is behind; this dislocation is worse than others, and brings more pain, and perhaps death comes from it.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And during restoration, if it can be re-set to such a state that you can extend his arms with both of your hands; and let his arms spread outwards, and move the hands towards the center following the line of the elbow, inwards and outwards, and press on the joint at its base or at the root of his palm until it regains its place within him.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, it returns when he holds his hand against his own, and supports himself with the point of the knife which has been reset.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And if it doesn't return to its original position, apply strong extension; and when you do so, extend the arm with both hands, and hold it steady, ensuring no movement during this process. Then bend the arm from each side, after having wrapped a double long and wide cloth around it; and when you attempt to align the joint with your hand, rub some oil on it to soften the joint, then carefully reposition the joint until it's in place; and once placed correctly, cover it with dry plaster and egg yolk, apply firm pressure, and position the arm under the neck on the sick side. Leave it there for a few days, then remove the bandage.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firmly in its place, you release the tie and leave it; and if you see that the joint does not fit well, you redo the binding and the tie, and let it be like this for several days until it is firmly placed; then you release it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And if it feels swollen after returning the joint, and it moves, then you should bathe and scrub well, pressing until it is relieved; or you place on the joint fat lamb grease for one day and one night, then return the bone and let him bathe in it. And when he sweats, then you should gently rub the joint and reapply the grease, then put back into bathing; and do this twice or three times until he is relieved; and if you see fit, place on wet cow's fat heated with butter and press it onto; if it returns to its position.
li dislocation de la main	The dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The hand's joint dislocates and the return is light, more than other joints of the body. It must be brought back to its place immediately, in the same moment that it gets dislocated, so that the limbs become swollen or there comes pus and healing begins.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	And the returning is done by placing your hand on a table and extending it, then looking at them to put their hand evenly, so that they place their palm on the appearance of the joint and keep pressing until she revives fully. You should look to see if it is correctly placed; hence, place the back of their hand on the table in extension and return when it extends and returns.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, you should have the patient place the back of their hand on the table, and you position your hand on that part of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If it returns now, that's good; if not, let the application of plaster soothing poultices continue to heal, and leave it at that without needing to start over.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	And if it can't be endured, and you can't return it to its proper place after some days, then the joint remains twisted; and it is not harmful for the patient as long as their hands are bandaged, and they can't strain anything fully: thus you should know that a nerve has been cut, or an artery; if there's no other reason except to use a cautery in this case, and by chance, it doesn't have any other solution.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hands are in place, set them on the plaster that we have described, then hold and let them for five days, then release and leave them thus.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it cannot move well, and there is no swelling, submerge it in hot water, and rub until it becomes clean.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	regarding the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	No time is a dislocation of the thumb on either side, no time under the palm or in the belly; thus the thumb remains and resists the dislocation at your temples until it revives. Then support the head of the thumb, and bend it towards the part where it was joined; and leave him for two days, and then place him equally that day; and fasten him, as we have said, and remove the dislocation that day, and move him on that one; and do this often, until it is constricted, and do so likewise if it is dislocated in the belly of the hand, and do it as you did before, until it's sound again; and do so likewise when it's dislocated on the other side.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	for the proper relief of the ankle and back.
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the shoulder blade or neck is dislocated, or if there are multiple dislocations, without any treatment, because death rushes to the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	And the signs are that the emissions go against their will, not being able to hold them, and many times become softened in any limb or both sides of the two arms or one; this often becomes silent into four parts. The one that becomes silent at the back is called 'gilbositez': the cure is that you reward if the gilbositez has come from childhood: if there's no cure or healing until then.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	And those that come from childbirth or impacts or similar things, the old methods of treatment by large words said, they did not derive any great benefit from these; but I have shortened them according to my intention and formed instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	I state that in the condition where it comes before the belly, none has health or strength; similarly, that which comes straight to both sides, and one cannot cure anything except that specifically which comes to the back, as I say; and let the patient be lying extended on his back evenly, and have no strain underneath him, so he does not bruise himself; then stick one stake in the head in the earth forming, and another at the feet, and tie a band under the belly between these stakes, and another at the hips, and at the knees, and at the ankles; and two assistants should know these bands, one to the head and others at the feet, among these two stakes; they must be well closed, as we have said before for the stake, and let her hands rest on the spine in forming, until she regains consciousness.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And if it does not return through this cure, take a table of three arms long and place it next to the part, and if the patient is on their side, have the patient's head against the table edge. Then put the top of the table just above the spine; and position one end of his legs on the other corner of the table, pressing firmly until they regain consciousness in their own bed; and should you see that he returns to his senses at the elbow that turns towards the hand, do it that way.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And if you insert two pokers at the head of the patient's arm up to the wrist, and towards his legs, place them between each poker halfway down, about an arm’s length apart; in each poker, have a joint or elbow where they bend, with the pokers firmly set into the ground so that they don't move; and between each pair of two pokers, place one turning poker, where their elbows turn towards it, and position two smaller turning poker arms under them about an arm's length apart for turning the elbow; then tie the link in the middle of all these devices at the elbow side towards his head, and the other link towards his legs at the opposite elbow. Each attendant turns their elbow on this whole link, and the master places the spine evenly as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	And when it is even, place upon it desiccative plaster with abundant egg whites, and then apply poultices, and apply a small table of three inches long, that purges the area of the gallbladder inflammation and the healthy part of the spine, then bind it with a bandage as we have said before, using the patient's resistance to subtle stimulation until they are healthy; and if any sign appears at the end of healthiness, then administer softening medicines and soothing ones, along with the poultice that we mentioned previously; and each time one piece of flax is given, and it brings no appearance at the back spine on the back, take care that this is dislocation; and it's the bone that opens up, for which there should be no presumption: if so would come about death.
des dislocations de la hainche	Regarding hip dislocations
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	Know that the joints of the hip and shoulder can only come from dislocations alone, unlike other joints; and the joint of the hip is dislocated according to four parts: inside and outside, front and back; and more inside, with less dislocation in front and behind.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And the knowledge of its dislocation from within is that when one unites the diseased leg with the healthy one, it grows longer, and opens more than the diseased knee is compared to the healthy one, and cannot allow the diseased knee to bend towards the fire; and it is because the joints in the diseased area swell up due to abscesses, as the head of the shoulder joint comes into contact with them.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign for one who goes towards fire, it is that this event is contrary to what was before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs for one who goes towards completion, it is that his leg is well according to fulfillment; nonetheless, he does not bend his knee without pain, and if you want him to move, he cannot beforehand, and he retains his urine, and swells his ankle, and when he walks, he steps on his heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the symptoms of one who has it behind him, so that he cannot spread his thighs, nor bend them, and this leg is more bent than the other, and the groin becomes limp, and the shoulder blade of the arm underlies the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The remedies for this manifestation of dislocation are that if it is an old dislocation, and it stays in its position, without any treatment; and there should be no assumption about it.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And for those where the dislocation is fresh, and there are four ways of dislocation, you should quickly return the joint, and stretch it inside and outside, and move it to the right and left; by chance if it returns, then no other treatment is needed.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And if it doesn't return in this manner, you should apply strong force and hold the leg firmly with both hands or tie one hand tightly around the knee; and another assistant extends their hand above in such a way that they press their hands onto the buttocks, then pulls them away from each other through the rope towards the thigh; and another holds the head of the tied part; and they extend upwards and downwards all at once, until the diseased limb is lifted off the ground once, and stays suspended.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of extension is common among four similar cases, and if the dislocation has returned, just like we have said, it is correct.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	If not, then care must be taken according to its appearance. When the dislocation is in the pectoral region, you need to position the patient on their back, place them on a clean surface, then secure the limb at the base of the arm, and above the elbow, then tie it upwards towards the armpit, and laterally over the sternum; then stretch it upwards from below. If it returns to its position now; this method of dislocation is lighter than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	And if you cannot hold it in this way as we have said, then it is necessary that you bind the two legs of the patient together firmly with a strong ligature under both heels and knees, and make the diseased leg extend more than twice the length compared to the other; then suspend them from the head by a pole, with two arms length above the ground. Then command another assistant to hold the knee of the limb, while others assist with the patient, holding the limb in position for it to heal quickly now.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And when the dislocation is at the back, if the patient lies down, as we have said for those with glibness, and stretches out their faulty limb properly along the affected leg, and across the body; then place both hot pokers, one on the head and the other near the feet. Next stick a poker between the ribs in the patient's dislocated side in the shape of it; and place moist cloths around to prevent any burning of the patient, then each minister should arrange themselves facing him, and set the dislocation equally with their hand.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it comes back, that's good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, place it on the table and press it like we explained in the glibness section, and have the patient lie on their healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when dislocation is in front, it's necessary to extend the painful leg quickly, and do as I've said; place the patient's pain on the inner side of their knee, then press with the other hand, and push down towards their ankle.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And if the dislocation is behind, it does not suffice to lengthen the body downwards or lift him off the ground. Instead, he should be in such a position as when his hip was dislocated at the back, as we have said about lying on both hips; and it should be under his buttocks, and the strap extended as we said earlier, and must press on the joint from the table; and will be ready when the body stretches its legs, and they will be even; then adjust the knees, put in the splint, and hold with one band, so that the hip does not move; and rest for three days or four, then release him, and place the splint on; and when you see that they are even, tighten again as before, and leave it for three days; then release him, let him walk properly, until the limb is strengthened.
de la dislocation dou genoil	Regarding shoulder dislocation
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The knees are dislocated in two ways: it means, internally and externally, and behind; and does not dislocate in front.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And the signs indicate that you should instruct the patient to bend their leg at their knee. If they cannot bend it towards their knee, know that their joint is dislocated; and in the restoration process, this means making the patient lie straight, extending their leg if possible, placing your back against their buttocks, and placing their foot on yours; then take hold of their knee with your hands, pull between your fingers, then bend both sides of the knee towards each other. And another assistant should extend their foot until the knees return to their place, and the signs are that they bend well their leg slightly at their knee; and apply the bandage, make the leg rest against the knee, keep them together tightly for three or four days, then release them; and do not let the patient work with their limbs until their joints are strengthened.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limb is not intact, apply strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it heals.
de la dislocation dou talon	from the heel dislocation
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heels are neither fully set nor completely dislocated, both inside and outside.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And the signs are that the ankle is swollen and tries to move before it dislocates; the reduction should be quick, and one must gently extend its movement with their hands when it begins to settle.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	And when it is reduced as soon as possible, the patient should be made to lie straight, and hold their leg out by the foot, above the ankle; then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and then with your left twice, then extend upwards, and firmly push the heel up; and repeat this twice, just like we said, while pushing and pulling on the heel. If it returns, that is well; if not, continue with the process as before, for it will return; and if it cannot return in such a manner, let the patient lie over their back on the ground, firmly place a stick between their thighs, and tie them tightly around to prevent bruising of the leg. Then shave the thigh, and another assistant extends the foot or another person with their hands or under the arm, which is tied onto the neck; then evenly extend each assistant's movement, and place the stick so it is tight between the thighs for the sake of keeping the heel when extended; then adjust the eyes equal to the dislocation on your hands, and another assistant shaves the healthy leg above the ankle, and the dislocation will return quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And when it reaches the point, place the bandage and apply heat above, then hold firmly in shape, tie the leg to the foot and guard the nerves that are behind the ankle, making sure not to tie too tightly; then leave for two or three days; if he loosens during this time, remove the tie. Then release on the third day or fourth, and advise walking the patient for four days; and if it goes beyond these limits, there's still no certainty that it won't dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there are abscesses around, it is necessary to soothe them, as we have said elsewhere, while they are still swollen.
des dois	Of the two
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the two shoulders are reduced, if they fit well and extend in a proper manner, it is a simple task.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the dislocation is in neither the neck nor the waist, then you must have the patient lie on their full length or on a table entirely straightened out, and place your foot where it opens from the joints, then press with your foot until it regains consciousness; and when it's even, and there isn't anything opening, then put under the heel of your foot a two-shoulder table, then hold in shape, and leave for three days, then release him; and have him rest until he is sound.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	regarding injuries and dislocations together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	When disease comes with dislocation and one wants to restore it, many times the patient dies: if you are not presumptuous in your treatment, if you are not skilled in the art and have not used it for a long time, and if you lack compassion and mercy, do not be rash; at the beginning use soothing things on abscesses, let the patient depend on God's hand, if you cannot see hope of recovery; and when you see hope, immediately reset the limb to its place in such a way that the abscesses are released as they come about; and once the limb is placed, administer soothing things on abscesses, treat the wound according to what should be done with desiccated ointments; and if there's breakage due to dislocation and small bones have been fractured, set them, and do what we've said in simple illnesses; and protect yourself from entering into fear's path, as I've said, because it will make you stumble according to your Creator, and for the wisdom it equips you with and the health of your body.
Amen	Amen
