O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	You dear children, I have completed this book which is the culmination of the science of medicine, bringing together its completion through my explanations and declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in vision that I would complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is well established in our region and has spread everywhere, it has lost its science and been divided up, and nothing remains from it except for small descriptions in books written by the ancients that were handled by hands.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And because of this, there has come error and vanity, and closed are the minds, and the science is far away.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	It seems that I should revive this treatise together with the order of its content according to the path of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and come together in assembly the forms of the cautery irons, and the other tools of work along with the adjustment of declaration and preparation of them, as it is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because no good masters are found in our times, the art of medicine has been neglected.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And he who intervenes should ascend in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so long as they know how to judge members, and their forms and connections and separations, and have knowledge of bones and nerves and muscles, and the number of bones, and their movement and the moving and resting veins, and where their exit lies.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And thus, according to Hippocrates, he says that without knowledge it is little, and with practice it grows some; similarly in the art of hand.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We shall tell you at the start of this book that if someone lacks knowledge about what has been discussed, they may easily commit errors and mislead others; just as I have seen many times among those who interfere with this science and abandon their knowledge and lack of experimentation.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I saw a fool who tried to cure one of the scrofulous swellings or neck of a woman. He tied off the arteries below her neck; so much blood flowed out that the woman died in his hands.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And I saw another fool who was treating a stone in an old man's body, and the stone was large; he took along with it a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I have already been called to extract, and saw the position of the organ and the size of the stone, and indeed if they had cut him he would have died.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And saw another case where I treated the leg of a Duke from our land, who had broken his leg and sustained an injury due to the breakage. The surgeons ignorant tied the break over the wound, causing inflammation there; they didn't stop with the treatment till it improved after one week; then instructed not to disassemble it again; so waited until the leg was fully swollen up and down and eventually led to ruin.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I have been summoned to help him, and I hurried to free his leg. And when I found it dislocated so perfectly, he was in peace and felt no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But every path of corruption had already been confirmed throughout the body or member, and there was no way to heal it; and the corruption continued to spread within the body until the entire member was lost.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And there is another method that collapses an abscessed wound, and then inflames it through the wickedness of her lordship.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For a chancre, when it is full of melancholic humor, it should not be touched with iron if it cannot all be removed, what has been corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And because of this, dear children, you are required to know that the work of hands is divided into two parts: meaning, those situations where there are risks in multiple positions. And I will show each one in this book where there is danger and risk.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	Because it is necessary for you to take care of this, so that no one may speak ill of you.
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	If you prepare your weapons carefully, and treat your illnesses gently yet firmly, and use the best approach so that through God's grace you achieve salvation and become whole; and leave behind terrifying diseases with no complaint of health; and remove from yourself those who cause doubt, and have faith in what you can do so that you may go from this world to glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.»	Galien mentions in some of his admonishments: "Do not treat illnesses improperly, lest you be called foolish by the people."
J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc .iij. chapitres.	I have composed this treatise according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapters deal with fire cauteries and medicinal cauteries, and the chapters are organized from head to bones; and about the forms of instruments, and the materials for cautery tools, and all that is necessary in work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapters are about cutting and piercing, and suction cups and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and the chapters are organized and contain the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapters deal with restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; it is organized from head to bones, and includes the forms of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Just as we remember our work, it is necessary for me to tell you about the quality of each remedy and its harm associated with each temperament.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the qualities of aid, and harm, are the longest word and most subtle science and the secrets respond; and many wise people spoke about this, agreeing with it. And they were content with their words for me, because I fear its length.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that the fire cautery universally benefits all compositions where there is substance, because it caters to two types of composition: these being known as warm composition with substance, and dry composition with substance.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In the warm and dry combined with substance, there was no agreement and they said that the fire cautery is great help; and another group said the opposite: that the fire cautery only benefits illnesses caused by heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is so hot, and should never be treated with hot diseases through heat or drying. And this person who says the opposite, that the cautery provides great help to hot and dry illnesses that come into people's bodies.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the body of the person and their moisture to the aspect of fire, you find that the body is cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this word.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it true on every occasion by experiment.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And for every way, do not intervene except that which has been proven and by long use known, the art of cauteries, and the diversity of skin types, and the dispositions and causes of their illnesses, and the occurrences and duration; we have no fear from other skin types, especially in cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the instruments gathered together with the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	Know, children, that when a fire cautery is assembled, it contains the secrets of healing, and offers more benefit than a burning medical treatment.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and does not come forth from any member except that which is cooked, and it harms no other member if you do not name it.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	Hot medicines spread from one part of the body to another when they are removed, causing diseases and disorders in various parts of the body. And by chance, they might cause trouble for the patient.
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	Fire by its height and by the goodness of its nature does not do this if there is no excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And this I have found for you through experimentation and from the longevity of my service and study in the art, it is true about things; and for this reason I apologize for the length of speech, because I do not want to withhold the secret that has been revealed regarding fire and its quality, how it relieves diseases in the body, as the philosopher explains by demonstrating. May you accept these insights in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, child, that they agreed on when the cauterizations should be done, and read prayers.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cauterization is suitable in all times, because the nuisances happening are mitigated by the help of the cautery; and indeed, if the cauterizations are for necessary pains greater than can wait until larger mischief befalls the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And never think of it, little child, as the foolish people do; for a disease cured by cauterization does not have recurrence. And they say it like this: but it is not quite as they believe, because cauterizations are only medicine that changes complexion and dries the fluids which cause pain, and is worth more than medicine due to its speed in enhancing valor, and due to the virtue of its work and authority.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And know that when disease comes, it happens according to the complexion of the sick person and the location of the disease and its virtue; and there are gathered in him the excesses due to the consumption of meats and similar things. If only cauterizations were administered where there is little excess and moisture, such as cauterizations for pain, and similar things, then that kind of pain does not recur; but this happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And no one understands why cauterizations are called the later ones in medicine, and this is seen; but they do not believe that cauterization holds after medicine. But their understanding is false, and cauterization is considered the later ones of medicine because when we administer our healing methods in any disease and they do not work, then we administer the cautery, and it works.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore, it is correctly understood that cauterization belongs to the later stages of medicine, not according to the understanding of those who misunderstand.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The old ones said that cauterizations made from gold instruments are better than those made of iron, and they said this only due to the quality of gold and the purity of its substance; they also stated that the gold parts of a cautery do not cause ulcers, but that is not true as I have proven it myself, and found out that this is indeed true in some individuals; and cauterizations made with gold are better than those made of iron, just as they said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And yet, when you heat an instrument of gold, you do not realize it by the color of the gold, and it is suddenly cooled down; and if you heat it too much; they place it in fire; and thus there is enough prevention.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And because we use our metal cautery that has been adapted to our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	So I have organized this chapter on the shoulder until this point, so that finding it may be easier.
dou cautere olivaire	The olive cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	A fire cautery is suitable for moisture and coldness on the head. There are two kinds that we do this due to the cause of an illness called 'soda', and because of many fluids that descend from the body like sweat, and from ears, and through a multitude of dreams and toothache and sore throat, and also towards all diseases that come from cold such as paralysis, soda poisoning and apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The shape of this cautery is such that the body's maladies are purified by a dissolving medicine altering the head. Three times or four times, according to how the virtues and the acidity and the habituation of the malady can bear it; and then you should reapply over the head of the malady.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then place his palms together, and position your hands on the sides of his nose; after that, place the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two nostrils; and let it be where your middle fingers go, if it bleeds from there, then heat up the cautery which is called "olivare", whose form is as follows:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	Apply ink to his shoulder mark, and while descending and stretching your hand gradually and steadily, move it back and forth. Then lift your hand alone, checking if you see the bone. If you don't see it, continue with the cautery until you do see the bone as I've instructed; afterwards take one part of charcoal, place a moistened soft cotton inside, put it on the shoulder mark, and leave there for three days. After that, apply a poultice made from butter onto it; let it remain until the scorching disappears; thereafter treat the wound with ointment known as 'tetrafarmaçon', until it heals properly.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And if they said among the old ones that when a wound remains open for longer, it purges more; and because of this advice, they moved.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And it was said by some that one should let the cautery burn until part of the bone is burned, and then remove what has been burned from the bone and treat it.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And they say that concerning the cautery one must allow it to stay there and press so strongly that you raise as wide of an area around the bone as would be made by a single ellipse, like what women place in their needles when menstruating because the body fluids are forced out; and should one leave the wound open for a long time after that. Afterward, one must clean it and stitch it up.
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two methods of cautery do not seem to me to be good for everything, except where there is a passage for fear; and I think that I should allow them. Because the joints become weakened by continuous exposure to nature's solutions, as we have shown in other limbs, and even when the joints are weak due to nature itself, my first impression of cautery is more healing and stronger for me, and from this method I work together with it thus gathering health.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of the old pain in the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When throughout the entire head comes chronic pain and lasts long, one should use the patient's years of experience and pills which are called "cochies", and treatments for clearing the head and ears and bandages; and if one applies the cautery as we have previously mentioned, it is effective.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take care that the shoulder of the patient is of strong nature and not too cold; therefore, apply the cautery just below this cautery as we have explained above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After you have done the cautery on each of the joints up to the bone as we said before, and do another cautery at the place which is called 'vassel'; and attach two levers where suction cups are placed; and lift your hand so that you cannot touch the bone: the patient feels much more pain in this cautery than in others, and I will explain further. And it must be that the cauteries on the joints are finer than the one used for half of the head, and they should have this shape:
dou cautere dou chief	For the fire cautery,
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When sudden pain comes to part of the head,
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The medicine-cautery if you take one spoonful of oil,
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the ointment treatment as long as it is clean; and if you see fit to use some burning medicines that I have written about or the tenth treatise on burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere. Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	The iron cautery is done in this manner. Heat up the form of the cautery as described:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And call it "closed" because its head is made in the shape of a bell with a .i. point of curvature, and in the middle there's a small appearance; and place it on the painful area, hold your hand and gently move the iron for a bit until half of the edge of the wound is burned; then lift your hand to prevent the artery from burning, it is done, and allow an abundance of blood to flow.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After putting on sailcloth and place it on the wound for .iij. days; then remove it and apply wet cotton soaked in butter, then continue treating the wound with ointment until it is clean; and if you wish to cauterize this headache with the cautery that is called "cultellare", do it at the tip only, and be careful not to cover the artery in this headache which is not old.
de emigraine	From headache
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you treat headache as we have described before in the divisions of diseases, and it doesn't improve, and when the fire cauterization tools which were discussed earlier are tried on metal but do not adhere, then it is necessary that you heat up the "cultellare" type cauterizing tool until it becomes white; and so with your hand guiding along a line half the length of its full size from the elbow, apply once while making sure not to cut the artery and stopping just before reaching the bone; and be careful not to let the jaw move when eating, making sure only the gum is in contact without causing spasms in the patient, and guard against bleeding from the artery if it is cut or severed even with fear and likewise for those who are unaware of this and have not been trained and experienced; leave the work halfway done; but I will tell you how to stop bleeding when the artery is cut, and show you where it is mentioned in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that these cauterizing tools do not adhere to the disease, and patients are suffering, cauterize them in the middle of the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it heals; and when you observe this, administer the cauterizer that we have mentioned or in the chapter on the extraction of arteries, with a cauterizer having two knives; and these cauterizers are better than others and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	From the pain of the ears from coldness
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When pain in the ear comes from cold, and one has applied solutions of medicines and other treatments that we have mentioned under division, and if the pains do not subside, then heat this cautery which is called "points", as follows:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After applying the cautery to all around the patient's ear, or in and around both of them where the pain is present on both sides, then move away a little from the root of the ear after you have indicated its location. Apply ten points around each ear; treat the area until it has healed completely.
de la torture de la bouche	From the pain in the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Pain that needs to be treated with a cautery is not for those that move from pus, as we have said in the divisions of diseases; and no cautery should be done on symptoms that come from drying skin and scabs.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you treat this instance of pain that moves from pus in the ear and from discharges from the head and gargling, if it responds well, then you must apply a cautery to the hair with three applications: one on the root of the ear, and another slightly beyond the temple, and the third at the adjustment of the two lips; place the cautery where health opens, and make it cauterize that area above the ear up a bit under the eardrum, and another one on the temple as long as an inch; let the cautery stay there until half the wick is burned; this is how you should perform the cautering:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you see the appearance of the surgical instrument that we described earlier, but it is somewhat more delicate, so it should be advisable to have the knives a little bit larger. After treating the wound as I said before, until it has healed.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When dealing with apoplexy that's been present for a long time and you're treating it as we've said, and if the patient doesn't improve, and the patients don't have fever, then do this: make three applications of the cautery: two on the two horns above the head, one behind the head, and one where the neck is called "vassel" as we previously mentioned, and the last application on the mouth of the stomach; and treat it as we said before.
de litargie	from liturgy
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this illness, give the patient large bread and pills that soothe the brain; after that, have all of their head shaved, and then place the sinapic plaster on the back of the head as written or described in the treatment guide for plasters; and here is how to do the cautery: do it in the way I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If it's healed like this, well and good; if not, then perform three cauteries descending from the head to the neck. Leave a space of one and a half inches between each cauterization mark. Proceed with treatment as usual. If you see an adjustment needed, and the patient tolerates it, do another cauterization in the middle area; and if necessary, apply two others over the first two marks until it is healed. And use those cauteries that are called 'olive-shaped', just like I've previously mentioned.
de la froidor dou chief	from coldness of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary to cleanse the head of old dandruff and what we have mentioned before; after washing the head with water, then apply heat to it. Perform cauterization around the head and on each horn, one behind and three on the spine near the neck; and if you need more, when the horns are wet and the skin is sore, and the illness is severe, do four cauterizations on the spine at the back; and leave until the driest part of your burn is done, then lift your hand. Afterwards, treat it until it heals properly, and use those cauteries that are called 'olive-shaped', as we have mentioned before.
de l’epilempsie	From epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	The epileptics should only use a cautery for those who are phlegmatic, and first modify the brain with years and other remedies that we have mentioned in the section when the patient is large and suffering from physical medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it's an infant who cannot endure this treatment, make them gargle and chew often with good meats; after that he restores his head in the middle, and I do a single cautery according to what we have said previously, and a single cautery on the jugular vein, and on each horn; and if the patient is large and suffering, perform the cauterizations as I told you when dealing with paralysis and softening of body parts, on the spinal column and the neck, and do the olive oil cauterizations according to the method that I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is an infant, then you should perform one subtle cautery in this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When due to the cause of melancholy are excesses or fluids corrupted and full of pus, then the part cautery of the fire cautery as we have said to those who have paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if due to the cause of melancholy is the excess descending into melancholy, and the parts are moist with malaise, then this should be drunk so that the brain may be purified, as was discussed in the previous section.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After touching the part of malaise; after make two linen strips well done, as one circle, place them around the head; and if malaise is felt, you will cross them, held tightly from all sides; then present the liniment, and apply butter of old beeswax; and heat it on a moderate fire, so that it can be applied without causing discomfort; after this, empty the ring inside with the head in place, and let it cool down; and do this once every week to each malaise part with another good administration until they are cured.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere. Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	If you see that the fire cautery is being used, by making several points all over it at once. This way of applying the cautery moistens the brain greatly; and then place wet cotton in butter and in gelatine grease.
de l’awe des eulz	of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the onset comes to the eyes first through the symptoms I have mentioned in the division, then start and continue making the patient drink things that purify the head, and keep him/her away from all moisture, and make them sweat or take baths several times on an empty stomach.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After giving him/her instructions about his/her head, and make them undergo cautery on the head, and make two cauterizations on each temple when their eye pressure begins to be felt together in both eyes, or if it is only one eye, then apply all the cautering across all the veins and arteries that are around the brain, and keep them cauterized as long as you can according to the width of the temples; and watch for bleeding, and if you see too much blood coming out, stop the bleeding with such force as you have.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	And I will teach you about the extraction of arteries and incisions with the cautery, how to apply it; and never should you do cautering or remove an arrow from between the two bones behind.
dou cors des larmes	of the tears' two courses
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	When the tears from the eyes are old and accustomed, and located on the veins, or beneath the arteries that appear outside of the head; and one sees that they are cold excesses of phlegm. So I make him apply the cautery that I have said at the beginning regarding descending to the eyes: 1. Apply it around the head, and 2. two cauteries on each temple, and 3. two cauteries where removing an arrow would be done beneath the two bones; and if there is need for more, carefully apply the cautery above the eyebrows with every small application of the cautery.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	of the tears within the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you administer the remedies according to what we have said in the division, and if they do not benefit, then give the patient three raw onions to drink; after that, place him on his head, and apply a cautery or olive oil in the middle of it; and perform two cauteries with the "claw" type cautery on the two ears, slightly above the hairline; and be careful not to touch the artery, so as not to interfere with it.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the shape of the cautery which is called "claw".
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare». de coi ci est li forme:	When the paper of the oil is softened due to illness and moisture, then apply this type of cautery which is called "olive". And here is its form:
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see that two cauteries should be made on the two hairs as long as they are; and do not let your hand rest until a third part of the paper is burned away, according to the manner I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	The hair which pricks the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	No instance has occurred where the hair of the eye turns inside out and pricks the eye; in such cases, one performs cauteries according to two methods: that is to say by fire or with burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so that they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they grow and are even, then make the patient healthy; afterwards draw on the page of the eyes a figure that is as round as the leaf of a laurel tree, and start drawing from the sign at the beginning of the hair. Then place wet cotton in egg white paste and garlic paste on the eye, then heat up the cautery which has this shape:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterizing on the figure you have drawn a little bit each time, until the scabs cover the area; and the signs of health are that you see the page white, and the hairs lifted at the edge of the eye; then lift your hand, and leave it like this for three days, then place wet cotton in butter until the scab is removed; after that apply ointment until it heals completely.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if hairs and the page become soft after this, then reapply the cautery on that same area as you did initially; and if the hairs have fallen out, then cauterize until the page is lifted to its natural position, and even, and doesn't touch the eye.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The burning medical cautery commands the patient to let the hairs grow large and even; then take parchment to form it like a bay leaf. Then take French soap and live vinegar, each about half an ounce, and finely grind them together. Mix them quickly so they don't cool down. Spread this on the form resembling a bay leaf on paper, and place it under the eyes; if the illness lasts for only one day, you must cut open in one place, and if in both places equally. Place moistened cotton below each eye like an egg. The patient's head should be clean and you should hold your finger in the medicine every time the patient feels the irritation of the medicine, because it feels irritation as well as from fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When this has been done for some time, once you have exposed the medicine to your finger.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien. Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the irritation has passed, lift your finger from the medicine, and check if you see the paper lifted as it would be after being forced off by fire or through incision; and if that is the case, then everything is well. If not, apply more medicine to your finger until the medicine works equally on both sides, and the eyes are properly aligned; then place moistened cotton in butter until the burned skin is covered, after that cure the application of the ointment called 'dyafenis' and other remedies, until it heals completely.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.  Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if this requires that you prepare well for your work by great care so that no medicine is wasted on them. And if the paper becomes damp afterwards, and the hair touches in the eye, then repeat the medicine on that part of the eye which was softened with clean paper properly; just as you did before; after this treatment until it is healed; and this is the form of the leaf of wormwood:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the eyes of humans vary in size and proportion, and according to this guide your measurements; do not let the right path be denied to him who is studying this craft.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	regarding the treatment of fistula with a cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and your treatments are not beneficial, then it is necessary for you to apply cautery according to this manner.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to place their head in your healthy hand; and guide the doctors' head between your hands in such a manner that it does not move or depart from its place; afterwards, stuff cotton moistened with the yolk of an egg or garlic juice onto the eye; next, heat up the cautery which is part of this method: and place it over the head as if forming a peacock's feather; if you see it, may it be pointed between one ear and another, and if you see it, may it also resemble a tent; but in all cases, what is beside that should not move for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After pressing the fistula if it has been opened, and treat the putrefaction, and dry it; and if it is closed, open it again, and remove from the wound. Afterwards, apply heat over the cautery in this form, and hold your hand on the cautery at the part below the nose above the eye, so that your hand does not cause mischief; and place the cautery into the oil grease, and let it become contaminated.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien. Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse .iij. jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se .xl. jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If you come to the beginning of the cautery up to the bone, that would be well. If not, then continue with another round of cautery and do this if needed as many times as necessary, leaving it for three days; after that place cotton saturated in butter on it, and use the desiccant ointment dressing while the wound is still clean. Once forty days have passed without healing, apply a corrosive water medicine until the bone is uncovered; and follow the instructions according to what he prescribes in his chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent. Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure .i. camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	And there is a way to cauterize a fistula that none of the old ones mentioned. Understand what I mean by a fistula, and make it round in shape; after this, place one thin camel bone inside the opening.
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	And I do it to the size of about three inches in length; and hold your hand or camel firm, not allowing the muscles to move, so that the melted wax doesn't drip into his eye; and when one places on the eye a wet cotton in the shape of an eggshell or in ashes: the wax performs the work of the hole and brings marvelous healing.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin. Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	And if the fistula is healed through the cautery method we've described, that's good. If not, then it is necessary to use wormwood for the child, and bring the fistula back into the body according to what should be done in its own proper place.
des crevaices en levres	of mouth ulcers
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Occasionally, mouth sores appear on the lips which are called "whiskers", and similarly on the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these mouth sores with the methods we've discussed in divisions, and if treatment doesn't help, then use a small surgical tool like this to gently burn them:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it quickly into those cuts until they grow just enough; afterwards, clean the wound of wax while it is still healthy.
de l’aposteme de la goule	from the phlegm in the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When abscesses come to the root of the throat or in the lymph node, or on the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, it leads to putrefaction and decay; after which it hardens and turns into a fistula. You treat this as we have instructed in divisions, but if it doesn't improve, then you need .i (one) cautery according to the size of the fistula; after removing the pus or pustule from the fistula, hold your hand until the metal rod reaches the bottom and up to the root. Then do this once or twice, after the treatment we have mentioned in cures, while it's still healthy. And if treated like this is good; but if not, you need to expose the wound and remove the rotten bone as you find it in your manual.
dou movement des dens	movement of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicines but this doesn't work, then put the head of the disease in your health; afterwards heat up the cautery until its form comes after in such a way that you place a twig on the tooth. And put within the cautery a hot stick, and keep your hand steady so that the diseased part feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; after lift your hand and start using the cautery according to your desire; afterwards fill the diseased part's mouth with salt water, and leave it for an hour and then pull it out.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this manner the moving tooth is repositioned, and the softened gum becomes restrained, and the moisture that was present dries up.
de la dolor des dens	from the pain of teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When tooth pain comes from coldness, or there is cold or heat inside the body, and medical treatments do not help, then one must use cautery according to two methods: and butter cautery and fire cautery.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Butter cautery works like this: you take butter from a cow, and in a spoon made of iron or tin; afterwards take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a thread, then soak it in melted butter, and place it on the painful tooth quickly and hold until it cools down; and do this several times until its effectiveness reaches to the root of the tooth, and if you see wet wool and cotton soaked in cold butter, place them again on the aching tooth, and apply hot iron for as long as heat reaches inside the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain. Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	Fire cautery works like this: you take a hot iron or tin rod, so large that the fire does not reach inside the wound; after heating the cautery, from which the heat will come out afterwards, place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the heat of the cautery cools down; do this repeatedly, as the pain will be gone that day or the next. And ensure that the patient fills their mouth with plenty of butter while the process is happening, then pull it out quickly; this is how to use a fire cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And apply the cautery to whatever part you desire, according to your capacity; and this is how it forms the rod:
des scrophules	of the sores
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait ij. aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou .ij. se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi .iij. jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the sores are due to cold blood and moisture, and do not respond to digestion by medicines, then apply the cautery as described below, and make two openings for the vapors to escape from the other side; and place the heated cautery on the abscess once, or twice if needed, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, adjust the cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it in that position for three days; and apply moistened cotton with butter until the scabs are removed; afterwards cure with ointments and bandages until it heals.
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc. Aprés li fai .i. autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the moisture invades through the channels of the lungs and especially when it comes from a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the body be cleansed first with diuretic medicines; afterwards apply the cautery at the root of the throat, and make sure not to go all the way to the throat but just a little bit. Afterward do another application of cautery at the junction between the neck and the base of the spine, and it is from this type of cautery that we have our form depicted ahead; and treat after as described until it heals completely.
de la toust	In respect to cautery by fire, it commands the diseased person to allow hair growth until it becomes long and uniform; and if they prick at their origin, it holds the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all and the diseases of the stomach are due to cold moisture, and patients do not have fever nor dryness, and it's an old disease, then make the burnings on their strength in their veins; and one other burning under their buttocks between the two nipples; and let the burning called 'claw-like' be according to the form that was mentioned before.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a .xxx., ou enqui entor. Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a .iij. rains selonc ceste forme:	And if you see that, do the burn with all the burn called "points" whose shape is as described in the illness of the ears; and let there be points up to thirty or more, or even slightly beyond. After treating the area according to what was said earlier, apply burns at three intervals following this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And because of this makes the cautery lighter, because you make three at once.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	From the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	After that, surround the wound on its back and sides; afterwards, remove the kidney inside the testicles with your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated internally, use the cautery with two fingers as described here: it should be shaped like this.
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	And apply the heat to the wound until it penetrates up to the bone, and let the shape of the heat treatment consist of four treatments; and this is done with the heat that has three points, because the appearance of the heat application consists of four treatments; and are the nerves according to the subtlety of a tent and this is the form of the heat which has three points:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And always fix onto this single nerve, because there are seven heat treatments for it.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After placing the heat treatment, grind with a thread; after that, have the patient rest, and do not let the limbs strain too long until it is well comfortable.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant. Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	And if it is reset above, in which little happens, then apply a cautery to the thick part of the clavicle, or use only one application of the cautery. For the joint is closed again, and the moisture is expelled and the patient's health is restored.
dou cautere de pleuresin	apply the weeping cautery
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The old ones said that one should do pleuresin cauterizations using the roots of aristological plants, and here's how to do it: take a long root of aristological plant, the longest you can find, ensure it's dry, and make sure it's as thick and as long as your thumbs; then mix it with oil, heat it on fire, and apply one cautery between the jawbone and neck, and two small ones slightly below where the beard is; also apply four cauterizations between the fifth and sixth ribs, leaning a bit behind; apply one in the armpit and another on the stomach, and one between the shoulders, and make sure your hand doesn't press too much but rather does it smoothly as if smelling.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a .i. raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie. Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	And an old saying states that no man uses a fire cautery on the root of hair, and it burns and is placed between the ribs until reaching that abscess; and once the pain leaves, just as we have said regarding the abscess in the liver. But in this chapter there is fear or now the patients die, or a fistula occurs which cannot be cured.
de la mice	Of mice
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the illness of mice in those who have been instructed on dividing treatments, and it doesn't benefit, then they adopt three methods of cautery that are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices .iij. cauteres, ou .iiij., en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	From which there is a method thus: you make .iij. or .iiij. cauterizations, in line according to the length of the mice, according to the shape of the heart cauterization as we have said before; and do not press your hand all over the cauterization, and let the patient remain under their back;
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	And another way of cauterization is that you heat the cauterization which has two handles, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; lift the keur that is located under the mice, or where the pain starts coming from the left side, and make the elevations where you lift the keur according to the curvature, according to the length of the body, and the cauterizations should be according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les .ij. ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra .iiij. Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a .iij. ners. Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After placing the two flaming handles in until they pierce from the other side, then remove the cauterization and do this four times. If you see fit, completely cauterize with three handles on the cauterization. After the cure when it has expelled pus over a long period, it is equivalent to using another of the previously mentioned treatments.
de ydropisie	Of cautery by fire, command the ill patient to allow hair growth until long and even; and if they pierce at their root, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes». Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres entor la boude, et .i. sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et .i. sus la mice, et .ij. derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et .i. endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	Cautery is not suitable for ydropique, except through the method called "asclytes". When you treat it using the methods we have discussed in divisions, and if your treatment does not benefit, then you must make four cauterizations around the anus, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the kidneys, and four behind the back on the spine, and one place on the testicles; and ensure that these cauterizations are well near to the urinary bladder.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After allowing the cauterization to set for a long time due to putrefaction, and do not cease the treatment of the disease after the cauterization; and recovery would hasten, and both the four intentions with God's help would be together.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The form of the cautery for the belly is as we show it in front, and that for the back is olive-shaped, according to what was placed before.
de l’enfleure des piez	of swelling around the joints
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner. Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	When the joints swell in someone who is hydropic and filled with yellow bile, it's necessary to apply a cautery on the back of the joint between the first and second fingers; then move your hand with the cautery without turning. And don't go too deep inside, otherwise it would escape the yellow bile, and you should apply the cauterization according to this form:
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After doing this on both legs, apply two cauterizations on each leg at the tip of the cuticle; and make the cauterizations along their length, one in front of the knee and the other behind, in the middle of the leg; and let the cauterizations remain for a long time without curing them until the bile comes out; after this, perform the other treatments that we have mentioned.
de la menoison	From memory
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	When the belly's solution comes from cold and moisture, as long as the retaining and digesting virtues that are in the stomach and intestines are overwhelmed, they cannot be cured by usual treatments; you see the patient suffering greatly and with much virtue, so do this. One large cautery on the stomach according to what was discussed earlier or the gastric cautery, at the circulating cautery; and three small cauterizations around the subtle mouth, for each one of .i cauteries clavile subtle, and four cauterizations on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see the moister being abundant and the patient suffering, do this: one cautery on the wrist, and one cautery on each elbow, and two small cauterizations on the stomach close to the large one. For the cure is beneficial when there's good help.
de la cure des emorroydes	Regarding the treatment of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: .iij. sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et .i. cautere desoz la boude. ij. dois;	When the embolli are either at their foundation or one or more exist, and they are old and consist of large cold fluids that have become corrupted, they should be treated as we've said in divisions; yet if it is ineffective, perform cauteries:
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on .i. grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et .i. autre sus le foie, et i. autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens. Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you think that the stomach is cooled down, and the food does not cook properly, and you see swelling in the belly, then treat the belly with one large cautery over the stomach as it was described before, and another over the liver, and yet another on all sides of the kidneys; and leave the cautery for a long duration. After that heal your patient until they are restored to health.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	Regarding the inflammation known as 'thelul'
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you perform surgery, if you ignite the cautery that seems to be one of the blades and then place it fully on fire over the place where you are cutting; leave your hand in such a way that the heat from the cautery reaches the base of the vein, from which the blood flows out. Do this once or twice, and if there is much fat involved, cauterize each part just as we have instructed; after using treatments that benefit afterwards wait until they are healed. And if you use a large cautery on fatty areas, it will provide more help.
de plaie mal curee	from poorly treated wounds
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient's body cannot endure cutting or incision, as we will describe in its place, if there arises a disease that cannot be cured except by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont. Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou .ij. ou .iij., selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes. se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	When there is no issue of pus and it's old and corrupted due to putrefaction and moisture, if you need to determine its extent entirely with one test, make sure that you know how far this test has penetrated. After heating the cautery until it resembles a sharp tool, place the tip into the fistula according to the amount that the test has entered, and continue using the cautery until all putrid and corrupted pus is burned away, once or twice or thrice depending on your need; be careful not to burn nerves or major veins. If the fistula goes through the body of the bladder and intestines, take these precautions, and do this only in the intestinal area, remembering that it isn't complete until finished. After treating the area until it is healed, when pus has been removed and materials have hardened over time, then you can determine if it is fully healed. If the materials have not hardened, know that there is still pus present within, and the bone has become corrupted at its base; and thus as one of these we shall speak about in his area.
de la maladie des reins	Regarding kidney disease
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When the abdominal pain originates from the kidneys and due to large wind, it affects women more so than men, then you must perform a cautery on both sides of the kidneys with an iron rod as we have previously described; and if we apply the cautery centrally, there will be three lines of cauterization, which will provide greater relief.
de la vessie	From the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is thick and weak from heat and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then apply a cautery to the lower part of the bladder, where the pubic hair begins, and one on each side, and let each cautery be as long as your fist; and do one behind the back, or two if you need them; and make the cauteries in a cross shape according to the form described before.
de la marris	Of the mare's urine
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the mare's heat is cold and moist, and fails to allow conception, and her flowers are rotten with delayed termination; and when they come, she feels great pain: then it should be that you apply three cauterizations inside the womb, as we have said or like the bladder cautery, and two cauterizations behind the back; and make the cauterizations in a cross shape, as we have said.
de la hainche	From the hip
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the viscous mucus descends into the hip socket, and due to this reason it moves out of its place. The signs are that one leg is longer than the other when measured together; and when you find the knee at the point where you would see it normally, you should cauterize the hip socket with a fire cautery similar to half-circle shape. And mark in front of the thigh as she turns, so that the socket is inside the circle. And let the cautery be like those used to cauterize the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the fire cautery is not at your disposal, make three large olive-shaped cauteries, and let these cauteries also be perfectly round like all the knuckles. And treat it while it remains sound.
de la dolor de la hainche	The pain in the hip
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes in the thigh bone area, and this is due to coldness and moisture, and the treatment is as we have discussed for division and cure failures, and the illness is old: then you must cleanse the patient of large thick body fluids with pus-filled pills or other good-looking pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu. Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche .iij. cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a .iiij. selonc ceste forme:	After you do the cautery; and the way of the cautery is according to two methods: this is to say assembled heated medicines, and fire cautery. Fire cautery is according to many ways, among which some are like this: you apply three triangular cauterizations according to this shape, and each makes a good depth and large, and there's space between each of these cauterizations the size of two fingers, and they're olive cauterizations; never do a cauterization in the middle above the hipbone, for which there are four according to this shape:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see that the circle cauterization as we've mentioned before in relation to hip joint dislocations; but do it this way so that all the hips are contained within the circles, and all parts of the bone burn.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe. Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai .ij. cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et .i. cautere desus la cheville .iiij. dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor .iij. poins ou .iiij. au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And this is the way to treat sciatica, when pain remains in the hip and does not reach up to the thigh nor down to the leg. And if it reaches as far as the thigh and leg, then two cauterizations should be done where the patient says the pain stays, and one above the ankle on the fourth day, at the left side a little bit; and make sure these are cutaneous cauterizations, burn off any thick spots along veins; and if the patient feels that the pain extends as far down to the knee or close to it, then cauterize where he feels the pain, three points or four on the cauterized area which is called "points".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if more work is needed, then do it; and if the pain extends from the knee towards the thigh, use a cutaneous or circular cautery on that area, and make sure you take good care in all your cauterizations so as not to leave them incomplete such that you burn nerves and major arteries, and do not cause the patient any greater discomfort or constriction.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez. Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	And I have seen several instances where cauterization was done on the ankle up to the knee, and they left it until the leg swelled completely, and the feet as well, causing them to be pierced and corrupted throughout. After a stomach treatment from which she died.
Et se li dolors est en .ij. parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere. // Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai .i. tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de .ij. pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait .i. mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And if the pain is in two parts together, make a cautery on each and according to this manner. // And the surgeons say that concerning the fire cautery for the buttocks, as is this manner, take one piece of metal shaped like a small pig's hoof or slightly less so, with it being around the size of a finger joint, and place it evenly between two pieces and then have those two pieces between them up until they cover the entire space equivalent to a pinch of something. And let these pieces be twisted on each side and resemble knots, having one metal handle well made; and this is the shape:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let it heat until it becomes entirely red and gives off smoke, and then place it on the spot of the disease in the buttock, turning it towards the healthy side. And apply a single cauterization using one cautery stick and leave for three days; and then apply a layer of butter bandage, allowing the wound to remain open as long as needed; continue with ointment treatment until it heals completely.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasim says that we use very little of this cautery for the fear of his view, and there are few who use it; however, he states that this is a good cautery which one can bear with, and leaves where it happens.
de la dolor dou dos	of the pain of the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether by impact or percussion or from too much evacuation, or due to similarity of cold substance spreaded, none of these appearances warrants cauterization, because that which comes from the infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary to follow this when the patient has been freed of infected pills or other similar symptoms, by applying it to the back where the pain is located, three lines marked with an X, and in each line from .v. to more cauterizations according to the virtue and quantity that the body can endure; and perform the cauterization according to the type of cauterization called "points"; and if you see fit, do 3 or 4 cauterizations at the midpoint of a standard cauterization like this:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	This disease often affects young children, and the signs of its beginning are that they become pale when they stand alone, and faint; and you find a swelling in the last spine of the back and an appearance that comes over other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and observe it being treated, if you apply the fire cautery according to this shape.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument. Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant .ij. lignes ou .iij., et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre. Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	If you see this and observe it being treated, apply the hot iron to each part of the spine equally. And if you notice this, apply the fire cautery along the spine using two or three lines, and have the points close together. After curing it until it's healthy according to what we've said, be sure not to use a hot iron in an area that is within reach of a nerve.
de la dolor des jointes	Of the pain in joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When joint pain is caused by moisture spread throughout each limb, and when pain comes from the foot, which they call "gout" properly, and when it's due to cold reasons and its cures are made with medicines that can't heal it, then it should be treated using cauterization in this manner: make a hole inside the joint of the foot, and have olive oil cauterizations according to this shape:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point». Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you need to touch the foot near the heel, have him apply fire to all of the cautery until "point" is claimed. And if the pains extend up to the knees and other joints, when this happens frequently, apply fire on each knee three times or four times for each part, throughout the olive oil-coated area; and if you need more, then do so, but do not keep your hand out from there until the healing is well underway.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre. Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile .ij. lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines. Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	And if the pains go down to the knees and back, then administer the cautery that we have described in this chapter. And if the pains are on the hands, make marks within the armpit four lines wide; and if there is still pain at the back, apply the cautery to each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains extend up to the elbows or shoulders, cauterize each part, and give good care and use medicines. For if you treat him well and cleanse phlegm, then he will be healed with God's help.
de la routure dou syfac	Of the rupture in the uterus
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When dislocation occurs in the shoulder, and the muscles descend to the chest this is newly happening, it's necessary that when you see them being treated, do not disturb him during the day; and use things that relax his stomach, so that the intestines descend from his belly; after make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to shave his underbelly until the muscles are repaired, then bring him back to your fingers, and mark along the rupture above the bone of the elbow, and ensure every sign is like half a circle above the torso; then heat up the cautery which is formed thus:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles. Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui .i. cussin et .i. serjant sus les cuisses, et .i. autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	As long as it's white and smells of farts. Then pinch the intestines back into place; and have ministers shave his hands so they don't turn backwards; and work well on his legs with the patient, and place one surgeon and one assistant on each leg, and another behind who shaves his hands; then place the cautery over your mark using both your hands, and keep your other hand straight as you reach up to the bone, and if you don't reach it the first time, keep trying until you do; and be careful that the intestines don't escape when you apply the cautery; not to burn him; and so that through this, patients are not injured or suffer any other illnesses.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien. Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés .iij. jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides .xl. jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And know that if you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is meaningless. And it's necessary that the cautery for children be subtle according to their size, and also large people should have ones as big as their size; after three days treat his abdomen with butter until the scalding goes away; afterwards apply other ointments until he heals completely, and let him lie on his back for forty days so that the wound is well healed; and it's necessary that his rest periods be long enough so that the intestines do not escape when he wants to go into chambers.
Et aprés .xl. jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse .xl. autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement. Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And after forty days, when he wishes to stand up, one should help him with a well-made bandage and use it for another forty days; and having good rest, he should work little and avoid too much drinking and eating, as well as too loud shouting. And once he follows this instruction, he is fully healed. And I will explain the treatment of tailoring in my chapter later on.
de la routure dou ventre	of the rupture of the abdomen
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai .j. cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a .iij. angles selonc ceste forme:	When ruptures occur in other abdomens and are known, and you notice that they no longer grow, one must apply a fire cautery according to their size for each of them, and do so using three quarters of the full amount; after which, follow the treatment as we have described. And none of the old texts have mentioned that one should cauterize with the cautery at three angles in this particular form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile. Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	However, the first sign is the edge of the wound and make a line across the width above the tear, and another below, and hold your hand in contact with all the fire iron. But the first applications are lighter and more moist.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	from old pain in no limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor. s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence .i. autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	When pain appears in any limb, whether due to falling or being struck, and if this pain lasts long, and medical remedies do not help, then it is necessary that it be cauterized with the cautery called 'points', and the applications should be according to the length of the limb and its smallness and weakness and its virtue and its location of twists and its pain. If the first application is well, that's good; if this is not so, try one more second application on top of it, because these customs require that they should change in relation to the member that they are close to, so you must make the applications until the patient is healed.
de meselerie	In mixture
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie. Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai .v. cauteres sus lou chief: .i. emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et .ij. sus les .ij. cornes, et .i. derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	The remedies are applied once by cautery with great assistance, and equally the illness that comes from the putrefaction of bile and melancholy. If you see it being cauteryed, take care that the illness is at its beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and does not spread or remain, then you should doubt whether the corruption will permeate all the disease, so you do this: .v. cauteries on the head:.i. on the top of the head towards the nose at the beginning of the hair, and the other towards the forehead at the end of the hair; and .ij. on the .ij. horns, and .i. behind on the lower jaw; and let your hand remain until the cautery reaches to the bone, and until the scabs come out so that the vapors of the thick humors can escape; and cauterize it on the cheek in accordance with what was said before.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	And if the mixture is everywhere scattered; and it becomes apparent, then it is necessary that you cauterize with these cauteries we have said on the head, and one cauterization under the nose, and two cauteries on the spine of the neck, and six cauteries on the spine of the back, and one large one on the buttocks and another elsewhere, and two on each shoulder; and two on the ribs, and two on the tendons of the foot, and one on each joint of hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and guard against the nerves that are at the heel, do not burn them; and never do any cauterization on the bone under the fingernails, and another on the bone of the stomach, and another on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus. Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers. Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	And know that when I make more cauteries, I provide more help, and he benefits from them; and know that the patient does not feel pain during cautery as a healthy person would, because his body is already completely corrupted. And it is necessary for the cautery to be large and small according to the limbs and joints, in accordance with what you will find in manuals on metalwork. After treatment, rub the area several times with honey and other remedies until it becomes clean.
de enfleure	of inflamed
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez. Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	When inflammation appears in any limb and is treated with medicines, oils, and bandages, but remains unwell, then I make cauteries on the limb according to the size of the limb; and let each cautery go somewhat into the heart of the lesion; then treat it with poultices until it becomes well. And for each time a cautery is made, do so at the hand, foot and back, at the exit of the nerve that paralyzes the limb, and in this way the inflammation is removed; and still no one should interfere unless they are knowledgeable about limbs and the exits of moving nerves within the body.
de albaras	From woad
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the sickness which is called "albaras" grows old, and the field of medicine cannot help it, then cauterize slightly with a cautery according to the quantity of the fur in the keur, until the bladder is removed and its color changes; then wash with flour several times and lentils using rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood from colon and water from an almond tree, each part from one. Mix all together, wrap it with a cloth, and keep under the sun until healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The treatment for the sore by cautery
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble .i. cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.  Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	When the sore begins, and you see it stop, then apply the cautery using a circle-shaped tool that seems appropriate. And always let those who advise you know to also cauterize in the center of the sore; and I do not think this is good because I fear it might lead to erosion and corruption and I have already had no intention to do so at any time; and more sensible practice would be to cauterize around, with the tool that's called "circul", as we explained about types of cautery.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	Of the swelling that cannot perish
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi. Car elle se hastera de meureir.	When someone has a disease called "adubelati", and it is lingering to die or due to the excess it produces or because of the old age in which illness occurs (that is, when one is too old) and there is little blood, or due to strength; then you see its hastening towards death: therefore cauterize internally with a few small cauterizations. Afterwards leave it like that. For it will hasten towards dying.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see her pierced through with the entire cautery, then heat up the cautery in accordance to what is described:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis. Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And place your hand in the middle of this disease called "adubelati" as long as the cauteries have pierced through its core, and make sure that these cauteries are such that the illness feels it being pushed out to such an extent that the process of putrefaction is accelerated. After treating until it has been completely healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	The treatment with a fire cautery using a iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches. Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit. Et puis le laisse .iij. jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption. Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.  Et se tu vois aprés .iij. jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus. Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	Another method of disease called "corrodens", which is nothing else but a gangrene of the limb because it sears the limbs like iron sears dry wood. If you see this disease that can be treated with combined fire cautery, then apply small and large iron cauterizations according to what is suitable for the location or where the disease is present; after applying the cautery from all sides until you remove all corruption, leave nothing behind so that everything corrupted is removed. Then let it rest for three days, and apply suffering with oil on the cauterized areas until the burnt skin and all corruption are gone. After this ointment cure of pus. And if you see after three days that no healthy flesh has grown, it's good; but if this doesn't happen, reapply the cautery to what is still corrupted in the limbs. This disease can sometimes be cured with an ague medicine instead of a fire cautery treatment; however, fire cautery is much more helpful and I have already spoken about the cure for ague disease in its specific section: take it as needed when you require it.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of hernias that come to stones
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet. Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc .ij. manieres. C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude. Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe .i. cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi .iij. jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines. Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Sometimes there is a disease born outside the body that we call "clos," according to our understanding, and it's a large protruding thing that hurts the foot. And for this illness of clos, there are two ways of applying cauterization. That means, you need to heat one cautery like a feather from a goose, and make it out of good iron at the size which can hold a nail in every direction, with thin edges; after this, put everything hot on the nail, and move your hand right around the nail until it reaches the tip of the nail; then leave it thus for three days until pus begins to form; afterwards apply an ointment made from ground wild marjoram mixed with oil, and let the ointment stay overnight, and the nail will fall out from its roots. Then treat the area with salve until the wound heals completely.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines. Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	And if it is converted from the outside on the body, and this happens repeatedly both in hands and feet, then you should apply hot water cautery; and here's how to do it: take a spider's hair or iron rod, or a goose feather, place them above the nail and the althelul (meaning blisters or warts), and put the rod such that it touches all around. Then pour some hot water onto it, hold your hand tightly in position, squeeze while moving your hand until the edge of the rod reaches the root of the nail, then you will find the hot water penetrates deeply down to the root; let the patient tolerate this for a bit, and they will be free from the irritation of the hot water for an hour. Then leave it thus, and everything at its roots will come out completely. Do this another time until you have removed all those on the body, then treat with salves that generate flesh.
li cure dou trembler	he treats through trembling
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When some shake due to cold or nerves or a quartan fever or other affliction, it is necessary that you perform four or five cauteries on the spine of their back. One cautery between each vertebra; one on the chest at the olive cautery; if this doesn't stop shaking, and quickens the recovery from the cold ailment.
des pustules puans	pus-sores
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues. si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire. Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	When visible through openings in the body's surface, or pus-sores that originate from thick putrid matter, they are a result of this process. Upon their first appearance, it is necessary at once when they appear to cauterize each head of the pustule: a subtle firewood stick cautery, where the tip touches the flame, or a long root of the aristologue herb, or a lenticular (round) cautery. And one should not cauterize them at their start when they first appear, following this method; instead, it discharges all excess that has come from them and leaves them healed. But it is required that this be done after the blood's evacuation.
quant li artere est copee	When the artery has been cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many times great hemorrhages occur from the artery that has been cut at the wound coming to the outside, or during incising of an abscess, or due to the cautery on a limb, and similar things; it is very distressing when the smell becomes unbearable.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And still, when this happens to no one, if you hasten to place your index finger on the wound of the vein and press it very much until the skin is relieved under your finger, and no drop comes out; then light several small and large olive oil cauteries until they are all red. Then take .i., or large or small according to the wound and limb where the artery is located, and place the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, and keep the cautery there until the skin is completely cooled.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it jumps out when you lift your finger from the vein, and the cauteries are off the fire, then take hastily another one of the cauteries that are on the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not stop doing this one after the other until the bone is completely healed; and watch that you do not burn the nerve which lies beneath, and that no harm comes to the patient; and know that when a bone dislocates from an artery, one cannot properly heal it themselves when the artery is large, unless done through one of the four ways we have mentioned: by cautery, by extraction if it has not been treated, by strong thread binding or by medicine applied which has the power to heal blood; and then bind and keep it steady for the future.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Who will administer the reattachment by tightly binding with cloths or by placing burning things on, or other similar actions, if it does not help then it likely won't.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this happens to anyone and they have no tool or medicine at hand, then they should place their thumb on the wound of the vein as we said, and stretch it well until it is healed above the wound and above the vein; and do not move their finger, but often moisten it with cold water so that it stays very cold until the bone is frozen, swollen and healed. And prepare for cautery and medicines what needs to be done.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	This begins the second book of treatments for amputations
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have spoken about the first chapter on all diseases where it is necessary to apply a heat cautery, or hot medicine, and their causes, instruments, and forms; and we placed that chapter up until the knee, and I will continue this chapter in the same manner so as to find what seems easier for whoever wishes to know.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And as I begin this one, it is necessary that you understand that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first section about cauteries, which means greater caution must be exercised.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie. Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures. si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	And I advise you not to undertake foolishness. For many ways of people come into cures. Some come from those who become quite afflicted with their illness that they die lightly due to the despair they find in their disease, and the severity of their wickedness; and one must have fear towards these things.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse. Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	And of these there are who give their understanding, and say: "Wait, I am good." And the illness is spiteful. It is not fitting that you agree with those who come to you in this manner, but rather place more stringent consideration for your honor than for your greed, and do not act foolishly but wisely from what you are certain of and have experienced; and use prediction and indication in treatments for illnesses where health has been transformed; and this will assist you in acquiring good reputation, glory, and long-lasting remembrance.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Dear child, our lords provide good understanding and righteousness to you, and if you wish to aspire from the holy inspiration of their hand, so be it.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or I have ordered this chapter out of discussion by chapters, according to what is before or the chapter about the cauteries, which I discussed from the head up until the foot, because you will find it easier that which you need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	from the head full of water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	Know that this disease comes very often to children at birth, and when the mother presses too hard on the head of the child; and it happens in no other instance due to a reason that we know.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this disease in anyone other than children, and among all those I've observed, their death was hastened by it; for this reason, it seems to me that it is worth stopping the treatment with these remedies.
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw one child of this kind where the shoulder was full of water, and the head swelled each day until it couldn't support more weight; and feared so much from the moisture that he died, and this moisture is assembled beneath the bone within the socket, between the muscle and the bone. And the openings are such when the moisture is between the muscle and the bone, and the abscesses are small, that you make a wide cut in the head one groove; and be so long as two fingers, as long as the moisture runs; and here see the shape of the spathile:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If there is more moisture, and the abscesses are larger, make two cuts in a cross-like manner, according to this shape:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is under the bone, and you see the openings of the head's edges from each part, and water leaks when you press it inside with your hand, and this does not stop: then it is necessary that you make three cuts in the middle of the head in this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers. Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	And after the incision, remove all moisture outside. After holding the cuts of cloths and powders, then put wine and oil, and leave like this until the fifth day; then reset it, treat the wound by changes and ointments, and let the head also heal equally. Afterwards, allow the patient to eat dry meat from a bit of moist until the limb is comfortable and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another way of incision is that you look at where the large opening of the abscess is, and gather water; for it is never in front, nor behind; neither to the right, nor to the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Cut then the place where the abscess opens, and fill with water, and make a cut according to your ability; and be careful not to cut the artery; watch for blood flow, so that the patient dies from blood loss and evacuation of moisture.
de reume	Of cautery from fire, command the sick person to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When it comes to any disease which is called "catarrh" in the eyes or at the bottom, and this sickness is old, and the treatment with medicine does not help, then the last resort therapy would be cautery using which one cuts off the two great arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout .i. drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de .ij. pars. tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	So it is necessary that the patient does this after his head; after rubbing the area with a rough cloth until the arteries can be seen, then pull out the diseased part up to one cloth. Next, observe where the vein lies, and the position of both eyes relative to the ears, ensuring they are properly placed; then mark the eyes on each side. Then puncture both with an extremely sharp needle point halfway through the thickness until it reaches bone, and do this while keeping in mind the width of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see it, hold the spatula near the artery and vein above, cut also as two inches through.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein has been severed, make sure to continue cutting upwards outward from there.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de .iij. dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est .vj. c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins. selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not open upon feeling it, you should measure the length of the space as three inches, then gently press and cut until reaching the bone; and what needs to be removed from the blood is about seven c.c., and by chance a little more or less according to how the patient can endure it and the filling of the artery; then look at the wound: if there is just a point left on the bone, if the incision does not continue as far as it should, then press and bind the wound, and apply ointment until it heals.
de emigrainne	"De emigrainne" translates to "from grain" or possibly referring to a process of sifting or removing grains. Without further context, it's challenging to provide an exact interpretation for this specific phrase within the medieval medical treatise. In general terms, in a medical setting, it could relate to procedures involving the removal of grains (such as pieces of gravel or sand) from bodily tissues or fluids.
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When old age approaches, and severe coughing occurs, due to moisture from tears and heat in the temples and elsewhere in the elderly body, as well as similar things, treatment is done using methods of medical cure and all this does not benefit it. Therefore, one should extract the arteries of the temples and apply a cautery, as we have described.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	The method of extracting them is that the patient feels beneath their temple hair, and listens to the artery emerging at the temple, as it opens well through its beat, responding only in some very cold individuals; if it responds, one should tighten a piece of cloth around its neck, then rub with a coarse cloth on one side, and raise above hot water until the artery becomes clearly visible. Then take the spatula which has this form:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des .ij. chiés. Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	Then lightly scrape the skin until you see the artery, then move it up to the pincers, and remove all the webs that are from beneath each part; and if the artery is thin, turn it at the tip of the hook. Then cut that part according to twice the size of both shoulders. For if it is not cut, there will be no blood flow completely throughout.
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And when the blood flows for 2.5 days, until it lasts for 3 days; and if the artery is large, you must tie it with two strong silk filaments in a double thread so that no rot occurs before the healing of the wound, nor does continuous bleeding happen; then cut away the excess between the two threads at that same moment, and then, if you see fit, cauterize it with a surgical cautery up to the bone until the shoulder is cut; this is the final work, if the patient doesn't have fever and has warm complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For cauterization helps to finish off moisture issues: because in this case it provides greater assistance for moisture problems.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	For when it's necessary for the extraction of arteries, fill the area with old cotton and place well-made cloths on top; and once you've freed them, apply dry medicines that create pus and cloths until there is no longer any moisture; and if you remove part of the artery as you are working on this task, quickly cauterize it with a cautery or use a glass container and squeeze your hand so that the artery dries off; and if you don't have a glass container available, fill the space with ice until the artery is frozen, then wash with cold water until it stops bleeding and ensure it's done correctly. The one that is wetter and more light during the extraction of an artery should be cauterized on this flat-ended cautery, but make sure the ends are well-spaced to last longer their heat.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instruments are too tight, they hold less of their heat.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And there should be between the two knives about one finger's width, and then when you mark to incise the two lines, place the hot iron until it reaches up to the bone, and make the cut in two places; and keep them apart from each other because this cautery does not fuse all together; and that is the form of the cautery:
des larmes	of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears from the eyes are flowing through the veins that are above the nose at the head of the arm, and no benefit is gained from medicine treatments when these are done, and you see the skin turn red from this ailment, feeling or sensing as if it were shaking on your forehead; and where they are tight and moist so that the paper's hair falls off, and the paper is heated, burned by the heat of the tears, then this treatment requires effort.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai .iij. fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com .ij. doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres .ij. as .ij. costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as .ij. costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des .ij. mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de .iij. dois au traver joins;	And they called the old 'healer of bruises', and you should instruct the patient with this illness to let their hairs grow on their forehead, then make them three cuts across the forehead evenly according to the length of the forehead; and one cut should be like two others all over the forehead downwards until it reaches halfway down, and the other two are each opposite a rib from above the hairline, and watch out for incisions of the arteries which are above the ribs; and keep your hand away from the continuation of the two jawbones, and make each wound three inches deep through the join.
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de .ij. pars de coi ci est li forme:	And have an sponge piece ready and some cloths to dab off the blood, then use a sharp spatula from two sides where this is formed:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	From the incision that is behind the temple up to the second incision; and scorch all the tissue that is between the two cuts all across the furrow above the bone, then make another cut from the halfway point of the incision up to the other cut, and then remove this spatula.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	If you use a tool in the first incision that is called 'culetter', and it is very sharp on one side, and on the other side is hollow, not sharp, and this shape:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure. Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And make the cut towards the soft flesh at the heart, and the edge hollows towards the bone, and push the tool until it reaches halfway into the incision. And remove all vessels that descend from the head to these spots while keeping the cut continuous up to where an opening appears at the heart, then proceed with another part of this cut up to the other opening; and then remove the blood evenly, and express the wound for the taken blood; then place a layer of old cotton in each incision, and put wet cloths soaked in wine and oil and saffron above them, making sure that no pus appears; and on the third day release the bandage, and give it large baths of cold water, then apply the ointment treatment with basil oil, and other treatments for wounds until healed.
dou reume des eulz	from the pus
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When it comes to sudden and customary cold sweats, you see the eyes reddened and small, and they weaken vision, and burned paper; and hair falls out, and one feels a fullness due to ague-like pain, and the patient sneezes; then recognize through these events that this substance and that fever come from multiple veins, and the treatment applied if it is so, involves this.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large. i. poc. Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les .ij. levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And you instruct the patient to look behind their forehead, then make a large cut down the middle of the forehead, and another wide one. Start from the cut on the left temple towards the right temple, making incisions until reaching the bone; and keep your hand away from the temples' nerves that move with eating; when the bone is revealed, drain all blood using a sponge, then clean between the two lips of the cut and place old cotton and linen; after this, cover with cloths soaked in wine and oil, making sure not to allow an abscess. Once removed, it should be rubbed on the bone until the char starts appearing, then treat with drying substances that promote the appearance of char.
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this manner: take two parts of wheat flower and four parts of clove oil, and make a plaster; and administer this plaster to the wounds to promote the appearance of char everywhere.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	On the cauterization of ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	Everything that enters into the ears is one of four things: or grains, or beast, or mine stone or similar thing like iron; or seed, such as beans, peas; or flowing substance like water and sweat and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel. Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus. Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	When what he excretes into the ear is a piece or another way of thing that doesn't fit in the ear, nor grows in the ear, place the ear under the sun. If you see the stone, if any drop of violet oil or nut oil distills out, then proceed with extraction; and have them sneeze pepper, and block the nostrils when the sneezing comes, and put pieces of cloth or wool into the ear; and hold the ear up. Many times this remedy works; and if it does not work in that way, have them extract using fine forceps, as is described here:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it jumps out with the forceps, that's good; if not, proceed with extraction using a small delicate instrument of two halves. And if it doesn't jump out by that means, make an arachnid stick and press out its head or part of the stick near the ear strongly, and block the wick in the middle of the candle or rosemary to the extent that nothing can enter through the candlestick with the stick; then pull it forcefully as we have said; and if it does not work in this manner, take some glue from this substance and place a small instrument on it at a suitable point for doing so, and put a bit of cotton inside. Then press the glue onto the stone or whatever it may be, and pull it forcefully.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if she does not heal from all these things that we have said, hurry to cut the ear in this way, allowing pus and blood to flow out, and spasms; and the manner of cutting is such that you first make a sinner on the cephalic side of the patient, and remove some of the blood according to its measure. Then let the patient sit between your hands and turn their ear upwards, and make a small cut at the root of the ear in the fatty area hanging down; and let the cut be like a crescent moon until you reach the bone. Then break the bone according to your strength, and suck it quickly into your mouth; and the cure as long as it is sound.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if they are grains and it is inflamed, administer an extraction; and if it cannot come out, administer one of these small incisions according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain. Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	And administer an incision to that grain. But do not do this when you think that the grains are wet due to the moisture in the ear, until you have done many pieces; then extract them with fine forceps and suction, as we said before, so that the extractions may be clean.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton. Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est. s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin. se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent .i. jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	In water then, when the patient vomits in the ear, instruct the person to use some cotton swabs for suction. And place them in the ear directly where the liquid is. If it splashes out this way, that's good. If not, take several stones according to their length and gently, and heat each of them a little on fire; and place one or two pieces of these stones into the ear of the patient, and step away by about one foot from each side, and strike another stone against the stone in the ear; and continue this process of striking stone after stone until all the water is forced out entirely, and thus all the water jumps out completely; and if you see that, take one rush, and insert the larger end into the ear, and the smaller end ignite with fire until the more tender part of the rush is burnt; then perform the same with other rushes until all the water is forced out, as we have described in stones.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the removal of the beast, if it's of small size like a flea and similar things, treat it as we have said in division; but if it's of large size that can be felt, proceed with the extraction using forceps; this is the more gentle thing to remove from the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of worms in the ears, when you apply treatments as we have described in division and distillations, if the cure does not help, you should look at the ear with the sun: if there is no worm visible, extract them using fine forceps; if it's not visible, take this form from here:
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus. Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent. Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And make the opening narrow at the bottom and wider at the top. And use the finest needle according to the severity of the patient's suffering, then insert it completely into the canal; perform this often until all liquid comes out. And if they don't wish to come out, numb the inside of the canal with cotton as I have described in relation to cutting worms; and if they do not protrude forcefully as we have said, administer distilled remedies that the old ones have proven effective for worm extraction, and you will find these instructions under treatment of distillation; and when you distill your oils and medicines into the ear through this instrument, as shown here, follow this form as you can see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And whether it is made of silver or lead, make it narrow at the bottom with two small holes, and wide at the top for distillation; and to press internally in the middle of the distillation use one well-made tool made of lead specifically for this purpose. If you see a scraper and wrap cotton around the tip, place oil or juice into the cylinder, and whatever medicine you see inside it, let them be in the canal, then pour all the cotton with the scraper, press your hand appropriately until the oil is distilled or from the ear; and feel within, and make the distillations one small piece heated over fire like when you distill it into the ear. And remember not to let it get too cold, because the medicine would not be as good then.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Regarding ear piercing.
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born without a bit of ear wax; and this same thing happens with injuries or birth in the ear, causing eardrops that only come once inside the ear if they cannot be seen; and never do two drops of ear wax appear at once, you see them well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	Thus, the one that comes inside if you cannot see it, is due to a blockage in various positions, and here what needs to be done becomes clear: you should place the ear near the sun; look inside: if you can see the plaque apparent, if the work has fully formed this pus-like substance from which we are speaking:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And be so, cutting in front and behind it completely flat, so that it does not irritate the ear; if there is a plaque or bump from inside the ear or of the ear itself, if you have fine pincers, use them to carefully cut, until all the char has been removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren .i. raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille. Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	And if the operations have gone too far in the ear, take one thin and light rasor, scrape a small piece from fire, then place it inside the ear. If you feel the operation causing pain to your ears, pierce lightly, and ensure not to injure the nerves of the ear; then insert into the ear a patch according to the width of the tear, and apply the moisture in the Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Continue this for as many days as the wound is healing, or take a patch and moisten it with rose water, then sprinkle powdered vitriol over it. And if you see swelling in the ear, it should be that you remove the patch and apply another wetted patch made from rose oil and beeswax, until the swelling is removed; then treat it until it is well healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if bleeding occurs, soak a cloth and wet it with cold water, then put it on the ear, and use other treatments that stop the bleeding which are similar to those used for distillations.
de la char des papieres	From the residue of paper
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	In the process of unfolding hairs when they are moist and drying, it is necessary to use tweezers and forceps on them. Take a small slice from their roots; then place under the glass tube.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if you do not remove the thorns, cauterize them with a thin round cautery iron. After incision, it's worth removing them; and they are often cut again, because nothing remains from their roots. And when they are cauterized by fire, those root parts burn and never return.
de la gresle	Regarding ice
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope. se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	Many times, in the papers come things that seem greasy by their form and hardness, and because of this it is called "grains", which is an assembly of moisture thick on the paper above and below; the operations are like this: take care if the grains move from one side to another, and this is a simple thing to know; then do it broadly, then lightly cauterize each part, then hold them with tweezers, and cut. If you cannot cut without piercing a bit of the paper, or causing harm to the patient; and if the tear is large, and there's an assembly at one seam, treat until it heals; and if it's small, do not use force, for the ointments will heal it quickly and regenerate tissue.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the grains descend into the ear towards the upper part, turn the paper, and place the grains on tweezers, cut and press from both sides; and if the paper is moved away by the incision, it causes no harm; and when the grains are cut, remove the salty water, treat the surrounding area until the tissues regenerate; as long as the patient heals.
de la graisse des eulz	of the grease of the lumps
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil. Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	Exinach is a fat that accumulates on the surfaces of paper sheets, and this happens more often in children than in adults, causing great pain to their eyes, and they experience an excess of tears in the mornings; thus, they cannot look at the sunlight as tears tend to flow into their eyes; for this reason, they lie down next to their beds, sleep on them, and have their paper sheets moist under their eyes. And when you press your hand onto it with your fingers, you can feel the exinach between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the way to treat it is such that you have your patient's head in a healthy position. Then take one piece of linen cloth and set up as tent-like structure into a circular shape according to the amount of exinach present in each section, then place it on top; press with your hands from both sides so that all the exinach is gathered within the circle. Afterward, cut in the middle of the moisture, making a small slit not larger than the wound made when opening veins, and ensure that the linen reaches into the moisture completely. Then various sections of the exinach come out through this slit, resembling the shape of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Pull out then, in one piece, the cloth padding between your fingers on the outside, and twist your hand to the right and left until it is spread; make sure not to block the slit, that you reach all the way into the moisture up to the eyes, do not hurt.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the exit does not open at the start of the incision, increase a bit the incision gently until it opens; then treat it as we have said, then moisten with bandages and water, place it on the wound, and apply binders.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree. Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez. Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there are those who grind grain and place it to corrupt the moisture that has remained. Then treat until they become clean. And when an abscess forms at the wound, then apply plaster remedies until they become clean.
des poilz des papieres	(of paper hairs)
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When hair grows in other than its natural place and ages, it harms the eyes, causing various diseases like familiar infections and paper weakening or scarring, as well as white discharges due to this cause; and one treats accordingly with four methods: either by combined fire cautery, or through ague medicine as described previously in the section on cautery, and is done through cutting and sewing, or through sutures, according to what I will explain.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	It is necessary that you place the tip of the eyelid in your healthy state, then turn the paper of the eye with your left hand; if it flips properly, it's good; if not, sew one thread above through at all .i. and attach another thread over the entire sheet of paper, and then turn it with a sharp tool; then cut in the area under the paper, under the displaced hairs, from the major tear to the minor tear; then remove the thread, place a small cotton tent on top of the paper along with a piece of silk, and then sew an outline resembling a leaf, like the bay leaf, onto the paper. Yet it is necessary that the shape match the amount you see when lifting the lifted paper.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les .ij. lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des .ij. angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout .i. fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les .ij. sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a .iij. jors ou .iiij.; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	And if it is necessary to cope with a large quantity of paper according to how the paper has become soft; then do this for all parts around the tear lines that you have indicated, starting from the major tear and going until the minor. And make sure one of the tears is close to the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then place the needle into one of the two corners of the tear, then scrape off everything; then join both lips with a stitch using a needle and all .i. fine thread, and let out any blood, and air the excess threads on the two tear lines, if you are able to do this; but if not, don't worry about it, and leave the stitches open for .iij. or .iiij. days; then heal the wound without a stitch with dry and binding substances, as the paper heals in response to the healing of the wound and its joining together, but the stitch becomes loose (as the old ones would say), which is work without fear.
et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a .iij. oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	And if you choose another way: and it is that you mark the paper with a shape as round as the leaf of myrtle, just like we've recounted, in three inches cut according to this form:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	Then cut the one that sits above evenly, according to this form:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait .i. fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute .i. autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	And if you do not have the ability to hold the forceps, and if the thing is not equal, take one thread or needle with two threads; and place that thread inside the figure. And place another thread under the large suture line, and the second thread under the small one, and assemble the threads equally between your fingers. Then lift your hand equally, and lift all the skin over which you have marked, just as we recounted, then sew both edges of the wound by stitching, and treat until it is healed; and if pus comes to your incision, soothe it with ointments and similar healing substances;
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	And it is sometimes the case that the hair on paper changes: if it is necessary for you to use what we have said about incisions; but the stitches in one and the other are more unnatural.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The treatment of canes follows this form: and you should convert the paper and cut it inside according to what I have said, and then make two canes by art, and also two fine threads each as long as the paper and as wide as its thickness; and pinch these two pieces together at half way from the paper of the eye, and hold tight the two canes from their ends shaped respectively; and leave them like this for a few days, and the skin that is constricted will soften and heal and recover, until it discharges through itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope aunes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des .ij. cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If the process takes longer and forces are applied, treat until it is healed; and when the wound has closed and the paper has lifted, and no more hair will grow; this is the form of the two canes that you make according to this figure, and according to this length and width:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	The tasks are such that you take a delicate needle and tie two pieces of silk thread that are both fine together, then join the heads of each and tie them intricately, making sure the length of the threads is as long as your palm; then prepare another piece of very thin silk thread for sewing, and tie it to your head. Next place the patient's head in a healthy position; ensure sunlight illuminates the operation area because this method requires subtlety and precision. Then insert the needle into the root of the hair where it is adjusted naturally until piercing through paper rapidly as you move it over the natural hair; then pull out all hairs up to the sewing line, tying that hair back into the line if there are two or three or more; finally remove your hand so that all the hairs emerge from the sewing area along with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the operation on the area is complete and hair doesn't come out with it, then pull the line away from the other end of the thread you have prepared until you see your hand through the vision of the eye; then pull the line and the thread, and keep the eye closed for two or three days, as long as the hair hardens in its place and grows flesh at the spot; and if the hairs are small, accompany them with one long natural hair, hold it up like you would this, until it is straightened out then raise it.
de la porriture de l’oil	Regarding eye infections or diseases.
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de .ij. manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.  Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	When this disease, called 'aleacrati' or gangrene comes to the eye, there are two ways: one natural and another unnatural. It occurs suddenly from wounds, or from surgery or cautery, and by similar actions.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent. Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	And the method of this surgery for it is that you split that seam and expose the eyelid, and place linen tents inside, and bind it until it heals; and it should not be that you use in the treatment of it things that dry up and restrict. For if you do this, then the disease will return worse than the first one; but work with soothing things instead, such as fenugreek; and pour water or boiled water and linen seed into it, and apply the yolks of duck eggs to all oils, and cover it with a tent, and treat it accordingly.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasures of your treatment are that you must be cautious not to join it back together in the same shape as before; and these operations we have described are only remedies for this disease, so that it does not return in the same form as before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the fat which comes to the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens. Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait .i. fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en .ij. chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a .i. spatumile large.	This disease which is about to be truly called "axacrati", and it's natural and accidental. The accidents come from wounds, cuts, cauterizations, and similar things; and the way of this operation in such cases involves you piercing with a needle, having two threads within it, inserting this into flesh, and causing the thread to appear on both sides of the left tear duct as much as possible so that the threads move through the two parts of the flesh. Then the flesh is above the entire needle, and the cloth has two large buttons at its end.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren .i. raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent .ij. fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des .ij. fendures des .ij. angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «.j. griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les .ij. parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the appearance of the paper follows as it should according to what is required, that's fine; but if not, take a pair and place it in the cut, and turn the paper, creating two cuts where they were inside the paper. Then make the edges of the two cuts from each corner of your incision, so when they are assembled together, the appearance matches that of a letter which has four dots 'i'. Then remove this flesh according to how its borders match up with those of the paper, then reattach the two separated parts with thread made from wool. After this, heal it using treatments as we have spoken about for softening medicines and antiseptics until it's healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the illness comes from a cut or stitch or cautery, it is necessary that you make a full gash across the hairs of the paper, and follow as before; then cut between the two leaves of one page like I said; and must perform the operation according to the shape of the illness, for she varies greatly in form, and the surgeons arrange their tools in accordance with all their ability so that they can return the figure to its natural form; and even the patients themselves, following the operations and instruments needed from various dispositions.
dou soudement de la papiere	suddenly of the paper
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this seam happens in a way that the paper above is fastened with the white of the egg and cannot move or do its natural works, then it must be that you pierce the edge of a razor under the paper, and lift it up; and stretch it out on pins until you reach the fine spatula where it is not too sharp nor too deep, so as to prevent the spatula being too sharp causing pain in the eye; perform your incision, gently removing that which has been assembled together, in such a way that the paper regains its natural form and heals completely. Do not let anything acidic fall into the eye, and rinse it with fresh water and cologne; then place between the paper and the eye a linen tent, and cover the eye with wet wool from an egg; afterwards apply for three days a cool cloth and soothing things until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	At the eye's nail
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	Know that the nail of the eye is in two ways: it is nerve-like and resembles a single hard substance, and another which is not nerve-like but seems like frozen moist congeal. If one touches it with iron or cares for it with pins, it cannot; both appearances start from near the large lacrimal gland, grow slowly and gradually until they cover all of the vision, light and movement of the eye.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the way of incision is such that the patient places their head in a healthy position, then exposes their eyelashes; and lifts the paper with your hand, then places the nail with pins into a small double bend, and extends it above. Then take a needle, and put one horsehair, or cow hair, or ox hair, and a strong thread; and double the needle point slightly and stick it through the nail, and pierce all of the way through the needle, and fix the nail with a thread and extend it above, then scrape all the hairs on the side of the nail that meets the cornea and silk up to the root of the hair at all delicate parts, and leave the natural tear in the eyelid, so that no trace of the body's usual tears appears through the incision; and the nail is extended only to the edge and along the thread, just as we have said; then scrape off all the silk from this side, and here is its form:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And make sure that the cautery does not touch the fatty tissue and breaks it, and that the probe doesn't pierce; and after making an incision pour a little of the heated oil into the eye, and makes a ring with powdered silver, and lets it stay until the next day; then treat according to what needs to be done as long as they're in good health.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail isn't made of bone, and you can't push in the needle, and the nails can't enter it, repeatedly treat this semblance of a nail with medicines; and just as I described in the division section, and if you see it cover, works on the eye from the disease, take the cautery slightly sharper than this shape according to its size.
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	Cut the nail carefully upwardly, and if you see that it doesn't diminish and the reason is pressing against it, then pour a little from your mouth into the eye, make a ring of silver and a red collier with oil, and soak the eye until the next day; then start another task according to this same treatment, until all of the nail has been removed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If there's nothing against your sight, for instance with pus-filled sores, then treat it by draining and start by curing the pus-filled sore until it becomes clean. Then resume the work as before, until it becomes clean again.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh near the ear is harmed by great damage to your eye, suspend it with an ointment, and cut off some part but not all at once, so that no tears come; then apply red powder, which is made from stannic oxide, around the eye.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh that forms near the pupil
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tune bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	Some people are born with red flesh once, covering the pupil and restraining it behind the eyelids, and seems like a rose of carbuncle; and all the operations should be such that the body puts its head into this state of health, then removes these eyes, and thus all this flesh is cut using uncinate scissors suitable for this, and supports with strength; then cut the first layer of flesh completely up to the edge, and make sure not to hurt the eye during the operation; and do the incision on the eyelid as we have said in the incision of a nail and the small forces that you remove the sebaceous gland, as the figure after this chapter demonstrates;
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	And when the incision has been completed and all the flesh is removed, then use oil of juniper or you distill it into red colander and similar corrosive medicines, and place cotton soaked with egg white over the oil so that there's assurance of heat; if nothing remains and the skin stays, and you doubt about heat causing an abscess, then leave the oil and treat the abscess with things soothing heat; then return to your work until it is healthy again, and thus make several incisions are healed by this appearance.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But nevertheless, it must be that you treat each weak oil of the natural way; and of the accidental way, in iron work; and do not thrust your hand into any of these works until you see that this member is suffering from that operation.
des voines des eulz	of veins and eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors. Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	When the veins become red and cover over the eye, and tolerate their appearance to vision for days weakening the eye. Thus, it is necessary when you first observe this condition in the eye, to examine where exactly the disorder lies; apart from that, there's no other disease than the disorder in the eye itself; therefore treat it like this: instruct the patient to position his head towards your healthy side, then suspend those veins at every ounce according to their ability, and have them do so subtly twice following this form:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And let there be two ounces in stages through one half according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then perform this procedure with the veins subtly, and let blood flow for another hour, until you see those veins depart from the eye; and make sure not to damage the eye with the points of the lancets, and do this operation at noon in front of the sun, and be very meticulous in your work so as not to touch other veins; and once you have done this, distill a collar of green and red liquor into the eye to help dissipate that which remains from the disorder.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you don't have the ability to do all this at once, make a poultice with things that soothe the pain in the eyes and leave it on for some days until the pain is soothed and sure of no abscess formation, then continue following this method as described until they are well; and this is the form of remedies:
de la fistule de l’oil	Of the ear canal
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The type of fistula known as "arissati": when you treat it with a cautery and with boiling water medicine following what I have previously said, and if it is not fully healed, then there's a place in the abscess where you cut, near where it should die off, and draw out all the moisture until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is exposed, and you will see corruption and darkness, if you gather all of the tool used as described here; and it is called "hard head", and should be made of iron in the shape of half a pound weight tool, and pointed like a file just as its current form depicts.
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And place on it the part of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your hands, and press your hand a little until you know that this corruption has receded; and do this once, then restore the part with drying medicines.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi xl. jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent .i. foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a .iij. angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	When the bones are fused together and cartilage begins to grow, and the body of the bone is fused, and remains like this for forty days, and does not heal or become an abscess, and no bad events occur, know that it is healed. If this is not the case, then there is no other option but to bring back the fistula to its original place near the neck according to this form: and you must uncover the bone again with iron and medicines. And when it is uncovered, take a tool according to this form, and make the iron head have three angles, and let the handle be thinned down until it resembles what you see here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil .i. poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then place it on the edge of the bone in front of the eye socket, and keep your hand away from the eye for one or two fingers' width. Then return to touch every part until you pierce the bone and feel pain through this location as long as you hold your hand on your nose; and then restore with dry medicine as I have taught you, and when the char is born and hardens your hands, let the matter go back to the nose; if it's a lighter thing for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	From the outcome of the eye
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the eyes are wide open and there's no disturbance in the chest or diminishment, it is necessary to tie the patient down; then heal them, then apply suction cups or bandages without piercing to draw out impurities, then place on the eye a mixture made of acacia, aloe, incense, and sarsaparilla and then strain the eye. After that, plaster the area with layers of cloth and bandages; the method for the bandages is to take soft cloths, fold each one in quarters, and place them layer by layer according to the need of the eye; then strain it from above using a hard cloth formed into a strip, and start applying suction cups without piercing again. Remove the suction cups, let the eye be strained day and night until the bandage comes loose, if necessary, strain it more. After that remove the bandage after day and night, and if you see the eye healed, it's good; if not, continue with plastering, cloth, the bandage, and suction cups until they are well healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	from the bursting of a blood clot
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When disruptions occur in the uvea, then it opens and produces substances as if they were a grain of resin, and it is observable; thus when you see its coping, the workpieces are such that you push an awl into the root of half of the part below until halfway up. Then push another awl with a double thread from the part above the tear. And make it pierce, then leave the first awl according to placement; then cut off a part of the uve with the double thread and tie it around partially inside, and tighten it well, then remove the awl and place on the eye greased linen in abundance of egg; and let it be as long as the thread breaks with the uve, then cure the eye with restorative substances until the wound is healed; and in no case does the wound heal by the uve each part from a circle of cloth, until she is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eyes have shown large appearance, then pierce them in the delicate sinus that comes beneath the eye, and dry out the moist albumen and bring down the eyes, and enter there soon; then tighten them until they are healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	From the field of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de .ij. pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit. si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee .i. poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	This disease which is called "alcunnati" affects only the field of the eye, appearing as something resembling an arrow descending, and it's not an arrow; and the way its symptoms manifest in the work involves having the patient sit upright with their head supported by one elbow at right angles, then place your hands under the eyes, moving them until you see the field come up above your eyelids; then insert it, don't let it descend and remove any obstruction of light, observe the patient's reactions as if normally; and if it doesn't descend immediately, know that it's an arrow, and when the discharge exits from the field, distill hot water mixed with honey or boiled water and fenugreek in the eye, then apply another treatment until it heals.
des aigues de l’oil	From tears of the eye
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit. Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre. se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	In the division of fluids, we perceive what needs to be pierced; indeed, according to health rules. It is necessary that you place the patient between your crossed hands, away from sunlight, and tie the healthy eye tightly while holding it firmly; then place the paper on the eye with your left hand if the eyes are on the left or right hand if they are on the right; next take the instrument called 'almagda' in your right hand, if the eyes are on the left, or in your left hand, if the eyes are on the right. Then place the tip of the instrument under the crown by a distance roughly equal to that of an eyelash to the tear duct part of the eye; then thrust the 'almagda' tool vigorously, and twist your hand until it pierces through the eye, feeling when almagda reaches the empty thing; and the measure of the pathway of almagda should be similar to the measurement of the space from the eyelid to the end of the darkness; this is the crown of the eye. If you see bone in that paper due to the clarity of the corneal fabric, then place the tool until it touches or reaches where the fluid is, then express through one path after another. If the fluid descends now, you will see the patient facing their own and the instrument in their eye.
Aprés repose .i. petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens. Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.  Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	After resting briefly, and if the fluid rises through the second path, use force with the tool, and when it is inserted and does not ascend further, gently pull almagda using small rotations; then return to slightly insert a little of the gem juice into the eye, and remove the eye from this. Then place beneath the eye something damp or wool in olive oil, liberally covered in egg whites, and bind with healthy eye. Now, and those who are of our time, let's do it as a poultice using plenty of eggs.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if almagda cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, for there are some people whose eyes are too hard, then it is necessary that you take the tool called 'alberit', of which here is its form:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai .i. leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide .i. dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en .j. leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And then puncture only the conjunctive tissue, do not go too far forward but make it about one thumb's length. Then add borage oil as we have said; and once you complete this work, administer to the patient one anointing agent with a soothing effect, on which he lies on his back in darkness for two nights. And remain stationary from all movements, eat light meats, and do not move your head neither to the right nor to the left, tie him according to his position until three days; then release him within this same dark room, let him test his vision, and have you show him some things, and then reapply the bandage for another seven days; it should not be done during the curing time or after incision as stated now, but you must apply it because an infection might spread quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice .i. orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse. Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	When dealing with discharges from the abscess, you should release the oil before the seventh day. And apply to this one who soothes abscesses; and when he is at peace, then release his vision and place one eyelid over it for covering no more than a day, and stay in that dark room. And remain within that same dark house gradually. And know that no students should interfere in such cases.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	One came to us from the Orient who told us that in their land they were using borage oil which extracted pus after applying it, but still I have never seen any such thing in our land, nor have I read of it in old books; perhaps this is a new discovery.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the descriptions of the forms of almagdah, for those who do not know them see them; and they are truly of araignae (spiders) properly:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And these have the head of those from this very subtle thing, and at the back there are three angles down.
de la char sor le neis	from the skin up to the nose
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color. En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; puis cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	They are born or emerge from various joints of the body, some resembling scorpions at the end of feet; and if there is a joint with skin colored in red tone, and if it has a yellow skin. In this case, among these joints that are yellow and not enhanced, you should have the patient lie between your hands facing the sun; work their nostrils, and pour wine on those joints, then remove them; then collect what you can hold of the fine sharp tip on one side until you know that this joint is completely ossified.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if there is no part that can be handled, when opening the entire body with all its instruments subtilely and lightly, ensuring nothing remains; and if there's not sufficient elevation or abscess encumbrance, then surgically intervene as it should be done; and if it's malignant abscesses, act promptly and use the cautery until the pus is expelled and all the contents are out, then cleanse thoroughly either with water or wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, acoi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes .i. fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice .i. doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil. Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu .iij. jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	And if it is the nose that's affected and moisture invades up to the palate, know that there is pus present; and if moisture doesn't pass as intended, know that there is newly formed flesh above the bone, so the instruments don't come through properly for cutting: thus, you must introduce a thread of linen somewhat thick, hold it with both hands, and have an inch or less between each knot; and guide the patient's tongue along this thread until the pus comes out from the nose into their mouth; and often children do this at school, and it is a simple task for those who can do it. Hold one head that comes through the nose with one hand, and the other head that comes out of the mouth with the other hand, and wait to check between each action as we are instructed with the thread present. Do this until you know that the knots have corrupted that flesh, then remove the threads, clean off any blood, oil the thread in Egyptian ointment, and place it back into the nose as before; do this for three days or longer, until the ointments dissolve all that is left of the pus; and then leave a strip of opium paste inside for several more days to heal, and if it requires dry medicine, use them; and this is the form of the instrument to purify the head, with which one distills oils and medicines or wine.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And use silver or lead, resembling an open lamp, like a rod, and guide it in the same way; and if you can see it, make a closed rod, and ensure the instruments are filled for purging the head; and have two handles on the head to hold it when heating oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	Of the flesh around the nose
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times a disease is born in the head near the nose, which is called "telul", it grows and becomes large until something visible; hence it must be cut at the beginning, then remove all the bone, then place the cautery or burning medicine on it. And if one delays cutting until it's large, should be careful if it feels hard, changes color, or lacks sensation: don't touch it with iron because it is encrusted pus, for when you cut once, it causes great harm to the patient; and if the pus is due to hot touch not from change in color, and if you see that it can all be cut, drain the patient and let it be operated on fearlessly, and treat its surroundings with dry and restraining substances.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	When the nose has been cut and sewn together
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes. Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les .ij. levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Know that when a continuation of the work comes into one of these open joints, it benefits little for some individuals. Therefore, this should not happen to any person, if they examine whether their wound is fresh throughout their blood; and then align the two lips onto a suture, and treat them while they are still healthy; and if the lips have turned black on both sides, you must sear all parts of their skin until they heal, then join the two lips onto a suture, and keep them together, and apply powdered dragon's blood and incense. And put powders one upon another with a plaster piece of strong or any other soldering plaster, and leave it until it discharges by itself, then treat with ointment while they are still healthy.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The method of suture is that you join the wound: either with needles, as we have said in the abdominal stitch; or with thread, as I've instructed.
des apostemes des levres	from abscesses of lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	Hands go inside the wound cavity of an abscess many times, resembling grains sometimes, small and large; therefore you must return to the lips, cut into each one individually, take it with tweezers, remove it from every part; then apply the hand after the vitriol incision, until the pus is drained out; and afterwards wash the hand thoroughly, cleanse the wound of dry matter until it heals.
de la char des gencives	of the flesh of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times a piece of attached gum tissue comes out on the gums, which the old would call "albulus"; it should be held with forceps, cut at its root, and leave the bleeding or blood; then put in under the hand vitriol broiet powder, or other powders that restrict and dry out; and if this flesh returns after incision, and many times happens, when it is cut a second time, and cauterized: if it does not return even after the cauterization; and these are the forms for removing them.
des sordens	Of cauteries made with fire, command the sick person to let their hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Certain times, teeth are gathered together at the front of the mouth, between the gums and the inside of the mouth, where the skin is ugly and rough; and at other times teeth turn black, yellow, or have worms until corruption reaches the gum, causing them to stink. So it is necessary that you place your hand on the sick person, with his head in a holy position, and grasp each tooth or piece of flesh as they appear between your fingers, making sure there's nothing left behind; and then do this for blackness, greenness, jaundice, and other colors until they are removed. If what is taken out at first is sufficient, that is good; if not, start again on the second day and third day until you have everything removed; and know that teeth require various tool shapes to be extracted, according to how their work shows them, because the scraper used for tooth extraction has different forms than the one used between teeth; and these shapes and others should be ready with you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is necessary that when you treat the tooth for its pain, you delay extraction as much as possible because it should not be done hurriedly; this is due to the nature of the material so that there would not be an excuse for the scraping.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant. Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Therefore when the patient is constrained to draw blood, it is necessary that you know exactly where the tooth lies. Many times during this operation, one might think there's a tooth abscessed, and you should check if it's indeed a tooth abscess before drawing blood; and once done, remove the good tooth; but until the bad tooth is extracted entirely, the pain does not disappear completely as you may lose some due to the operation, which we have already explained to these surgeons. And when you are certain of where the tooth lies, it's necessary that you cauterize inside the tooth up to a depth of i spatumile strongly in order to keep the gum from bleeding everywhere; then move your hand or with your fine tongs directly into the first pocket and gently until extraction is complete; then firmly hold the tongs; and have the shoulder of the patient in their saint between your knees, and hold it well so that it doesn't move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier. Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	After extracting the tooth correctly without breaking it, and if there is no bleeding, take any of these instruments and gently place them inside each part, and move them as you did at first. And if the teeth have been pierced and are mixed together, it's necessary to fill them with cloths where they were lost; and when extracting them carefully with tongs, ensure not to break them during extraction; and it is important to cut very precisely around the gum to remove the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere. Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And ensure you do not break it and leave a part behind, causing the patient more intense pain than before. And be aware that this should not be done as some ignorant surgeons do, who break once without hesitation or consideration for the tooth's integrity, and they do not apply what we have advised; but instead, they bring about another painful condition through their haste and recklessness every time due to the roots remaining in place or because of the tooth broken by them; this is something we often want. And when the teeth are extracted, wash off the socket with wine or water, and if bleeding continues as it often does, fill the cavity with vinegar. If that doesn't suffice, cauterize it instead.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The shapes of the tools, to which one binds their teeth first, should be with long points and thick handles, such that they do not bend when you pull the tooth; and these are the shapes:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And may have large members that do not bend when being pulled, and be made of well-crafted iron, and have teeth for holding as needed.
de la racine des dens	from the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre .i. jor ou ij., tant que li leus soit amolis, puis i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	When the root stays during extraction, it is necessary that you place inside your mouth a wet cotton ball soaked in butter. For one or two days, until the gums are softened, then take out the forceps called "algefri", which makes the shoulder appear like a care; and make them inside just like a file, this is the shape:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if they do not want to come out of all these nails, it is necessary that you reveal the flesh entirely along the root and place the tool called "althalus", which means palanchet, as its form is shown here:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And if it is free and large enough so that it does not break at all, and if the root jumps out through this, that's good; if not, use all the tools you have available, as their forms are shown here afterwards:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if one uses this tool which has two points, as its form is shown here:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and there are other tools placed according to the order of teeth, and this tool that appears to be large tweezers, as its form is shown here:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And be it this instrument that cannot break it, and know that there are few instruments of teeth; and also other instruments, which are not counted; and the wise surgeons themselves find their own instrument by themselves, according to what their operations and diseases indicate him, because there are parts of diseases for which old teachers did not teach an instrument due to the diversity of these ones and so they do not break from a fracture or of the other bones, or if it rots, then he searches among the instruments that he needs, as I have told you, and helps with gestures, from which this is the form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And be them large and well holding for holding the bone that it does not escape but that you may hold and remove it; then restore its place with medicines fitting to this, and if there is decay in the bone and it is small, seek all this instrument.
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the tooth appears not according to its natural form, and the shape is ugly, especially in virgin girls, you should know if this tooth has been born after another tooth, and it is not straight in place, and one cannot polish or file it: then you must extract it; and if it adheres with a tooth, take this instrument as depicted here, which resembles two small beaks, and it should be made of sharpened iron.
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the tooth is inserted gradually into one's hand due to its hardness and because you don't move others, and if it can be seen that we could grind it, then this tooth is ground with a single grinding wheel as it is formed:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	And similarly to the file used for making needles; and grind the tooth gradually into one's hand lightly over time, so that it doesn't move until it cuts; then make it flat at the end with all nozzles, and if it is too sharp and it irritates the tongue, then you must grind off the roughness until it is even, so that it doesn't irritate the tongue or spoil speech.
quant li dent lochent	when the tooth becomes loose
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les .ij. dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a .i. ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper. Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des .ij. dens sains, et des .ij. meus, si com tu vois:	When the tooth is in front of the mouth, or by percussion or by falling, and the patient can't press on what they're chewing that they don't defecate, and you've cured them with medicine that restricts, and it isn't effective; if they should be restrained with a thread of gold, because threads of silver turn green and rot, but gold never does change. And make sure the thread is not too thin nor too thick, according to the size of the space between the teeth; and if you see to align the teeth, then take the thread and a pair of tweezers between two healthy teeth first, then place the dislocated teeth between your own teeth, if there are one or more, until you feel them properly on the other side; then resume covering up until you covered back that part, and pull your hand subtly and skillfully, until it doesn't move at all; and bind your thread to the root of the tooth so it can't escape. Then cut the dislocated teeth with the thread using tweezers, and assemble them again, and place them between a healthy tooth, and then put it so that it doesn't irritate the tongue; and then leave it like this tightly as long as it can stay, if it loosens or the threads break, you should tighten it with another thread; if stays properly and serves for all its time, and this is the shape of the teeth and the arrangement of two healthy teeth and two dislocated ones, just as you see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth dislocates, if you put it back in its place, bit by bit, just as we have said; and don't interfere with anything that isn't careful and suffers, and not once does one make the shape of an ox bone tooth, and then place it at the spot where the defect is, and tighten it like what we've said, and stays and serves for so long.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	covering the wound of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder. Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	No occasion comes from within the tongue or nature, which we are born with; or by accident of a healing wound; and the procedures are as follows that you work on the mouth for the diseased area, have its head in your healthy hand, and lift the tongue; then cut down the nervous ligament, until the tongue is removed from its position. And if there's stiffness or swelling, which might be due to a sudden wound injury, if you pull off the hook and cut it out completely; and make sure not to let the incision be too deep, for fear of an artery beneath; once completed, then raise your head to pink and cool water, or cold water, then place under the tongue a linen bandage. And soothe the diseased area every night, so that the wounds don't stick together. And if bleeding occurs again, place vinegar over the head; and if this doesn't subside, cauterize with the slow burning cautery, which is well-suited for this task; then continue other treatments until it heals.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it's of color or black or hard, such that the patient doesn't feel it when touched, do not touch it for fear of gangrene; and if it turns yellow and shows pus, with moisture present, should you pull off the hook, cut out a thin incision from both sides, and remove it completely. And if the pus continues to come up through your apparatus, place vinegar over it until it's dried, then return to your operation while working with all your strength; then raise your head with cool water and other treatments until it heals.
des apostemes de la gorge	regarding throat abscesses
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les .ij. amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer. Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez. Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	No matter comes within the throat cavities known as 'godath', and these are properly called the two almonds. And when you treat them, following what we have discussed in division, if they aren't seared, be careful: If there are pus filled lumps of small sensation and fusiform color, don't touch them with a metal instrument at all. And if they are red and their root is large, don't touch them with a metal instrument either, so as not to cause the evacuation of blood; but leave them until they're healed, then you will remove them, or it would break on its own. And if they have a white color and their root is delicate, prepare your tool for application, yet first ensure that the pus filled lump rests and calms down. Then make the patient lie in front of the sun, and let their head be in a healthy position, and let them open their mouth while you hold the servant's hands between their own, and press the tongue over the entire instrument, as described here; and use silver or finely crafted arsenic too, just like knives.
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	Can't you press the tongue with all of this instrument? And when you see pus, take the tincture and insert it into the almond, then pull it upwards more than you can; and remove nothing from the strings with this, then apply to the tool as described here, which seems like a strong force. And both the head is tied together, and one place another, and are very sharp, and is made of iron or arsenic:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this tool present, then use forceps, as depicted here:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	And make incisions on both sides, and on each side you name; when you have cut out one of the almonds, then cut the other according to that same manner, and after making the incision gargle the patient with hot, sharp water, and cold water too, and if bleeding starts, then gargle with hot water, or slices of cooked rhubarb, or bay leaves, and similar things, until the wound is healed; then perform the cure until it is healthy; and in no case let other abscesses form in the throat than those two almonds, so cut them accordingly like the two almonds equally.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir .i. aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi .i. jor ou .ij. Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis .ij. rains par les .ij. pertuis dou neis. Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un .i. oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	And I treated a woman of an abscess that was born inside her throat, one small-sized abscess. I had almost completely closed off the entire throat, so that she could not breathe through the obstructed passage and could neither eat nor drink, dying after one or two days. The abscesses were so high up they were placed in both sides of the neck, with four inches down each side from the throat's entry point. I then hurriedly acted, put an inch of salt into one, followed by pulling out the tube, and a large portion of water; after that, I sewed another part in the other opening near the throat, and made her mouth open while pressing her tongue; afterward, placed the salt inside these abscesses and removed a part from them, only letting a small amount of blood come out. And thus opened up the passage for breathing in the woman's throat, she started drinking water then wine now, not stopping to cut away at that abscess over long periods; and the abscesses grew back immediately, filling the space I had emptied till it became very large; then I treated her gently and cauterized inside the throat: thus did she live without growing worse; and left those parts, and may God do the same for me afterward.
de l’uve	regarding the eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve». Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li. Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide. Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a .i. des .ij. estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des .ij. amandres. Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des .ij. amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee. Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor. Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague. Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	When the head descends into the eye socket, and it swells up and becomes long, it's called "perpendicular"; and if it's swollen and round, it's called "eye". When it is treated as we have described in the division section, and the treatment isn't helpful, and you notice that the wound has healed, and it feels tender to touch; then it should be handled accordingly. The one that is round assembled and not long; and if its color is red or reddish or black, it should be treated with an incision procedure because there's significant risk involved for the patient. Therefore, when you observe this, according to the method I have mentioned, regarding its size and length, place the patient under the sun so their head faces upwards, press the tongue onto the tool we previously remembered; then insert the needle into the eye, drag it outwards, and apply pressure with two or three tools as described in the incision of four almond-shaped areas. And ensure you don't remove more than the natural limit; for if you take away too much, you could harm voice production and speech ability. After making an incision, use what we have instructed about the incision of four almond-shaped areas, and treat until it heals completely. If there is fear during handling, then it should be treated with a cautery apparatus in that way. The method of cautery usage should be precise. And when the patient's head moves into your healthy section, then press the tongue onto the tool mentioned or detailed within the chapter on cautery equipment, and apply it with lively heat so it is neither too thick nor too thin; and use the movement of this apparatus which was shown here:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let my head have a hair or where I put the medicine, like the movements of a spoon, and place the tool completely with the medicine over the eye socket; and the patient should remain stationary on their side, so that saliva and mucus flow from their mouth into the medicine inside, without it descending to the throat or causing irritation; then keep your hand on the medicine and press it over the eye socket for about half an hour, until you see it absorb and the medicine's impacts are relieved; if you notice this, take cotton and wrap it around any tool, moisten the cotton with the medicine, and place the tool completely on the cotton in the wax, until the cotton dries up on the eye socket; and do this often, until the cautery is perfect, then let it dry off, and clean after four or five days. And if you need to reapply the medicine cautery, then do so, and afterwards, wipe around the eye socket with cotton dipped in butter, cleaning that area where there's leftover medicine; rinse with cold water and perform gargling until it is fully healed.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This treatment is safer than incision or the cautery; if it is treated with fumigation like this method, take calamus and juniper and oregano and rue and chamomile and clover and similar herbs, and gather all of them or some of them into one pot, and put water in it, and let it boil; and the pot should be well sealed with strong clay, and inside the pot have one tool knife according to this manner:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut. Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And make it of silver or lead, and have one of the shoulder blades placed in the mouth against the wound until the vapor rises to the eye via the nose, until the eye is dead; after that repeat often, until the eye dries out, and remember not to do this at the beginning of the coming abscess eruption, for many things happen; and don't perform this method when the abscess is declining. And if this tool isn't present, take a stick and place an eggshell inside your head so that the mouth against the wound isn't too hot; for the eggshell doesn't let the vapor irritate the mouth, and this is a good treatment together with salvation.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times it happens in the throat bone or spine of fish, where nothing occurs; if therefore you are able to do so, then pull out what you can see, and press the tongue against the sun with all the tool, so that you see the thing move; and whatever does not open up and is stuck in the throat, it's necessary for you to make the patient vomit like this until the food is cooked in the stomach; by chance if the thing is expelled due to vomiting; or if a piece of sponge, navel, lettuce root, or one piece of dry bread is ingested by the mucus. And tie a string to the sponge and then swallow it afterwards; and when it comes up at the head, if it clears away, and then pull out forcefully; and if it doesn't come out from what we have said, then take one tool of lead according to this shape:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And prepare the instruments to the throat so that they can enter more lightly into the mouth, and have the head lifted up high above it; and beware not to touch the epiglottis, lest everything goes wrong or pushes the bone inside; and move so that the patient pushes the instrument in its entirety equally until she does it forcefully, as long as it is pushed forcefully.
de la sansue de la gorge	from the saliva of the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit. Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout .i. petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu. Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine .i. fer chaut, et fai ce sovent. Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor. puis pren plein .i. voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	No treatment is made of saliva, as I mentioned in the division by medicine cure; and if this doesn't help, then look into the throat of the patient with the sun, because you press their tongue onto the instrument that I've told you. And when you see the saliva, if you remove it with a quarter inch small enough or fine tongs suitable for this task. And if this doesn't work, take a hair, and insert it into the throat where the disease is, then after the hair turns red after one ironing, do this often. And wash the patient's mouth with cold water all day long, then fill a cup of cold water and let them rinse their mouth and pour it down without swallowing, and move it around frequently; and as soon as the saliva feels the water, they defecate.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier. Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes .i. pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And if it doesn't bleed as we have said, then fumigate the patient with asafetida, using the tool we've mentioned in the fumigation of the eye. Do this several times because bleeding will occur without scarring. And this way of fumigation is that you take a pot where there are coals and it has a cover pierced in the middle, and at the bottom of that pot are the roots of the tool; then pour your fumigation, put the tip of the cane inside their mouth, seal the mouth so that no fume escapes but goes until it reaches the sinuses; and now the mucus will come out. If it doesn't bleed, restart the fumigation several times; and allow the patient to feel thirsty and eat salty things and such; and don't drink water; then it's necessary for her to leave through this method.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the shape of the tool used to treat the mucus is such that when one can see it, it resembles curved tweezers meant to enter into the throat; and it has the appearance of a doctor's beak, and it has the texture of steel, so whatever she takes doesn't let go; here is its form:
li chapistres des apostemes	This chapter deals with abscesses.
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en .ij. manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor. Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors. car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	No mention of pus removal are found according to the memory that comes after this from one or another in this book, and they differ in perforation and carving; and it's done in two ways wherein one is like its own appearance, and concerning what has moisture. And the second way is for the areas where they are within the body. For abscesses at the head are different than those at the foundation, and abscesses at the middle meat are different from those that come in joints. Each has their judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures. Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre. Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	And if for abscesses one must not pierce them until the body is done according to its maturation. And if there are such that it should be pierced when they have grown and do not mature according to their development, like abscesses below joints. Because when abscesses come from below joints and you leave them until they are rotten inside, by chance if the ligament and nerve of the joint are corrupted, this causes contraction in that limb. Or if the abscess is within the main member, and if you delay piercing it until it's done, it will harm the main member. Or if it is within the foundation, then pierce it when it's done; and one should not pierce a growing abscess without full maturation, except for that which is within the foundation, which rots through completely and lies inside, causing a fistula; and cannot heal properly over a long term.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And it must be that you know the time for piercing the abscess which is done according to its maturation, and this is when the pain has subsided, and the departure of fever, and the reduction of pain and redness, and from the movement and firmness of the head of the abscess, and other signs; and it must be that you place the piercing area as close or as far as needed from the abscess, and where it opens; and make the piercing at a point along the length of the body, and whether it is in the hands or feet, or joints and nerves and arteries, and all equal areas or places without fold.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre. Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit. Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui. Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.  Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com .i. drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en .iij. angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	In cases where the joints bend according to that body part. And when abscesses are in the internal flesh, if it's worth mentioning you should let the perforation remain until digestion is fully completed within it, as we said. For if you pierce it beforehand, if it stretches out through the body with its venom and becomes full of a heap of dirt; and by chance hardens the skin and the flesh beneath him. And for any abscesses that are pierced according to the width of the body, according to what this member requires. It should be that you remove small abscesses, small protrusions; and in large abscesses, large protrusions, and many openings according to the appearance of the size of the abscess; and if there are such abscesses or it's necessary to cut through its center, and cover it; when it has become as wide as two cloths, and is softened, then it should be done as one does with blisters: and for those that split into three angles, and those in which they cover like the leaf of bay, such as abscesses of angles; and those where a circular cut is made, and other cuts and similar surgical techniques are applied.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites. Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois. Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Those without a head, such as superficial abscesses, it should be that you fully pierce them; and when the abscess is large, and has a lot of pus, if you pierce it, do not remove all the pus at once but remove a part of it. Then seal the abscess until the other end, then leave nothing directly on it; repeat this many times gradually, until all the pus comes out. Similarly, if the patient's immunity is weak or pregnant women, or small children, or elderly and decrepit ones. For there are many times when with the pus discharge, the patient dies, and you don't notice it. Therefore, handle this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced your abscesses, if a wound occurs, check that the wound from the abscess is small; and if it's a simple cut, cover it with lint or old cotton; and if it's large abscesses, and there are many protrusions, then it should be that you sew each one so that they touch each other. And if you have sewn part of the skin in the abscess and sealed it around, then fill it with old cotton or linen rags soaked in moisture, and hold it until the third day; then remove it, and apply ointment to it as long as it is healing.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille .i. drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.  Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if bleeding occurs in your operation, then cool and gentle water should be applied and a wet cloth, and place it on the wound many times. And if bleeding persists, then you should provide management and treatment, and use the powders I have mentioned in this book, and if it's near winter, or the location is very nervous, then it should be that you put moistened cloths and pieces of linen on top of vinegar and oil; and if it is a wound, and the area is meaty, then it should be that you place wet pieces of cloth on top of water and oil, or vinegar and cold oil until the third day, as we have said; and then remove and clean the wound, and heal it as needed, as it should be, until it heals.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And it is necessary to know universally in the treatments of abscesses: now I have told you how one should proceed before the treatments of abscesses, and here begins the chapter.
des soros	of the wounds
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances. Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire. Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout .i. estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient. Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc. Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit. Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez. Et se li apostemes tient .i. nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés. Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	Of the small abscesses that come from the head and are in the form of spots, such as pimples on a girl's face, many have these characteristics. Some are oily like greasy food; others contain moisture like little pustules, and there are some with no doubt that they are veins because they do not behave oppositely to veins. And when cutting into the spot during surgery, use all kinds of tools called 'entromissoire' as follows, this is their form: if it contains moisture, cut deeply from above downwards. And once the moisture has drained out, burn off nothing but the skin that contains this moisture; for if you leave nothing behind, it will heal immediately. Then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment if available; otherwise, use water and salt and apply it to the wound, leaving it until another day; and this heals any overnight soreness. And then repeat dipping the cotton in the same way as before on the second day, and the third day, until you're sure that nothing stays overnight; then treat the wound with ointment suitable for healing, until it is cured. And if the abscess contains one fatty nodule, cut according to this form down the long axis; and cut out all its parts, burn off every part of the skin around it, and apply your entire treatment process on top where it was located; and if the vein causes a reaction opposite to what I've told you, then do what I've instructed after that. And also treat any hard abscess with the same method, cut by the surgeon as I've described.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc. Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut .i. apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere. En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	And when it comes to the incision in relation to a stone wound and moisture, it is easier because there is less blood. And if any of these abscesses or on the head where there's no moisture, then of two such abscesses that I observed or on the head of an elderly woman; I found the abscess as hard, rough and white like sand, and could not break it apart; and if one had cut into it, it would have been treated just like a stone. In other cases where they occur near the head, it's necessary to keep the opening for all days until it depends on its own for bile to come out; and treat them accordingly.
des scrophules	regarding the treatment of scrophula
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre. Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes. Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit. en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les .ij. levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	Many times there occur abscesses in the neck and in the glands, as well as in the armpits, and never at any other place or on a crest, and they are soft and intertwined with each other. And each scrophula is properly within its bony cage, like a nut and an abscess near the head, as we have said; and there are many appearances of these scrophulas. Some contain moisture, while others are wicked and do not wish to obey health. In that case, you will see a good disposition towards treatment, and they resemble the color of the neck, mute from each part and neither close to the throat nor near the artery or in the passage, and not deep; then it is appropriate for you to grasp it from above, and scrape off every part, and take both the two lips of the heart at the veins if needed, as we have said about abscesses near the head; and treat them little by little, and make sure that you do not cut the nerve or the vein, and neither be rash nor go too far ahead, so as not to cut what you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir. Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde. Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if you cut the vein or artery, and it doesn't allow you to open it, place vitriol broth or any powders that stop blood in the wound; and leave it as long as the abscess is calmed, and the wound has softened, and begins to rot. And when the blood has stopped flowing, return to your work until you complete it; then according to your duty, if there are no small, residual ulcers remaining, remove and cleanse them. And if at the root of the ulcer there's a large vein, it shouldn't be that you cut this ulcer from its root but tie it with a double thick thread, leaving it to naturally fall off without harm; then apply the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, then start treating it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les .ij. levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule. si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit. Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you remove the entire ulcer, it's right that you join together the two edges of the wound and stitch them now. There should not be any excess left due to the size of the ulcer; thus, it's necessary for you to focus on removing its root and draining fluid from it before stitching again as explained earlier. The ulcers with excess material should be punctured where they open; and pierce them in a similar manner as previously described, hanging them down, then apply bandages soaked in ointment and such things so that the decay is consumed within; and once the wound has been thoroughly cleaned, start treating it with ointment and all other relevant treatments while keeping it clean.
de squinance	Regarding squint,
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The old ones spoke of the art of gullet surgery; but I have never seen anyone do it in our land, and this is written down from their speech.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	For those with squint, it is necessary that the incision in the throat referred to as "epiglottis" be made; and one should not try this technique because all the vessels and the heart are close to these who have a large amount of mucus either in their mouth or in the throat or near two almond glands.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the illness is within the channel of the lung, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to prevent loss due to strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz .iij. cercles ou .iiij. une petite fendure dou travers, entre les .ij. cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	Therefore, when we wish to cut the epiglottis, it must be done across three or four small cuts through, between the two circles, so that the size of the cut does not involve the cartilage.
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	And these joints are capable of undergoing the sectioning of the epiglottis that there is no flesh, and the vessel extends deeply within.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	And if the masters are fearful, it is necessary that they extend the throat skin to the entire length of a finger, then cut through the bone until it reaches the gum; and avoid the blood vessels, if you see anything at all, and then scrape out the tongue, as we have said;
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	and it has been demonstrated by the section of the gum artery that bursts through the broken bone, and by the loss of voice;
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	and leave the wound open for a piece.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the time has passed from which one doubts strangulation, gather together the two lips of the wound neatly, and across the entire cut without the cartilage; then administer medicines that cause growth until it is clean.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasim, instruct that this should be done until the throat is completely swollen, and the patient's life judged to be at an end, and when there is no further improvement.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	Therefore cut into the epiglottis because the patient can't breathe normally, and they are breathing through the wound, and thus you will keep them from dying.
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en .iij. jors ou en .iiij.	And because of this, the elderly would instruct to keep the wound open until the disease's malady passes, and it has passed in three or four days.
Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	And then they instructed to stitch up the wound and treat it, until it was healed.
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	and I will tell you what I have seen.
Je vis que une damoisele prist .i. coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	I saw that a maiden took one knife, and stuck it in her neck, and cut part of the channels from the heart;
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	and I was called to treat her, and found her as if dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound and found the blood that was issuing from it, and indeed, it wasn't accompanied by a severed artery or exit route other than the throat, and the veins bled through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	I acted quickly, treated the wound until it was healed;
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	and did not leave the girl until she had regained her voice, and then returned to her duties afterwards.
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I swear by heaven that there is no need for tailoring in the operation of the epiglottis.
de la grosse gorge	In the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	Cysts of abscesses are called "throat hernia", and they are large abscesses in the color of a blackberry, and there are many in women;
et est selonc .ij. manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	and according to two ways: natural and accidents; or naturally has no causality.
Et li accidens est selonc .ij. manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	And the accidents are according to two ways, of which one seems like fat in us, and the other way seems like an abscess that comes from our arteries;
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	And there will be fear, and it is not proper to perform operations outside that in the small ones, and the proof and search must occur throughout all the instruments used.
se tu le trueves ausi com .i. nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	if you find it as thin as a new stick, and cannot pierce any vein, then cut through it, as one cuts through wood, and apply the technique to all its parts, if there is even a hint of it.
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And search thoroughly from start, and treat as it should be treated until it is completely healed.
des nous	from the bones
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	Many ways exist for us, so I will say all the similarities;
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	And it is fitting that I should mention all the differences that exist between us and the outcome.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that issue is characterized by heat and fever lasting until the body's flushes have passed and putrefaction has occurred; then, the fever and heat settle.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient .i. syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	With the new one, there is no heat, fever, or pain, and it contains a single pus, which is its own sack and varies in size according to the color of the body, and starts off like an apple, and becomes swollen;
et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	And they depend on two appearances, or greasiness, or moistness, and little color change as I have described in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	When you come to the treatment of new injuries, it is necessary that you first inspect and inquire about all the tool which is called 'the adjuster', according to its shape or chapter that follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	And the method of inspecting the abscesses in wounds is that you remove as much moisture as you find inside the abscess, and twist your fingers slightly and gradually, until you know that the tools have reached the center, then do it according to the size of the abscess;
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	Then remove the adjuster tool, and be careful not to let it break.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	If moisture is released, whether it has this color or not, if it's made like I said for other abscesses;
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	And if after the incision no moisture comes out, know that it's fatty, if then you make a cross cut and pinch it, take it lightly with pincers, and slightly scrape each side. Then remove the coat where it lies, so you can take it away cleanly with the nut;
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	And if you cannot take it out clean, then take it piece by piece so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	For if anything is left behind, it will return to us many times;
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if it stays for a little while, and the patient does not suffer, then fill the wound with some corrosive powders that cause irritation, and restrain the wound, and place things that soothe abscesses in hot water, and treat other treatments until it is healed.
et se li nous est grans, si cout les .ij. levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	And if it hurts greatly, then cover the wound with two of his mouth's lips, and treat those who are in pain due to bleeding.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	And if the vein is too large or another condition requires urgency and you need to treat it with vinegar poultice, let it remain for one or two days or three, until the wound discharges pus, then rest in hot blood; afterwards return to treating where he has been exposed to the new.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de .iij. manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a .iij. quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et .i. qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de .iij. manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	Know these forms of instruments for internal use, and they are in three ways: large, medium, and small; and if there are four squares which are called "albaret", and one called "breb", and there are also in three ways: large, medium, and small, to encircle the abscesses of fistulas;
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	And they are also like needles from which one removes the thorns, and are of lemon citrine, or iron, or silver, and gold yellow ones are valued more than black lead for enclosing pus pockets;
et sont de .iij. manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	And there are three ways: large, medium, and small, depending on the size of the openings.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont .ij. corbeures de .iij. manieres ausi;	The shapes of the pins are like little images, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and if there are two bumps on the pins in three different ways, too;
et si a oncines qui ont .iij. corbeures, et sont ausi de .iij. manieres; et si a oncines qui ont .ij. corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de .iij. manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	And if the pins have two bumps, they are also in three ways; and if there are pins with two bumps, and single-bumped pins, and these are all in three ways; and all of this is necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	The head of this one that they make to be cutting, and there are those who do not cut force from both sides, whom we burn the flesh, for in such cases one does not encounter a vein or nerve;
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	And these introducers have their handles restored to the hand, so that the patient does not notice them during the opening of abscesses;
et sont de .iij. manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	And there are three ways: large, small, and medium, as you see;
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	and one does not use much force only in the leg muscles, such as legs and arms, nipples, and similar body parts.
et aucune fois fait on .i. autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	And no other small tool is ever made, resembling whips of gallstones, according to this form, on which one stops the blood:
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	And it is placed in the healthy part of the body, at the junctions of veins and arteries, and never according to this large form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	None of the men swell their nipples when they begin to become corrupt, until they seem like nipples of women;
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne b. jusques a .g.:	And remain ugly and swollen, and whoever wishes to cure them should follow this method described by line B until .g.:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	Then scrape off the fat, and fill the wound with an ointment that encourages new flesh to grow, then join together both edges of the wound for stitching, and treat it until it heals.
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en .ij. costelz desus, par .ij. semblans fendures;	And if the belly sags down and is flattened due to its size, just like it happens in women, cut it into two sections above, making two similar incisions;
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	From which one holds to the other at the end of each, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line B until this line G;
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les .ij. levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then scrape off the skin that is between the two edges, and remove the fat, and apply the treatment that we have described for stitching and powders, and what is necessary in the healing process, until it heals.
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	And if it isn't clean, or if the incision hasn't been completed, because the patient doesn't want to rest, or due to blood flow, it is necessary that you fill the wound with wet cotton in a corrosive dressing;
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	And let it grow until it starts to chew and move again, then clean it as long as it is sanitized.
des apostemes des asselles	from abscesses of the armpits
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	Abscesses that originate in the armpits are manners of hard scrofulas where there are nodes, and if there are any containing moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those who contain moisture should be cut according to this shape, from line b. up to line .g:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the pus in the abscess has drained out, fill the wound with old cotton and let it be for another day, then remove all the cotton, and apply ointment until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscesses resemble scrofula sores, make incisions as we have said in cuts for scrofula sores, and if the wound is filled with pus, apply a cautery as we have said previously.
de la routure de l’artere	regarding the rupture of an artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	When the artery is cut and the skin is sewn up above it, many times one will find an abscess. The same happens with the opened vein and abscess in a deep vein.
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	and if one knows this when it's due to an artery, then the abscesses are long and straight.
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens .i. estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	and when you feel it with your fingers, if you sense resistance; and when it's due to a vein, then there are clear protrusions;
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	and it's folly to cover this abscess, and likewise when it is under the axilla and under the elbow, and around the neck, and in other parts of the body, and they are very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	It is therefore necessary to avoid iron treatment, and one who is at the head should also avoid it. In that which has inflamed arteries under the skin, they should be treated through the skin for its entire length.
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	Then work on the size of ounces, and cleanly separate the artery from the meshes, until it is exposed;
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en .ij. leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des .ij. arteres qui sont en temples;	Then take out a piece of thread and make it pierce until the other side, and restrain the artery with a double thread for as long as I have taught you in extracting two arteries which are in the temples;
puis point le leu qui est entre les .ij. liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	Then poke through the middle between the two threads with an introducer until blood comes out where it is, and free the abscess;
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	Then administer the treatment that relieves pain, until the patient's condition improves;
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then apply ointment supplementary to this one, as long as it is effective;
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir,	and if the abscess size corresponds to that of the vein, it is necessary that you dye with your hand whatever amount of pus you can extract from the abscess until all the skin is covered.
puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait .i. fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	Then insert the needle through the part you hold in your hand and puncture it, using a single thread of yarn, then bring it from the other side.
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de .ij. pars as .ij. chiés dou fil;	Then remove the abscess, as I have told you, or tie off one of these ends with thread from one of two sides;
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout .i. fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en .iiij. leus;	And if you doubt that the threads will hold, then replace another needle with all two threads right across the entire abscess at the incision of the first hole, and keep the threads taut for four lengths;
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	Then cut away the abscess as much as the excess comes out, then cut off the excess neatly and leave what is tied up.
puis met sus .i. drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then place one moistened napkin in vinegar and oil, then give them treatments and ointments until they are healed.
des apostemes des ners	Of abscesses of nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Also like abscesses appearing in arteries and veins, they appear on nerves when they are cut or due to too much work, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est .i. grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	And this happens more often at shoulders and elbows, and everywhere there are joints, and it is one type of nerve abscesses, and they have a color like the color of flesh, and can be in various positions with pain;
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	And when you press them, the patient feels pain, and it does not remain in all parts of the body, but below the skin;
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction;	And move well in all directions, neither forward nor backward, neither to the side nor above, and that which is in joints should not be covered with iron: by chance it would result in constriction;
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And that which is on the head or forehead, let the skin heal over the cautery mark.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	If the abscesses are small, use your tweezers and remove them from their root;
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if they are large, suspend them to the navel, and scrape them, then remove the bone and stitch up the wound. Continue treatment until it is healed.
des grosses boces pendans	Of large boils hanging down
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	None occurs in the abdomen and nowhere else, it is a disease known by the name 'fungus' due to its appearance, and it has subtle roots, and large lumps; and there are both small ones and very large ones.
et je vis .i. home qui en avoit .ij. ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	And I saw two homes where there were two stomachs that resembled fungi more than anything else, and there was no difference between them, they were white, had a small root, and were split open, and began to rot from moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un .xviij. onces pesant, et en l’autre .vj. З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	I dissected them and found in one eighteen ounces weighing, and in the other five, and the organs in the incision such that when you look at it, the disease is moist, and the color of the fungus is white and moist, and has a subtle root;
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu. Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	If it burns wide, and have the fire cautery in your sight. For the surgeon often encounters too much blood during operation, and if you're not prepared for this, then quickly apply heat from the cautery;
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent .i. fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse .ij. jors;	And if you see the patient shocked and fearful from the incision by iron, then take a well-made linen thread, and tie it around the spot as we have described, and let it stay for two days;
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet,	And then apply pressure, and keep tightening the linen thread until it reaches the knot, and everything passes without effort; and if the roots are thick, do feel fear for coping to the stomach, but you can handle half of them well.
puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	Then apply heat to prevent infection; then treat the wound, and make sure you don't touch the slippery substance that is of dark color and has little sensation and milky appearance.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For this is an abscess, and I will come to the treatment of gangrene next.
quant li boude ist fuer	When the bladder burns
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	When the appearance of the bladder comes through a wound or opening in syphilitic disease, and it is on the belly and there are some swellings like in other lesions, just as when blood seeps from veins or arteries as before, or due to windiness;
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	And if it's due to the rupture of syphilis and through the outlet of the bowels, its color resembles that of the pus, and is a slight thing without much pain, opening from various outlets.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it's due to the exit of an intestinal tract, then it is more varied. And when one presses it with their fingers, it returns and then comes back again, and by chance gets stuck, and enlarges quite a bit at the entry from the bath and through strong labor.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	And if it's due to moisture, it's a simple matter, and opens well when you press it with your hand, without constraining it; and if it's due to blood, it opens through these symptoms: large and hard abscesses, implanted according to their quantity;
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it's due to windiness, it smells at the nostrils, and the veins so that you see their appearance is from the blood of an artery, or a vein, or windiness.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure. Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	If you should leave the wound untreated. For there is doubt and fear, as I have told you in the chapter on abscesses, concerning the artery and the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	And if the lesion appears to be in the intestine or the bladder, it is necessary that you instruct the patient to scrape their skin, and have it extended completely straight, then prick all around the wound.
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains,	then command them to heal it by rubbing with your hands,
puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile,	then go into the area you have indicated on all surfaces,
puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	Then half of the abscess is above to the entire large hook;
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	Then bind it with a strong thread, or with a sturdy silk rope, and let us firmly tie it until the dislocation is released;
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	Next, spread half of the abscess upwards on the tie, and then place your thumb tip, and restrain the intestine;
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	If you find it caught by the tie, release it, and press the intestine towards the front of the abdomen;
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	And if you find the boil, take it at the root, and cut away the excess;
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren .ij. aguilles, et i boute .ij. fors filz, et boute les .ij. aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	And if it goes against the artery or a vein, or if you go too deeply into them, then come back to your work and take two needles, and place one piece of thread on each needle, and insert the two needles where you have made a piercing.
puis estrain l’aposteme en .iiij. leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	Then remove the pus within four days on top of the needles, and if you see it, remove the needles, and let the wound heal until it scabs over, and discard the dead flesh by itself.
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	or you cut it when it becomes firm and scabbed over, then treat it as necessary, and scrape out the pus in the way we have said.
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And remove the blood or moisture that you find, then clean the wound of what is necessary, and stitch up the wound.
dou chancre	treat the gangrene
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have discussed in the division the appearances of gangrene, and how to handle it with medicine, and how to avoid iron treatment; we shall explain that gangrene appears within the flesh, requiring great caution during its treatment. The old ones say that when gangrene is found on skin or parts you can remove, such as breast gangrene, in cooking areas, and similar spots, one should remove everything when it's just starting. But for large and old gangrene, approaching it doesn't work; I never knew anyone to be cured by it, nor did anyone else before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when it's in a place you can remove, as we have said, the procedure is to cleanse the patient of black bile on all sides. Then have the surgeon drain if there's obvious fullness, then prepare for surgery by thoroughly cleaning out the affected area. Next, scrape out or cut away gangrene from everywhere and clear it completely with nothing left behind; let the blood flow freely until you've wiped your hand clean over it or any other surface. If bleeding contradicts the incision made in an artery or vein, cauterize so that the wound is fully dry. Then apply another treatment once it's healed.
de ydropisie	From dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces .ij. semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	We have discussed the appearances of dropsy in division, and how the assembly of water occurs, and the signs for each appearance, and the treatment done by medicines, and that which is treated with iron: it's only for these two; one must not touch with iron in these four appearances: it's to say, tympanites and yposarche, because this is deadly matter; so when you use medicines for this dropsy appearance called 'eclites' through medicinal means, and the treatment doesn't prove beneficial, look if the patient seems weak or has another illness other than dropsy, such as abdominal pain and similar things; do not touch with iron if that's the case, because there is doubt; and if you see the patient's health very pale green, and they have no other illness but just dropsy, and they are neither too young nor too old, then you should proceed thus by operation:
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme: Et soit trenchans de .ij. pars. a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	Lift the patient's leg with your hands and have the attendants press the abdomen upwards while pouring water to the lowest part of the foot. Then take the pointed spinal instrument according to this shape: And make two cuts each of about half an inch, and do not make them too deep so that they can come until reaching the intestine when inserted, without being able to sear;
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude .iij. dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude .iij. dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	Then look if the dropysis (a disease) is directed towards the intestines: if you need to cut under the belly in this position, two inches straight down from the navel; and if the dropysis is due to liver disease, then make your incision on the left side of the belly, two inches; and if it's because of bile, then do so on the right, and it should not let the malaides (glands) lie over the cut so that excesses don't flow into this weak area.
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme: Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz .i. petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, .iij. pertus; et .ij. d’autre part, et .i. d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	Then cut through the whole skin with the tool, and push it outwards, lifting your hand to remove all the spatumile (a substance) between the skin and stomach as if scorning up to the quantity of a fingernail or twice that; then pierce the stomach until the spatumile reaches half way towards you, this is the level of the water, then pull the tool out, and it's the form of this instrument as described here: It resembles a thin silver rod, and it's made of bronze or brass, and has on one side two small depressions; and from one side three; and from another side, and from another; and the heads are cut like a feather, and this is the form of the incision that writers describe as cutting the feather.
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	At the top is the alemele (a tool), so that when the instrument reaches the water, it can now descend towards the tool; empty it then either half or a third part, because if you remove more than should in this moment, by chance, the malaides may die due to the release of its spirit from the weapon, or it gets disfigured, or it approaches death;
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	but adjust according to the amount of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue indicate in the patient's condition, and their pulse; then place the tool and retain the water, and it is now retained due to the anesthetic effect on the pertus located above the syphilitic lesion, as I have mentioned, you pierce it like this; then restart using the tool another day, if you see the patient suffering from it, and draw out a small quantity of water.
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue. Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	Do this each day, and do not rush it until only a little water remains. And if you doubt about the condition of the patient, avoid leaving much water in them. If there is fever or sweating or bathing under the sun, and if they turn red from drinking; and take care of medicine drying treatments as long as they are sane, and cauterize over the stomach and liver after the removal of water, just like I mentioned earlier.
de l’estopement de la verge	regarding the stopping of the penis
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu. Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout .i. spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme: puis met ou pertus .i. clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi .iij. jors ou iiij. et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	No child is born without testicles, or if they are small, or not in their proper position. If it happens immediately that there should pierce completely all .i. very subtle spatumile according to this form: then place or let the testicles .i. delicate clo of tin, and tie and keep like this for .ij. days or iiij.,and when they want to urinate, remove the clo, and urinate, and then put it back; and by chance no point applies, because the urine that comes out does not allow it to be closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera. Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	If the testicles are small, there is medicine for a clo of tin, as we have said, if it expands. Those who do not have their testicles in their proper position will be blind, because no child is born with testicles at the head of the penis, so they cannot urinate before lifting their penis upwards; and cannot procreate because the matter cannot come to the spermatic, and this is a bad disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the way of the opening is that the patient lies on their back, and they place the head of the penis and its surroundings like a feather's size, so that the testicles lie in the middle, as it should; and beware of many times of bleeding, and if this happens, stop the bleeding with someone who knows how to stop bleeding, and treat the wound until it heals.
des pustules de la verge	Of the pimples of the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times pus forms in the penis, and there appears a disgusting aspect; and among them are malignant and non-malignant ones; so it is necessary that you weigh them at an ounce each, and cut and clean all of them, then place cotton moist with Egyptian ointment on top; then cure with diafinicon ointment until it becomes healthy.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere. Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer. Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the pus is malignant, with a putrid color and discharge, it is necessary that you apply a cautery to it. Once you have cut it, and if the pus is inside the penis and part of it under the skin and part outside, then it is necessary to remove the pus that is inside first; and when it has healed, you treat what is outside. For when you treat them together, there's no assurance that the head of the penis will not be pierced, leading to darkness and corruption in the penis and during intercourse; so you should remove everything that is black and corrupted, then cover with a plaster made from walnut shell juice and flour, then cure it with other cures until it becomes healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme: Li cauteres si aide as .ij. dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a .i. estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	And if there is bleeding due to decay, you should apply the lunar cautery according to this form: The cauterizations aid as two dispositions together: namely, in the case of blood discharge and corruption; and if the head of the penis has become corrupted and removed, it is necessary that you insert a pine needle into the penis and piss through it. And when the skin is dry at the tip of the penis for those who have not been circumcised or due to injury or abscess, then it is necessary that you burn it with one hairpin until all threads are freed, and release the head of the penis from all sides;
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a .i. spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre .ij., et i met .i. subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	And if this is something you find difficult to discuss, it's necessary that you cauterize at two points near the head of the penis and the scrotum; then make a good incision halfway between them, and I place one piece of linen bandage moistened in cold water there, so that steam doesn't rise immediately.
de la circoncision	Of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not a simple matter of continuation like other injuries; nevertheless, when we perform this work out of our own will and for children, it must be that we do the best job, and make the lightest action for their health.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the old did not instruct circumcision of their children, for they did not practice it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I wanted the majority of masters and surgeons who performed circumcision around one day after birth, and in strength, and throughout the entire foreskin; if they left it be because there are two sheets (of skin), and by chance if they cut this one above and let that one below remain.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Or they receive cuts, and the pain doubles, and in the circumcision which is done on the first day after birth, the edge of the member is not secure; and during the cutting of the nail by chance it escapes the blade, and runs through the work, and many times are born like this even though they do not need circumcision and I want that.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	From the circumcision done in force on the entire length of the thread I have found the value of experimentation, because the forces cut as well above as below precisely.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en .i. tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	For when you squeeze your hand, cut it equally at .i. (1 inch) all the way through; but make sure the thread is well threaded inside the skin; and do it in the manner of the first operation so that you can imagine the child, if they hear, that you are only tying the thread around the penis just like that, then let it out in all the ways you can.
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz .i. poc a .i. autre liien; et la tien as .ij. dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les .ij. liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	Then make it stand straight between your hands, and apply force between your hands or under your feet so that the child doesn't see them or any of the tools; then pull your hand back towards the penis and blow gently or firmly, and do this until you feel the joint in the penis; then thoroughly clean it of all dirt, then tie the first joint with a double thread, and tie each part again for .i. (1) loops at .i. other joints; and hold it about two inches above the second loop at the pouch and index finger, and place them between the two loops, then remove the thumb quickly and pull out the head of the penis;
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre .i. drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then let the bleeding slowly and steadily continue, for this is blood; and apply powder here and there on top of the powder, applying one spoonful mixed with half an egg yolk cooked in rose water, mixed with well-churned olive oil that is fresh, and leave it like that until another day, then cleanse again after any other treatment until he is healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of force during creation is thus: let the two shoulders be together and intersecting, and have the shoulders as large as the forearms equally.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error in creation is when the kidneys inside deviate from incision; hence it's necessary to extend them up to your fingernail, thus causing an abscess; and treat equally, and if you can't hold them up to your fingernail, take them with tweezers, then treat.
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if they protrude for three days, and the one which is under the foreskin swells, let him stay until the abscess is soothed by the pus coming out, and gently scrape; treat as you can move, and avoid touching the part of the foreskin, it will not harm him.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, treat the rest of the things with the powder that we have discussed or treated in powders, and if you touch too much on the kidney beyond measure, and it goes above, it will do no harm; therefore, treat according to what we said until it is healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	The retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	Retention of urine is due to the presence of stone, or frozen blood, or bile, or a lump that has formed, or similar things, as we have mentioned in the section of this work;
et se li urine n’est desliie, et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	And if the urine is not able to flow and you observe retention due to the stone blocking or in the bladder neck, then it is necessary that the patient be in a kneeling position. And their feet should be placed under the back, and they should extend their belly from above the part of the back, and restrain the patient so that they lean forward as much as possible; and then the bladder opening is constrained to allow passage for the stone above, which results in urine flowing out.
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	And if it doesn't come out as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you should administer extraction using all the tool called "syringe", which is this form: and make it of fine silver that's slightly curved like a feather from a bird; and let its rod be one palm long and half another, and make it fine at its tip.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren .i. fil double, et lie au chief .i. poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus .i. siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	And the method for removing urine is as follows: take a double thread and tie one end to the head of the patient, attach about an inch of wool or cotton at the other end, then place this end inside the catheter; remove any excess wool until it's fully contained within the catheter. Then smear the catheter with oil or butter and with hen's egg fat. Have the patient sit upright and moisten his bladder and penis with olive oil and vinegar.
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	Then gently insert the catheter into the penis until it reaches the root of the penis. Next, double back upwards towards the bladder. Then place the catheter in front just before reaching the bladder and feel the patient's urges up to the empty state. This must be done according to this order because where he was directed she went twisted; then hold the thread firmly against each piece of wool until it is all attached, and urine follows the wool. Afterwards remove and properly dispose of the urine.
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And repeat the process with the catheter until the bladder is emptied, and ensure the patient has urinated.
des maladies de la vessie	Concerning diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When burns or blood come into the bladder, or putrefaction gathers there, and you see distilled waters and medicines, if make everything to the instrument that is called 'clepsis', and this is its form:
Elle est close, et si a .iij. pertus: .ij. d’une part, et .i. d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	She is enclosed, and if has three parts: two on one side, and one on the other, as you see; and the leavings are through which the medicines come should be such that they numb well the penis without addition, if can take away moisture, and to expel when necessary;
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	And when you see the medicines flowing in the bladder, put the end of this instrument into the moisture, and guide it to where you're pulling; if pulls out the moisture with this tool, then firmly bandage the puller; should enter the moisture inside and come to the bladder now, so that the patient feels it;
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	And this is the form of the subtle stone, which one catheters the bladder with: if it's like this:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a .i. sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les .ij. seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe .i. poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	And it's made of silver or tin, and the shoulder is positioned higher; and at .i. hand or between the breasts it lets out urine; then take a sheep bladder and put in it some moist with which you catheterize the bladder, then tie it between the two breasts forming a good double thread, and heat one end of this moist on fire; then insert the stone catheter into the penis, then hold your hand over the bladder with all the moist until the patient feels that this moist has reached the bladder.
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai .i. cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute .i. fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble .i. dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And if you don't have the bladder, take a piece of parchment and make it into one circle, and cut it roundly in the middle; then insert a strong thread into these cuts, then join the circle like joining two plates, and put inside whatever you use for moist and water and vinegar, then tie it up as you would with the bladder, and do this just like you did with the bladder, pressing it with your hand until the moist goes to the bladder.
de la piere	of the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have spoken of the methods for stone division and extraction in medicine; we also spoke about the differences between stones that pass through urine and all signs, and which stones require size reduction; in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will openly and briefly tell you this.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that stones that get stuck in the bladder often occur more in children, and this is a sign that an infection has traveled from the bladder like an infection in its subtlety; and they often pass urine, and irritate the patient's penis, and it swells many times, and then returns; and at some of these infections there are stones; and until about four years old, children have easy recovery, but it is quite painful for the elderly, and occurs halfway between childhood and old age; and stone treatment is easier for those who have large stones compared to those with small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines. Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	And when we come to treatment, it is necessary to first cleanse the patient through urination, in order to remove all the impurities that are in the intestines. For it only blocks once at trying to pass the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche ded ens;	Then grasp the patient by their elbows, and lift and move them backwards, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, appearing only once from their upper part; then have them sit between your hands with their hands placed on their thighs, so that the bladder is completely descending downwards; then inquire and touch it repeatedly.
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere. Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	If you sense the stone in space, cut it immediately. And if the patient doesn't urinate even at touching, wet your index finger of your left hand with oil; if the patient is old, or wet your middle finger, meaning the patient is young and fully grown. Cut it from its base and touch the stone, when you sense it on your finger, remove it to the neck of the bladder; then press against your finger and cut outwards at the place where you see it should be cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And instruct the surgeon to press the bladder with his hand, and tell him to extend his right hand upwards above the penis, and have his left hand hold the skin over the penis in the place where the cut should be made; then he cuts out the stone, this is its shape:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	And make it between those who are within the joints and the foundation, not even at mid-way but on the edge of the left snowbank; and be straight on the stone, and let your hands meet either the joint or the foundation, and have its size cross so that it is broad outwards, and narrow inwards, according to the quantity of the stone, not too large.
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	By chance if the press is what needs to be or foundation, it jumps for no effort; and know that there are parts of stone with angles and margins: it has trouble escaping; and if there's a part beneath, resembling a gallbladder, round, from which the release is light.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li .i. estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge .i. poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	In the sky where there are angles and margins, make the size larger; and if it doesn't jump, then you must use the tool that is similar to a file at its tip, to force the stone so it doesn't escape; or you push from under .i. instrument slenderly curved at its tip; and if you can't engineer it this way, then widen .i. hole slightly, and if it's not smooth after that, then use vitriol to force it.
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors. Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie. Car .ij. choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	And if there are more than one stone, start by removing the largest at the neck of the bladder, then proceed upwards, then pull forcefully and afterwards remove any smaller stones that may exist. And if it's very large, it might be necessary to make a bigger incision and cause more damage. Because two things happen to the patient: either they die, or urine starts coming out from their body instead of them being able to urinate; but still, strive with your pulling or gripping tool until you remove the stone piece by piece;
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus .i. drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	And when you have completed your work, fill the wound with incense and aloes and dragon's blood, then press it in place, and cover it with one or two strips of wet wool in oil and wine, or oil and cold water and rose water, to soothe the hot abscess; then put the patient back on their back, and don't remove the bandage until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you remove the bandage, wash it thoroughly with water and wine vinegar, then apply a diaper ointment and basil ointment until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	And if abscesses come into the wound and corrosion occurs, and blood clotting in the bladder, and it is because of this that urine is retained which is known to behave like this when urine is present: therefore you must apply to the wound, and remove that blood, for if it remains, it will corrode the bladder and deteriorate it;
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les .ij. cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	Then cleanse the wound with water and wine, and salt, and help him in all ways that you know, until he is well; and it must be that every time you cure him, you tie his two thighs together, and apply the remedies to the spot.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure. Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	And if the stone is small and it's located in such a way that it blocks the urethra and urine cannot pass; when you treat him as I have described, you should cut him multiple times, allowing some relief with each cut treatment. I've seen this method work before.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take one iron branch according to this form, and have it pierced at three points on each side.
puis pren .i. fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge. Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	Then take one thread and tie it around the base of the member so that it cannot come back into the bladder; then insert the iron rod into the member gently until it reaches the stone; and twist the iron rod with your hand in the stone gradually, until you can pierce the stone from the other side; if urine comes out quickly, then press your hand on what remains of the stone inside the member. If is broken quickly, let urine flow and keep the patient comfortable;
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie .i. fil desoz la piere et .i. autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les .ij. liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, tie one thread around the stone and another above it, then place the member directly over the stone between the two threads, then pull hard, and remove the thread, and clean the frozen blood in the wound; and treat until it is clean.
de la piere des femmes	From the stone of women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	It happens that a stone becomes embedded in women, and if it occurs once, the cure is difficult, and must be done for three reasons: one, perhaps the woman is a virgin; and second, no one can find a woman who knows how to expose her eyes, even when she is pure.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a.	And the third way is perhaps one cannot find a woman who knows well in this art of hands; and the fourth way is that the stone in a woman is more towards the front than the stone in a man, so it must be cut deeper, and there is great fear involved.
Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier .i. caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	And if the need goes to this, it is necessary that you seek out a wise midwife, and find her true location, or if you cannot find one, at least ask for two discreet pure eyes; and present someone experienced in women's life, or a woman who knows part of the art, and command her to do as you instruct about the examination of the stone;
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	And look very carefully to see if the woman is a virgin: then she must push her womb or its foundation and seek for the stone; and if she finds it, make her squeeze under her womb and advise that she pushes her womb or through the malady, and presses her left hand on the bladder formation.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	And if she finds it, then she should move it from side to side at the entry of the bladder until underneath, as long as she reaches the root of the thigh; then apply pressure on the stone near the root of the thigh against the middle of the groin, where the stones appear, and feel the stone in that area; and do not move her hand over the stone or underneath it, and proceed with small cuts.
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains. si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	Then cut in the abdomen, if you feel the stone, increase the incision until the stone can come out forcefully, and know that there are many types of stones: that is to say, small and large, rough and smooth, long and round, and that have grooves. Know their characteristics to understand the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	And if it doesn't hurt you, put sulfur in the wound for an hour until the pain subsides; then return to your work while the stone is hard, and have the tools I told you about in the extraction of stones ready to assist you in your task.
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if it doesn't hurt you and it's the artery that has been cut, apply the powder to the wound and use gauze or bandages to compress it, and don't repeat this again, leave the stone untouched and don't remove it by chance, for fear of possibly harming the patient; then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood has calmed down and the limbs are restored, then return to your work while the stone is hard.
de hernie carnouse	Of fatty hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Gelatinous growth is nothing else than a collection of moisture or white jelly, which resides in the sack of the kidneys, containing the egg; and it's called "jelly", and once it properly sits in the fabric of the egg if we believe there's another one; and this is the skin between the white jelly that we've mentioned; and this doesn't have a hole.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the formation of this gelatinous growth is due to weakness that affects the kidneys, and spreads that substance.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	And it does not come at all from hitting the kidneys, and that moisture has many colors: or it turns yellow like jaundice, or without redness, or black, or aqueous white, and this happens more often.
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, .i. poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And these are the signs to recognize this assembly, for if it is or whitish-yellow as we have said, then the abscesses are round, that is, long enough like an egg figure, and do not open any of the veins, because it has moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	And if there is moisture in the proper tissue, then the abscesses are round with a portion of an egg, and because of this we think that it's another egg;
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if the moisture is between the skin of the veins and the whitish-yellow substance, you can feel it well; therefore, when you know the color of the moisture, try to examine inside completely through this square opening, from which its form was described previously.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	Following then those who come after the preparatory step, judge by what is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	And when we cure it with iron, the patient's health and their body's ability must guide the treatment; then place them in front of their back, on a slightly elevated thing, and lay blankets under them.
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des .ij. costelz dou keur des coions;	Then sit to their left, and instruct the attendant to sit on their right, spreading their leg towards one of the two ribs near the heart.
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	Then take the spit rod, and place the skin of the chest between them from head to foot until under the knife, and make the cut entirely straight while splitting the chest skin up to the white flesh, and gently burn it according to your ability.
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a .i. large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	Then pierce the artery with an acute tool half an inch wide, and remove all of the water, then put your fingers on it, and make the incision upstream; and do not touch the heart's chambers, but only let the artery alone; cut everything or in pieces right away from his body, because if you don't cut it carefully enough, it will cause more bleeding.
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les .ij. leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the egg jumps onto your work, then reset it in its place when you have completed the operation around the artery; then join together the two sides of the heart's chambers with a suture, then treat it as other wounds, until it heals properly.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find that the egg has been corrupted by another illness, it is necessary to bind the vessels that are suspended in doubt of blood flow; then cut off the penis completely from the suspension point, and remove the egg, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en .ij. parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont .ij. ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	And if the wound is united in two parts together, know that these are two branches; if you gather the other part as you did with the first equally, then bleed it out, and place wet wool saturated with rose oil on the wound.
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les .ij. coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	and place another piece of wet wool in wine and oil, and put it on the two stumps, and cover it with folded cloths, and bind it all together above according to this form:
Puis pren .ij. drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les .ij. angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	Then take two cloths, and sew them with frayed wool according to this appearance so that they are joined by stitching in the girth of the breeches, and one piece of the shoulder is placed on the foundation up to the back, and the other at the part near the elbow; and the second head is placed on the two angles, and everything should be assembled with the constriction in the loop of the lacing.
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes .i. cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	And never is medicine applied to this branch of the cautery in place of iron size, and you must take one small iron cautery instrument, and cut the skin around it, and heat it up as we have said, so that the white liquid contained in water is exposed;
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	take the cautery according to this shape, and puncture that white part like oncinces, and apply it to this small hot cautery:
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	And cut it in all ways that you can, until you thoroughly remove it; and remember not to let the fire touch the egg; know that this work is more preserved; and be careful about preventing blood loss, and understand how to perform the incisions correctly;
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And if no opposing thing occurs, or in the case of pus formation or blood spillage or anything else, treat according to what opposes you, as was said previously.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai,	And if the patient is fearful and cannot bear this work due to its horror, then you should perform a puncture, as I have told you, and indeed, when you are well certain through the meanings that we have said—that the watery branch lies,
si fai seoir le malaide sus .i. siege leveit; puis perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	And have the patient sit on a raised seat; then puncture the abscess in the part below at all the watery area widely, and make the puncture along the length of the chest; and make the incisions wide enough that all the pus can flow out.
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	Then place cotton on the area, bind it, leave it to drain in water, then treat until the wound is healed;
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge .i. poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés .vj. mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And if the white paste stops water from leaking out of the wound, it is necessary that you insert a feather or the tool used to treat water in ydropiques (a type of infection), as described earlier; and widen one inch around the wound, knowing that water will return, and gather together after 8 months or so much later. And when it gathers together like before, then this process will pass through her days.
de l’aposteme des coions	from the abscess of the testicles
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	Know that within this branch of knowledge there are various practices, because I believe it's better to follow them;
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	and I will tell you the process and similarities of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	So I say that many abscesses come from wounds or bites, and similarly in women; it's through certain cases.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	This means to know about the sourness and fever that spreads in women or due to impact, which is dispersed among women.
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	And its color of the abscess matches the color of the body; and does not find any pain, and it is an abscess lump.
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	And by chance there is an abscess lump and hard, with bleeding or swelling, and it never comes from a vein or from the arterial area.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	If it's due to an artery, you can recognize it by the location of the abscess lump when pressed with your fingers;
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	And it is not right for you to touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois,	Those made of swollen veins can be recognized by their arrangement at the expression through touching with fingers,
et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	and one can do well to make measurements on this likeness, and on other marks;
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	and when you measure the size of the heart, then it is at the top, and the thread should be white in color, and release the suspension from all sides of the egg.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	If the egg is already well-formed with these marks born, then you must take out the egg and the measurement;
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	And if it is in the stomach, or within the vessels, then you should release all that tension, and shape it round again.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birth of the child is behind you, then you should take it all in hand, and extract the egg, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your operations are completed, then fill the wound with moistened wool in oil and wine, then continue other treatments until it heals properly.
de l’aposteme des coions	Regarding the abscess of the testicles
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a .i. borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions,	This is an abscess enveloped with an enclosure resembling two thongs, with the softening of joints,
et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	And there is severe pain in the muscles as it grows.
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant,	And this treatment for such a disease has been well established like this one before.
et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	But we will nevertheless tell you about its treatment, according to what the old ones did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois,	It is necessary for you to make the patient lie on one elevated seat, then push up the groin suspensory ligament with your fingers,
a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	stretch all the veins near the penis, and guide them gently, and extend them evenly;
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert,	then cut across the broad cutting point of the thigh bone through the veins, as long as they are exposed,
et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	and then peel off from each side, as we have said in the extraction of arteries that are in the temples;
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait .i. fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	Then I stick a needle with two threads at one point, and tie it to the first joint where the thread came from, and tie it immediately to the other joint.
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	Then go the surgeons straight across, according to the length of the body, and rub out the corrupted moisture;
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	Then treat the wound as with others or one wraps it, so that no fluid escapes and grows from either end of the bone.
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	for this way causes no harm, and if all vessels come out visibly, it is necessary to remove the bones from all the vessels.
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	If the eye loses its sight due to cutting of the blood vessels, they dry out and cannot be helped.
de la routure dou syfac	from the rupture of urine
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	The occurrences of this branch are due to the rupture that comes from urine or abdominal extension in the area of the hips, because the intestines descend through that opening into one of the kidneys;
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces .ij. manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	And this rupture is from urine or abdominal extension and these two ways of the cause occur in such a manner: due to impact, or leap, or cry, or lifting of weights, and by similar actions;
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	And the symptoms when it's an extension by suffocation, if it happens gradually and over a long time period, not suddenly.
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	And the pus is equal until around the middle, because the suffocation presses on the intestine.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the symptoms are when it's an obstruction by suffocation; it causes sudden pain at the beginning, and the pus appears varied, close to the skin, and this is due to the pressure of the intestine and the body behind suffocation.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And the bile never descends with the intestine, it is retained there, and causes great suffering to the patient when pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these treatments with iron for fear, because it is advisable to avoid them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	And the method of this work is such that you instruct or guide the surgeon to direct the intestines into his hand within the wound if it can be inserted.
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	then sew up his neck, between your hands, and lift the legs;
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	then stretch out the loin above, and peel all the skin from the belly down;
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	Then insert through the liver edges of the ribs according to how you need to open the wound, and do it in such a way that the force can escape;
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	Then burn the small intestine which is under the skin of the anus, until all sides of the white intestine are exposed.
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac,	Then place your index finger on the one that covers the anus, on the one between the white intestine which is under the skin of the egg and between the second intestine,
et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	and remove the one behind the egg and between the second intestine; and then move to your right hand inside the cavity of the anus, and place the white intestine at the top of your left hand, and lift the egg towards the waist.
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	And instruct the surgeon to extend the egg upwards, and release the one behind the knot;
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	And inquire with your hands if any part of the intestine is enveloped or white and hard, and if you find nothing, stop pushing it into the abdomen.
puis pren une aguille ou il ait .i. gros fil fait de .x. filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait .iiij. filz;	Then take a needle with a thread that is made of ten threads, and push it into the rear part of the syfac, which comes after the skin of the kidneys. After cutting, then cut off the hairs that appear from the threads, as long as there are four threads.
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de .ij. pars;	Then join them one above the other in a manner of a cross, and bind the syfac, which we have said is under the skin of the kidneys, with a strong string of two parts.
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de .ij. pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	Fold the shoulder bones together and bind them in two layers so that none of the joints through which they pass can allow an abscess to enter or spread;
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc .ij. dois de celui, et aprés ces .ij. liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	Apply the bandage along with the first long line, about two spans of that length, and after these two lines leave a little slack equal to the thickness of one span at the back of your knee where there's no space for pus to spread.
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	And after that follow the roundness of what he has placed; then cut in the area near the skin of your knee until you can't reach the bone and ligament as we have said earlier.
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	Then apply wet wool in oil, and place it on the wounds, and put on the bandage as we have said.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And not once is the white scab burned that we have said, after incision, by fear of blood loss.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	For this happens many times, and let the wound bleed from itself until it stops; and if it doesn't fall off on its own, then apply hot water, and place what we have said there until it stops bleeding.
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	Then continue to treat the wound with another method, until it heals completely.
de hernie carnouse	of fatty hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this part of the treatise, I never see anyone who dare to perform surgery with a metal tool.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	And the old ones said that it is done like a bundle of sticks being held together by the twist, in such a way that you connect the vessels after cutting slightly on the surface.
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then hold me, and treat the abscess of the one who is working, as long as the vessels are intact; and treat it in such a manner as we have said, until it heals.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	Never allow rupture in the abdomen, as we have said, and open the belly; and do not remove any parts of the intestines from their places, and if they are removed, it's rare, and repair them every hour.
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	And even if it stays too long in this position, if you suspect a wound or gangrene, until the intestines descend;
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	And this happens due to the extension of gangrene which is in an advanced stage, as we have said, because it is extended, then it softens and inflames the limbs and opens them up;
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	And the treatment involves a cautery method, as we have mentioned before; and sometimes it is treated in this way with an iron:
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de .iij. dois;	And when the disease lies on its back between your hands, then lift the limb from the swollen area outward in proportion to a length of one and a half feet;
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	And then extract the fat that is under the skin where it follows, then take hold of the muscle and place it into the apparent opening of the fat.
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les .ij. leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	And press on the right side of the belly, then cut both of the apparent edges of the fat above the area where it comes out from the muscle, and cut the one edge and the other.
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	And remove the head of the muscle, without covering it with fat or stretching the skin elsewhere, as I have taught you in treating the extraction of the intestine contents.
puis le cure par la cure des plaies. Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Then continue with wound treatment procedures. And when you cut open, if the patient is well and healed, treat the wound until it is fully recovered.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The surgeon is constrained, and does not appear in the operation, and the cauterizers are burned in this place, and closer to salvation.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the skin around the anus
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the skin around the anus is softened in some men, because the fluids inside are softened and can be seen; when one wants to treat it, they should make the patient relieve themselves while lying on their back, and then peel off the softened skin from the natural skin. Then bring the two halves of the anus together at a seam, and if necessary, sew the excess softened skin with three or four seams or firmly with four. Next pinch between the seams, and treat the wound like other wounds until it heals, and cut out the stitches when healed.
dou chastrement	of sexual restraint
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes. Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc .ij. manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.  En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.  Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a .i. cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Know that punishments are administered in our law, and because of this I would like to not discuss it in this book; they are necessary only for two purposes: one is to provide answers about how to respond when asked, and the process of curing them; and the other, because we often need to discipline certain animals to assist us, such as from sheep, goats, cattle, and others. I then say that punishments are performed according to these two methods: either through attraction or by making a cut.
des hermofrodites	Regarding hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc .ij. manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les .ij. coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.  Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et .ij. coions.  Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	Hermaphroditism occurs according to two ways as males: one way is when between the two openings of the genitals it matches the natural figure of a woman, or it has hair, and sometimes urinates. And the second manner is in females, having at its crotch something like a penis and two openings. The treatment for this condition is that you copulate all the organs together, and treat them as any other wounds; in the second way, for males where urine jumps through the skin of the genitals, there is no specific cure needed.
de la tentigene	From the scab or soreness
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure. Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee». Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Tentigene is an unwanted mark on the natural body part; it's so unappealing to see. And some women have them as large as a hand, this needs treatment. You should remove excess tentigene from your fingers or toenails with a careful scrape, and don't go too deep for fear of bleeding outwards; then proceed with another cure until it heals properly. And on another spot that comes up near the woman's mouth, at the anus, suddenly erupting in anger, according to its appearance like a knot, they named this old ailment 'Koewe disease'. You should scrape it off too, just as we've mentioned for tentigene and continue curing until fully healed.
de erratique	Regarding the irregularity
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile. Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait. S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as .ij. leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes .ij. dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les .ij. leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder. Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte. Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.  Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez. Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	If the nature of the woman isn't pierced or if there's some kind of loss happening; it occurs either by birth, due to accidents caused by sickness that occurred, through castration, or because of an intricate syphilis, which is caused either internally or externally, and happens in the hips, back, stomach, or any other area; you need to understand its conception, childbirth, and occasionally how to have flowers. The knowledge about this can be gained by observing a midwife. If the injuries are noticeable from close observation, then inspect them with your hands or eyesight.
des emorroides	Of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation. Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer. Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer. Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai .i. emplaustre sus son dos. Et se il estainche, c’est boin. Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.  Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a .i. chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Hemorrhoids are openings of veins that often lack proper care, and when hemorrhoids are old they become painful; we have already discussed their appearances, signs, and I will now describe those that require treatment. I state that hemorrhoids and pain occur internally in the vagina, not being felt unless treated with iron. Those found at the mouth of the vagina can be sensed, thus they can be treated. So it follows that you should place the woman in a cold house, then position the anus like tongs, and cover her navel; then apply powders from medicines that stop bleeding, such as garlic, dragon's blood, and incense, among others. Then bind her feet to her waist for an hour, afterwards immerse her in cold water; if bleeding occurs, make her take a decoction of sumac, peel of pomegranates, chestnut bark, and similar things, then mix with flour from oats, honey, and garlic, and apply this as an ointment on her back. And if it stops the bleeding, that's good. If not, she should have leeches applied to her back and nipples without touching them; then take a cloth, make a paste of its juice with plantain or elderberry vinegar, and apply it hot on her.
des apostemes de la marris	The treatments for abscesses of the arm
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division. Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.  Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege, et ait .ij. petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument. Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés .ij. jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.  Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	Many ways of incision come about in the arm, such as boils, abscesses containing stones, herpes, ulcers, fistulas, hemorrhoids and boil-like conditions, and many other diseases that I've mentioned earlier in the division. Hence, it is necessary for me to describe here the boil that occurs in the arm, which isn't among those that coagulate; and if you see the beginning of its appearance, then you'll notice it's full of heat and fever, and if you can see it turning red. Therefore, don't rush to pierce immediately, but wait until the pain subsides; afterwards, have the patient lie down on one elbow and place two small pillows under the other elbow where they lean, supporting their back with their hands and bringing their feet forward from their legs; then spread their legs widely, put their arms under their knees, tie them well together, and guide the opening towards the right side of the body. Then take up the instrument used to open the arm, which comes afterwards in this form; it is necessary that when you see the instrument being used that you first mark its depth into the arm so that what enters through the instrument doesn't go further than necessary without causing pain or injury to the patient; and if the instrument is larger, then cover the depth of the arm with a cloth so that the instrument doesn't disturb it; it should place the bell of the instrument at the top, and cut the instrument. And when the boil opens, and you let the hand hold it gently, then it's best to cover it up from head, over the pit of the neck; and when the pus has been drained out, it is necessary to insert wetted linen bandages in olive oil or dried olive oil into the wound; put the dressing at the bottom of the wound onto the depth of the arm, and place a clean linen bandage on top of the arm and underneath where it meets with the cut cleanly dipped in water or cooked with parsley; then apply ointment for two days afterwards following this method until it heals. And if the wound heals into the arm, then you should avoid using hot iron to treat it but treat it as we've said earlier in the division.
de l’enfantement	Of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment. Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	Craft is first among the skills to know how natural birth looks when it occurs, and you'll recognize these signs when you see a woman's water break, and she begins to desire to push out with her breath: at that point, the infant will quickly make an attempt to emerge; then you can tell this birth is proceeding naturally, and its course follows the head first, followed by the rest of it; and upon seeing these signs, you should gently press on her abdomen, so that the child emerges promptly; for when he descends through his head, his rest accompanies him, and his delivery is cleansed of excess with a good birthing process; anything other than this does not occur naturally. For it happens only from his feet, and it forces the body or the legs, and hands, or it occurs from his belly, or genitals, and becomes reversed by chance around his neck, and through other ill-fated arrangements; in these matters craft must be wise and subtle, avoiding error and deception, and I will show you all the signs on how they should assist.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the child descends through its head in natural birth, and the woman experiences severe pain during labor, and her strength is weak, she should sit on a chair or have women hold her; then rise from her nature with something cooked from fenugreek, and then place the midwife between her hands with a small spatula which has this form:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.Et se les .ij. mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus .i. siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And cut the second part [of the birthing process], and keep to her finger until all moisture inside her is expelled; while keeping her belly pressed throughout as the child descends, if it does not descend then you must administer castor oil to the woman with fenugreek, along with olive oil. Then have her rise slowly and snort deeply several times, hold her mouth and nose for an hour: now this child emerges. If her two hands come out, then gently insert them a bit at a time; if they do not enter, make the woman sit down on a stool and lift her feet up high. Then remove the stool from under her, cut her, ensuring she does not pass any feces during the process; if her hands cannot enter and the child has died, then take her hands with the knife mentioned beforehand and extract the infant, and do so gently.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piez	From the birth of the child upon its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	When the infant comes walking on its feet, it should be encouraged to stand upright;
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	and then make them walk slowly and steadily, until they are even in height;
puis preigne .i. des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	Then measure one foot and extend it slowly and steadily.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	If it jumps up to the thighs, if one commands it to do so, and makes it snort with consideration;
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	If it should jump further, may God will it.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it does not jump as we have said, if one makes it move little by little, until it is according to the natural form.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it will be slightly.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons dit, si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en .i. mortier;	And if no force comes as we have said, take a spoonful of alum and oil from safflower, and molten gum, and grind everything in one mortar;
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement,	and place inside and outside the body this ointment.
puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	then have her lie in water until under her ribs.
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai .i. coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	and when she is thoroughly wetted up to the ribs, give her one spoonful of myrrh, and put it under her, and let her stay like that for an hour;
puis la fai seoir sus .i. siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	Then make her sit on one pillow, then make her sneeze and restrain her mouth and nose, and gently pat her stomach, for the child is now jumping.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	From the child's position on its knees.
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	When the baby comes in this form, if you put the cradle her hands little by little;
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor .i. lit;	Then support her under her neck, and let her feet hang down slightly, and lay her down on one bed;
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	And slowly bend his hands back and forth, then lift his hands up to the belly, and stretch out his knees under him, until he is ready for a stomach operation.
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	And if the fetus kicks, take his feet and move them vigorously, then move his belly upwards, then push your hands;
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	Gently guide the child back and forth; instruct the woman to bear down until the child is born.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	From the birth of the child that comes out with one hand on the way,
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	It is necessary to engineer how to bring back the hand:
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	If one cannot bring it back, have her stand up and walk;
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus .i. lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	If she cannot walk, have her sit on a bed of one foot, and make her bend the other leg.;
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	then apply the massage that I've described;
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus .i. siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	And if it does not give birth, make her sit on a stool, then study to bring back her hand;
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	And when it gives birth according to its natural form, make her sneeze, and instruct that she prays until the child comes out fully.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	From the baby's exit through its neck, and let her spread her hands, and her buttocks turned towards her mother's back.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	It is fitting that the baby beaks its hand, then turns it gradually and gradually, and you gently.
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	And when they are even, you should place them in the nature of muscle and oil, just as we said before, then instruct that it moves a little bit at a time;
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus .i. siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	And once you have done this, make her sit on one leg, and command that she bend it; and have her sneeze.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	In the same manner for the rest of the second part.
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	When it comes to proceeding in this way through the entire second part, you should drain the moisture with your finger until it is completely emptied;
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	And if the child can move on its face and neck, make sure that she doesn't hold her breath, or the child will die.
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	Then continue to push the child inside, as long as you have placed her correctly and properly, instruct the woman not to stop pushing at any point.
adonques si istra legierement.	Therefore, do it gently.
de l’issue des gemelz	from the delivery of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	Know that fleas are born many times, and every time three or four; and this is not unusual, nor does it happen often.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	Two are exceptional things, and they do not live at all if one has them;
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	I know that when they multiply and are fertilized by the sperm which fuses with them, it is tied to the womb;
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	And they do not come out naturally like all others, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	And if they pull painfully, as we have said for the treatment, and there are subtle knots, then do what it does promptly and lightly.
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	and perform like this until the cure is achieved.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou .iiij. ou .v. ou .vj. ou .vij., ou plusors jusc’a .xv., et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious,	They are formed in marriage one or two, or three, or four, or five, or six, or seven, or up to fifteen, and they are all shaped like children by the measurement of their glory.
et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	And it must be known by everyone, for perhaps this kind of thing has happened to him.
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	So act according to what is proper.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	When you treat a woman who has lost her child or is suffering from an abortion, as I explained in the division and if it doesn't come out on its own and you are forced to intervene manually;
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	It is necessary for you to know if she has good health, and whether she has experienced any accidents or shows signs of impending death;
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	It is necessary for the woman to be in control over her back, and have her shoulders inclined downwards, and lift her legs;
et li ministre la teigne de .ij. pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	And the minister should apply a knife for half an hour, or if she is tied to the bed so that it doesn't affect the delivery of the child;
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	Then rub the mouth of the midwife with moist olive oil and a mixture of sage and fenugreek seeds, as well as linseed; then anoint her hands with these oils and these mixtures.
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere .i. leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu,	Then press them into the hair lightly, then wants one or two places where the rings might fit for this,
et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	And take care so that when the child is born, it descends to its head;
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez,	if they stick in their eyes or at their necks or on their mouth or under the tongue or by the beard or near the armpits or around the ribs,
et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	and if it descends towards the feet, make it stand or grasp and at half way to its back;
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	it is necessary for them to shave the eye with their right hand, place the elbow between their left fingers, and hold it lightly with all their hand, and insert the eye into none of these places that we have mentioned until it reaches the empty thing.
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	And this is the shape of the kidney:
puis fiche encontre .i. autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	then find another kidney, or use any that you need when required, so that their extractions are equal;
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	and then evenly extend it by moving on one side and the other, so that they can move out; and make sure each kidney is toothed for holding movement, as this is its shape:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	And if any part remains, and there are some of the kidneys beneath it, and you apply them to that part, and pull out the other part;
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if there remains none of it, place this cautery or higher on its position, and do this until it has expelled everything outwards.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement,	And if one hand comes before the other, and it cannot be returned by squeezing,
si covient que tu envoloupes sus .i. drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	If that happens, you should wrap with a piece of cloth until it has come out completely;
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as .ij. piés.	Then treat the joint of the foot or at the cut, and in the other hand, do the same for both feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee,	And if the head of the child is large and it is obstructed at the exit, or if there is an assembly of an acute head,
si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	then you must press the pointed spatulate between your fingers, and shape the head and remove the sharp one;
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	or you will have it done with an instrument called 'almidach', which is used along with the tools or chapters that come after this one;
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	and similarly, let these children develop naturally to a large head;
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles,	and then press with force on the bones with the tongs,
et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	and if the head of the shoulder jumps and holds due to force, until moisture is or less comes out;
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	and if it cannot come out, cut it piece by piece as you can;
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	and if it is swollen in the belly or around the ribs, you should pierce it until the moisture drains.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the fetus is on its feet, there is a slight attraction, and the movement to the mouth of the birth canal is also slight.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a .i. drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	And if it is in the belly or on the thighs, you should extract it at an angle, wrapped in your hand.
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	and continue with the belly or the thighs until all the moisture that is there has been removed;
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure,	and if another bone is broken and the shoulder remains in place,
si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	If they ask to clean their hand under the apron,
puis i boute .i. oncine ou ij., et le trai fuer;	Then I pour, one or two ounces, and I guide it forth.
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier,	And if the edge of the apron is narrowed due to an abscess that has come there, it should not be scrubbed.
ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	Instead, moist and greasy things should be applied.
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	And the surgeon applies plaster, using both aqueous softeners and moisteners.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	And if the child is on their backside, and you can place them level, then apply what we have instructed for live childbirth;
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if it is not possible to do so, then perform the delivery in parts, and leave nothing of the second part.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	And once you have done this, apply what we have instructed for dealing with wounds that come about through bites;
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And if bleeding occurs during this process, then it should be treated with cold restraining measures, and other treatments should be administered to the patient.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman who had given birth to one child in her belly, then another followed from that womb, and this other one also died.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, an abscess came out in the belly, and it swelled so much that when it opened, it started to cause severe pain.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was summoned for treatment, and I thought for a long time, and couldn't provide proper care for the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I placed a strong plaster on it, and out came a bone, and after some days another one.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was greatly amazed, for the belly does not have any bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em miglior point;	I looked into the wound, and with my hands I felt for the bone, until the woman was in better condition;
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	And let the woman keep her for a long time like this, and it would be somewhat of a comfort to her.
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	And I remember this chapter only so that when the masters find a strange thing, they know how to provide help.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to bring back the wife to her place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	Hereafter comes the form of the presser, with which books are written; and in each two parts there are four heads of four limbs.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	In all cases, the horns are more delicate than those of a restrainer, and they should be made of ivory or horn.
et soit li bouche dou fust .i. doi de large, et li marge des arbres .i. doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	and the mouth of the tube should be two inches wide, and the edge of the stakes should also measure one inch, and in length it should be a palm and a half;
et enmi les .ij. liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	and between the two poles should be two joints of this same tube, which are firmly in one and the other, about half a palm or a little more in length;
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les .ij. cornes.	and these two joints are placed inside the mouth of the tube so that when you turn the two horns, they open.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	Another form, more subtle and lighter due to its resemblance, can be made from the stem of ebony or boxwood, according to the appearance of tongs;
et ait as .ij. chiés .ij. ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et .ij. dois de large;	and have two spurs on each side, just like you see, one as long as a palm's length, and two fingers in width;
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor .i. lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes,	And when you see the opening of the anus to the whole instrument, make the woman lie on one bed, with her hands hanging and her legs spread apart,
puis boute les .ij. ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	Then insert the two spurs together into the anus, and hold the tip of the instrument between her buttocks;
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Then use your hand on all the tool, like you did with scissors equally, according to the quantity that you see open the mouth of the iron, until the bolt does what it wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	This tool is all mounted high and multiplied in their likenesses; and when you have them arrayed before your eyes, the work proceeds more swiftly and the doctors stand higher for their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	Do not lose hope in the tool you have not equipped, because its necessity is not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	When the second part is retained during birth, it is necessary that you instruct the patient to hold back her mucus and then make her inhale through consideration. And let your hands be pressed against her mouth and nose;
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	And if it jumps over this, it's well done.
Se ceu non, si prent .i. pot, et fai .i. pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	If not this, take one pot and make a lid or cover, and place herbs that can open the mouth of the marrow, such as garlic, rue, fennel, chamomile, bitter orange, and thyme.
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris,	All these herbs, or any of them, whether cooked or simmered in water on the fire; then place a spoonful or a cover over the pot, and the other end into the mouth of the marrow,
et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	And let the steam rise from within the marrow until it starts to exhale; then have it emit a smell as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the second one leaps quickly.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature,	And if it still remains after this treatment, and is not stronger, then instruct her to moisten her left hand with sesame oil or camphor, and then apply the paste in its natural state,
et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	And when she finds the second one; and once she has found it, if you catch it and gently extend it gradually, so that the husband does not feel during extraction;
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	But she must move it lightly to the right and left, and then pull; if it comes out and becomes loose.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	And if the mouth of the miscarriage is narrow, we have said the treatment for coughing and the smoking of herbs;
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	and if it isn't from all that we have said, just make sure you don't overly prod at the extraction;
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	but it is necessary that the person at the mouth of the miscarriage should be tied to the woman's belly, then apply a clove oil enema;
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	if it passes and produces pus, and there is a smell; but still, if it doesn't pass and causes bad odors in the stomach and head, and harms the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	So, therefore, suitable fumigations are to be conducted for this: none of the old have proven that the fumigation of watercress and dried figs is effective.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the tool with which one fumigates the woman during the retention of flowers and the afterbirth is thus:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	And it resembles a cane in shape, and one places its delicate tip into the fire, and the joints are wide above the flame;
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And let the fumigations be over the coals, and continue until it is done, then start another one.
de percier lou fondement	To pierce the base
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	Many infants are born who have not had their base pierced, but rather experienced an exquisite sensitivity due to this subtle art.
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	So, it is necessary in surgery that this art should pierce the correct part according to its function, and not prick with sharp needles, but protect the incision so as not to touch it.
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then apply on wet wool in wine and oil, then perform the ointment dressing until it is clean.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it won't slip back, place or insert a tourniquet cord and leave the hands bound, and have it removed when the child desires to go into chambers.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And sudden injuries to the wound or abscess do not occur; it is necessary to cope with this suddenly: if you treat them, as we have said about the tourniquet cord.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula from the foundation
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des .ij. parties,	Fistulas that originate from the base are nodal, and grow larger than those that originate below the base, or in the space of two parts,
si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe,	If there is one fistula or more; and when that swelling exists for long periods, it operates, and often produces moisture that appears as white pus or thin matter,
et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	And these fistulas are permanent; and they are known by the fact that there is an expulsion or windiness when the patient expels something, and sometimes in her direction.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if there are fistulas that penetrate up to the bladder, and halfway down the penis; and they reach up to the joint of the thigh, and up to the root of the kidney.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	And thus one can distinguish between a permanent fistula at its base, and not permanently.
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And you bend your second finger or its base, and insert a fine needle or a spider's leg or iron into the sore when there is no winding.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou .i. poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	And if there is winding or curvature, then you insert a fine tentacle, or a horse's hair, as long as you feel the tentacle or the hair at your finger tip.
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	And if you do not feel it, and there is no outward discharge or wind (breath), nor any sign of infection, as we have said:
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	Know that it does not puncture at all; if you hasten to heal.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula is passing up to the bladder or up to where urine leads, if it jumps with urine, and cannot be soldered by medicines.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	If it passes up to the knee joint, then the vein coming up reaches up to the thigh;
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	If there is no curvature and the pain is confined internally, then it remains in the thigh, and neither medicine nor application of ointment helps;
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	And when it comes to these Persian canals, there is no remedy but work, and the vain efforts of those who interfere.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit,	And in this one that isn't Persian or old, there is hope for healing with iron, as I have experienced.
et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	And it is such that the patient lies with their body under your hands on their back; and you lift their legs up to their hips, and incline their buttocks towards their abdomen.
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	Then make a test bed of spider or of snail, as long as you know where the test bed originates from.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice,	If the patient feels it deep within, it is necessary to press your index finger there.
se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	Then you will feel that the needle has pierced it; and know that it is under your finger if you sense something between your finger and flesh when pressing.
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If you don't move it, then one cannot measure it.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	Despite this, some can be measured quite well, but such cases are rare.
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	And when help is given for this, so we heat up the fine cautery according to the size of the fistula, as it was explained before.
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu .ij. fois ou .iij., tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	And the stick is heated through the fistula until it goes beyond the foundation; and do this twice or three times, as long as you know that these burned particles resemble a feather of a bird.
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	And then the tent-covered wet sponge is used until those burned particles come out, then the ointment dressing is applied over the wound and sealed.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien. Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	If it's done like this, that's well. If not, there can't be another way to do it.
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	And if it is tried to enter and does not pierce until the point that is the foundation, and at the entrance of your thumb and the tent there is a thick covering of flesh or sinew, and you see the fistula where the covering begins near the elbow.
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	If you remove up to the beginning of the fistula, press firmly before the tent, and then apply the cautery afterwards, until it reaches the tip of the tent.
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	And the tent will be released and removed; then remove those thickened flesh parts that resemble a bird's feather, leaving none behind.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the wound does not heal, cut between you and the wound, then apply either fire or medicinal treatment.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble .ij. bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	For the fire cauteries combine two things: this is to say, the burning of these heated rods, and the bleeding from wounds and the dissipation of moisture;
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	then the treatment for wet bandages or ground things, as long as the patient sweats, and the rods burn in the sweat;
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	next treat the wound with the application of hot pieces that stick to it, and use dry medicines.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is healed, if it has truly healed and does not recur.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if the fistula comes just past halfway through the base, and is distant from the body, you should press on or inquire about its foundation.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre .ij. est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des .iii. manieres:	And if you feel the tentacle, and there are two of them or a vein, or it is almost to pierce, should there only be a way of hope and no escape, through the application of one of the three ways:
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	or you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut it until the bottom, or if you can, you place a pin and then treat it in the first manner;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	and do not go too far inward, so that you cut the support of the foundation, and let the excretion come out naturally without resistance;
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	then he treats with surgery, as we have said;
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	by chance if it is healed, or you remove that covering and clean her up since she has been cut open from under the root, either by probing or with another instrument directed;
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	then cleanse that wound flesh which is in the wound, as much as you can.
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	then strive to restore the wound and keep off the fistula in the lower part of the base: if it is easier for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus,	And never are there fistulas in this manner: and when you blow into the fistula, and it is where the base lies beneath the skin above,
si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	take a tent pierced through the head according to this form:
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And tie two twisted threads together, and blow the tent into the fistula until it reaches to the head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	If it is deep in the margin beneath the base, then remove the thread from this one twisted, such that you blow on your finger or base;
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les .ij. chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse .i. jor ou .ij.;	And guide the head with the thread, and join the two shoulder bones together, then hold one to another, and let it be for one day or two.
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	And secure it every time, until the joints are where they should be between the two bones, so that they fit together smoothly.
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	Then treat the wound until it is healed and has recovered.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not puncture, make an incision in all possible ways that you can, as long as it is not too deep.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not proper to perform such placement directly and then proceed with treatment as we have said, until the wound heals.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	The form of the sharp spur that is used to make a fistula is quite hard and thick.
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	And on another side not this, because one should neither use what one shouldn't, as you see here:
des emorroydes	of lacerations
Emorrydes sont selonc ij. manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc,	Loses are of two types: or they are within the foundation, like a piece of pine resin, and if there's small ones and large ones, and in that place blood collects,
et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor,	And there may be one or more, and they are outside the foundation and at the base of its bottom; but those that are out so have little moisture,
et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	And even there is water slightly yellow or a little blood, and they have the color of flesh;
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	And the treatment of those who have them within the foundation, it instructs the patient to spread out through channels, until the foundations are released and their children become visible;
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	if you hasten, or hold it with tongs, or you keep it by your nail, then pull on its roots.
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a .i. drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	and if the thorn cannot hold by its moisture, take them with an inch or two of thread, or cloth, or a piece of leather;
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	and pull them out with your hands, then remove them, and apply some hot powders in place of the cauterization;
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, puis les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	When you apply a cautery as was said or described in the chapter about cautery, then treat other remedies until it is healed;
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	And if the foundations cannot emerge, then harden the patient's urinary tract with astringent remedies to wash out what is there or at the foundation, so that it may exit freely;
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	If the body fails to respond and if the fibers are strong at the foundation, then treatment should be gentle;
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	And you should take them with your fingers or forceps, and pull them out, then treat them in the way we have said until it is healed, and until it fears metal incision.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren .i. fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les .ij. chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille,	If you need to stitch according to this manner: take half a twist of thread, and put it in one needle, then pull the thread over and make the needle pierce through from another side, and loop both ends of the thread around the needle twice.
et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse .i. por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	And if you need it wide; then tighten the thread properly, tie the thread into a knot, and remove the needle, and do this for all others, leaving one end to absorb excess blood.
puis met sus le fondement .i. drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	Then place on the foundation one moistened pad in oil of roses or a poultice, and place it over the wound, and instruct the patient to rest.
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then let them grow as long as they can endure it, and when they have fallen off, apply oil treatment and other remedies until the body heals.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	so that drying occurs due to fire or foundation
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times there is the drying effect of dung in the intestines, and due to the nature's constraint, and when the disease is old and medicine no longer works.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	It is necessary that you place it at the tip of a thorn or on your nail, which should not be left in moisture.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	Then treat until it becomes hardened as is fitting;
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	And if it doesn't harden, start again with a more vigorous shave until some part heals, and ensure that it is scalded;
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat until it is healed.
dou fremit	When the tremor
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	Antennae are a tiny false appearance before the body, and they move quite far forward;
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	And indeed, this trembling is a true happening within the midst of human nature's workings; and we also perceive it like death by trembling, spreading throughout the entire body, especially in the hands more than any other place.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	And the treatment involves taking a reed from a goose feather or a sturdy vulture feather, and place this reed over the trembling until the purple circle encompasses the trembling completely;
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	Then turn your hand to all the cane until you grasp it completely from the tremble and put it properly; eliminate the tremble from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see something like a spider's cane or iron in this shape, make it thin all around and smooth above:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	Don't let it pierce through, so that you may hold onto both sides and squeeze it. And if you see a tremble, then apply the cautery to the tremble, as is shown in front or chapter of cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	in the shape of a bladder
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	None of the times does one make an argentary blister or an iron blister, or a lead blister; and none of these small and large instruments are made according to those to whom they are applied.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Therefore, when one applies them in the treatment of infants and those who are weak and painful, they are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The shape of the small and large blister is as follows, or how the belly is bound according to this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez .ij. pertus, et en l’autre .i.;	and there should be an opening where the belly is bound, as you see, and the head is pierced inside; and have two points on one side of the body, and on the other side one each;
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus,	And if it's the belly where we place the medicine of a beast bladder or parchment, and pierce it completely through with small punctures,
et ait entre chescun pertus .i. doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus .i. fil fort de fil crut tort en .x. ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	And have between each puncture one inch of space, then insert into these punctures one strong thread made from a spun thread for ten inches or through the entire belly, and sew the belly as if it were a goat.
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	And when the medicine is within, seal it with a strong thread in front of the tool, then proceed to cauterize; and this is the form of a circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	And let the medicine neither be too hot nor too cold, and smear the opening of the cauterizer with oil or yolk of egg, or something similar, then gently insert it;
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses .ij. mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit,	Then the surgeon operates with both his hands together, as long as he can see everything clearly, then removes the gallstone, and lifts up the patient's legs to expose them.
et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And if the medicine is seen to emerge, it pulls out as much as possible; and if there's a whole night of rest, then it's more greatly helped.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you perform a colonic irrigation in cases of stomach upset disease, and the medicine quickly emerges, then repeat until it's well.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por .i. enfant;	And if there is internal bleeding or an abscess, or the condition requires a colonic irrigation, then use a colonic irrigation tool as thin as one's little finger;
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And this is the form of a subtle cyst under which the skin might be strained:
des plaies	of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have discussed the treatment of wounds in the previous section; now we will discuss treatments for hands and medicine, according to completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse depending on how they are made, and depending on where the wounds are located, and for what reason they were caused.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	Things that result from wounds are due to the breaking of bone, and the size of a sword or knife cut, or of an arrow or spear or axe, or similar things;
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	or those that are made according to the parts of the body, such as a wound on the neck, or on the head, or on the chest, or in the belly, or in the liver, and similar limbs;
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	and I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and start with wounds of the simple head, since the memory will come to its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans,	I say that when a simple wound comes or to the head, and if the bone isn't broken, be careful whether it's due to stone or similar things, and even though the skin is completely torn and the wound is large,
et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	And you slightly doubt about the abscess: if it becomes so quickly healthy of the cephalic itself even if there is a little blood from the wound, and let it heal in contrast to the part removed;
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	And beware that the patient becomes full of wine and rich meats.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	And if he does not want to heal quickly, let his food be reduced, and do not give him wine or meat.
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	And place it over the wound, if there is an abscess that breaks open, use a wet cotton soaked in rose oil or only vinegar.
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	And if there is no abscess present, apply it to the wound, if it's fresh with all its blood, and it isn't disturbed by air, powder, which I will mention a little later;
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound has been contaminated, apply some dressings until it is clean.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large, like from a sword cut or similar injuries, and the lips cannot be sewn together with sutures, then they are sewn together, like I will explain in injuries to the abdomen, by sewing.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir,	If the wound is exposed to bone and muscle, and only holds together by a little bit, if you stitch it up; then treat the wound with medicine, and restore hard tissue instead of skin.
et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	And instruct the patient to consume large meats, such as fowl and cooked wheat, also like chickens, and similar items.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	And if you find or discover putrefaction, and it extends to the bone, then remove all the putrefaction, and cleanse with water, then treat it;
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	And if there is an artery in the wound or vein, which cannot be stopped by medicine, then remove the artery, and if you find it protruding, tie it with a thread;
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if this does not help, then apply the cautery.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light: and you should apply this powder which binds in such a way that once it's applied, the wound heals.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon .ij. parties; chalz vive .iij. parties, et le poudre subtilment,	And the way of making this powder is as follows: take one part of incense; dragon's blood two parts; powdered live charcoal three parts, and finely ground it,
et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	and apply the powder to the wound, then press firmly until it is well aired and joins fully with all its blood.
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	and then keep it properly bandaged, letting it alone without removing the medicine as long as it doesn't swell; for the medicine should be kept until the wound heals.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And you should not do this with charcoal alone, when you don't have the incense or the dragon's blood, but only that the doctor has cleansed the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	And if the doctor has cleaned the wound, even during its state of being clean, do not apply this powder at all;
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	but place upon some prepared poultices, or oats flour made with water and honey, until the wound discharges pus;
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then continue other treatments until it heals.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	And if bone fracture accompanies the wound, and it's small, you should remove it with delicate instruments;
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	and I will tell you about skull fractures after this.
de la plaie dou col	from the wound in the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	This wound comes from the neck and if it is simple, there should be no difference between it and those in the head, but if a vein or an artery is cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	If it's the nose, there should be no other tool than to let the treatment proceed and not put any restraining thing on it, for it harms the nose and causes it to recede;
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	And do not put anything cold on the wound, for the material of bones is cold, and continuity with them is connected to the brain, which is the highest part of the body.
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce,	but let it be under the supervision of medicine, such as salt washed in mild water, mixed with rose oil, and lettuce also washed similarly in mild water,
et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	And other stones within, according to this manner, and wet applications.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, so it binds in layers, then treat until it heals properly.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	And if the wounds are deep and filled with blood, then pierce them or as far down as possible;
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	And if the artery is severed, and blood starts to flow outwards, then uncover it or as far down as necessary, and if required, sew it up and cauterize.
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va,	And if it is cut at the throat or the lungs, or where the windpipe goes, by which the flesh flows,
si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	if you sew up the lung above the stalk of the throat, and do not touch the throat but place it according to its natural form;
et puis l’estrain avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then allow the wound to heal properly, and leave it for several days, then treat with desiccated ointments until it heals properly;
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	and if the injury has made an impression in the bone, then address it;
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse,	And if there are bone fragments, extract them thoroughly if you can, and leave those that you cannot have until the wound heals.
et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	And let it be drained and treated with its discharge;
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wound is fresh, apply the powder I have mentioned.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there are bones in the wound and it has an ulcer, treat it as I have described in this chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	From the wound of a spear or a knife
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	If it's from a spear or a knife, and the wound goes deep, then observe whether there is an increase in windiness around the wound: if so, you will know that the wound is mortal;
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont,	and if it's not deep and is full of its blood everywhere, if you don't put the powder on or tie it immediately in the first hour after injury, do not let the blood stop flowing completely because of that.
et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	and give him courage and keep him busy;
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie .ij. fois le jor;	but apply the attractive ointment, and bind it twice each day;
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor,	and if you do not have an ointment, place old cotton in the wound to absorb moisture,
et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie .iij. jors, ou .iiij., ou plusors;	and let the patient rest on the wound for three days, or four, or more;
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’es traingnemens d’alainne;	if there is no spasm, nor bad heart tremblement, nor Alainne's movements;
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	And when you see the good arrangements, if you know that the wound is saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Therefore treat it with various remedies and other treatments, until it heals;
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	And if it cannot heal or improve, then know that there is an abscess; treat it accordingly.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	And if the wound is from a sword or knife cut and it's simple, or worse or on the back, then treat according to what is in front of you.
s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	If it's large, use stitches; and if it's small, use powder, and if there are impregnations in the bone, and if you have cut out pieces, if clean the wound, and remove any foreign objects if they are exposed;
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	And if they aren't exposed, let the wound fester, if it facilitates the removals;
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And for other wounds on other limbs, is the judgment like what we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	regarding the protrusion of the abdomen
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	The belly decompositions are large and medium-sized and small;
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	From a major wound, sometimes the bowel jumps out, or the nerves of the intestines, by which there is an intrusion of them;
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans,	And the suture is more troublesome, and not once is it as bad as a small wound compared to a large one.
por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	Therefore, when putting the intestines back in, we would not place them directly, but rather little by little;
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes,	Because when their intestines swell up as soon as they feel cold, they return further into the anus,
et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres .ij.	And because of this, they stimulate the abdominal wound, for thus we must move their intestines back to where they normally are, as is done with other cases.
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc .iiij. manieres:	Know that there are four ways a rupture of the belly occurs:
les .ij. costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre,	The two common stitches happen at the abdominal stitch,
et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et .ij. autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	And the suturing of other wounds from the body, and two other types of suture specific to their own kind, are common for other wounds;
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	And yet, they are more appropriate with the suture of the belly, and I will say each one and explain.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer,	I say that when the wound is small, and nothing of the intestine sticks out,
et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des .ij. manieres:	And if the injured area can be repaired, this can be done through one of these two methods:
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit,	because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said,
ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	or because the intestines are swollen due to cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	And when he is cold, warm him up in this manner:
moillie une esponge ou .i. mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement,	moisten a sponge or half a pound of cloth only in water,
ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique,	when you cook with boiling water streaming and cypress and thorn,
et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	and as long as the herbs swell so they are cut;
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	and once this vinegar is strained and made to cook until it frees up, it is ready for reducing.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites,	And when you see the swelling depart, you should moisten the intestines with water or with broth that has been well cooked.
car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	for because this allows entry to very little thing;
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	and if it cannot enter, they will make a small incision with the tool used for removing the worms;
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille,	and the first treatment is to grind that which has been cut,
que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	that we should not cut without great necessity or cause;
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	and these are the instruments to split them:
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	if you cut inside in the bend and not outside, and here is how it should look:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer,	And when the wound has been enlarged, and the intestines have jumped out,
si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre,	If you set it back according to its natural form in its proper place,
se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	if you have the ability, because this is what it takes to move it.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre,	When the wound is wide and it's located in the abdominal area,
si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos,	If it is necessary to make the patient lie on his back,
et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	and place his legs higher than his head;
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre,	and if it's in the abdominal region,
si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz,	then place the head and buttocks higher than the abdominal region,
et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des .ij. parties	and also if there is a rupture in the abdomen in one of the two parts,
si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	If you understand this, let the removed part be higher than the other;
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	And thus, it is necessary to apply what I say in large and medium wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet,	For small wounds, use what suits you,
puis aies entre tes mains .i. ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main,	Then have among your hands .i., a minister who heals the entire wound with his hand,
et assemble les levres;	And gather the lips;
et c’est la maniere commune de costures,	and this is the common way of stitches,
et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie,	and you should take one needle or more, according to the size of the wound's width,
puis laisse des le chief de la plaie .i. doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait .i. boin fil fort;	Then leave about half an inch from the edge of the wound and insert one needle with about an inch of strong thread;
et perce les .ij. chiés dou cuir avec les .ij. chiés dou siphac,	And pierces both leather cheeks with both needle of the spathula,
qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie,	which is inside the leather from within, until you make it pierce that part.
et assemble les .ij. chief dou siphac les .iiij. ensamble;	and join both ends of the needle of the spathula with four units;
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de .ij. pars,	then pull through a doubled thread into one part of the needle twice,
puis assemble les .ij. chiés de la plaie avenanment,	then gather together both sides of the wound's opening,
et puis laisse .i. doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	and then leave one inch of space, and insert another needle;
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille,	then weave the thread in the same way you did with the first needle,
et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles,	and keep doing this according to how you need to work with the needles,
tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	Until all the wound is contained;
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses,	and are of average size, between delicate and thick needles,
car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	for delicate needles pierce all the flesh, and the overly large can't enter properly:
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	thus they should be of medium size;
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir,	and it is not right to push the needles too far out from the flesh and skin,
k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	let them not pierce and fester the wound before the stitch;
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir,	and then remove the heads of the needles, so they do not irritate the patient at night;
et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir,	and place tents or cloths over the heads of the needles to keep them in position;
et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	and let them grow until the wound has healed;
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies,	and this method of sewing with needles is more convenient for small wounds,
car il i soffist une aguille ou .ij.	because it requires only one needle.
Li seconde costure si est commune,	The second type of stitching is common,
et est que tu assemble les .ij. chiés dou cuir et les .ij. chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait .i. fort fil moien;	And you should join the two shoulder joints with skin and the two elbow joints together on one needle where there is a strong thread in half;
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz .iiij. ensamble,	and when you have pierced these joints all four together,
si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	then remove the needle from the part where you started, in the way one sews with thread;
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	and leave a space between each stitch as wide as a small coin;
ceste costure sevent li home,	this sewing stitch makes the body,
et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre,	and I sew a wound where there was once an opening or belly,
qui estoit navrez d’un coutel,	which had been cut by a knife,
et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant,	and the wound was more than a palm in size,
et issoit des intestines bien .ij. palmes de grant,	and let them be large for the intestines to fit properly.
et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	And the wound is within the belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit .xxiiij. houres fuer,	I brought back the intestine, and it was twenty-one hours since its removal.
et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a .xv. jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	And the wound healed up to fifteen days, I treated it, and it became healthy.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	And when the sight had judged that he would die, and this was a wonder;
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en .i. leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	and did not cure him with ointment because I was in the first level where one could not find it, nor any medicine;
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel .ij. fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	and I changed the cloth under the wound four times a day and washed it with honey water until it was clean.
Or vos dirai les .ij. propres manieres de cousture:	And I will tell you the two proper ways of stitching:
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	Take the needle, and at first place it from the outer part down to here inside;
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille,	When it has pierced straight through the artery in the right way, if you find the head of the syringe or causes pain or where you have inserted the needle,
et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	and make it pierce from the inner part to here on the outside;
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz,	And as for this stitch, know that you must sew them in the same way as the weaver sews his cloth,
et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	And when you leave out the stitch on one side, and take it again from another, until the seam is entirely completed.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement,	The second method of sewing up, as Galen properly stated,
si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les .ij. parties ensamble naturelment,	So it is like what everyone does, assembling the two parts naturally together,
et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	and apply one end of the thread to the other end in this manner:
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement,	Prick with a needle or pierce near the navel, and puncture just that spot.
et laisse les .ij. chiés dou syfac;	and leave those two joints at the side;
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens,	then turn the needle, and puncture it from below up to this inside.
as .ij. chiés dou syfac;	like those two joints on the side;
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en .ij. autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	Then pierce both on the outer part up to that inside, in two other shoulder joints which are opposite each other;
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	And this is the common way of stitching and the most usual method.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent,	The doctors say this word, and none testify to it,
c’on doit coudre le ventre a .ij. aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	One must stitch the abdomen with two needles, or where there is thread in each;
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	And one must push a needle from one side, and the other from another, like those who sew wounds;
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre,	Know that when the rupture is in the midst of the belly,
si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	The suture there is more painful than in any other part of the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	The judgment of the wound is as follows: (This refers to assessing and treating wounds similar to others.)
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee,	And it is that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, as long as the surgeon has moved it,
si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char,	so that he may be placed with his intestines back inside, and the stitches; then put on a powder to soothe the wound,
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	and if the surgeon has moved them, apply no ointment that might be present, until the wound heals;
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	And heat the thread, and may they sew up the cut, and mend it;
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then treat the wound in the same way as others, until it is cleaned;
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel,	and if you do not have medicines, put an old cotton cloth, temporarily, when it starts to weep.
et le remue .ij. fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	And shake it twice a day until it is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	For you need no other medicine besides in many situations when the wounds are simple;
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz,	and if you doubt that the wound might cause communication with principal parts of the body,
si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset,	then it is necessary for you to immerse a thread lightly in oil heated by fire, or in rose oil,
et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	and place it inside the joints, and under the skin;
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient,	And if one feels pain or gangrene in the bowels, and this occurs frequently.
si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	If black wine enemas are given, and equally if gangrene reaches up to the intestines;
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	And penetrates within, and remember that when it's in the large intestine, it is easier to heal than in the smaller ones.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez,	The intestines which are called "juvenile" cannot be healed when they are injured,
et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	And this is due to the arrangement of veins that they are, and by the subtlety of all the body, and the approach of its nature to the nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	And if the heart jumps out of the wound, then place it back inside as with an intestine, while it is still fresh;
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne,	and if it is old and has become red or black, then you must tie the area that is black, so that no further blood comes out,
car il i a voinnes et arteres;	because there are veins and arteries;
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien,	Then take what is between the link,
et met les .ij. chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	and place both shoulders up to beyond the wound until they ease the extraction when the joints are cold, and let the wound heal.
de la routure dou boueil	from the rupture of the boil
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite,	When the intestines are full, and the wound is small,
si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes,	if it can be restored in some places,
por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	because I have seen that some were pierced or wounded in the stomach by a spear;
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac,	and the wound was on the right side of the stomach,
et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	And if it became inflamed and turned into a fistula, and there was discharge and wind flowing out of it;
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	I applied treatment according to what I could do, and did not stop refining until it was healed, and sealed the wounds.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	And when I saw it healed, I wondered if the patient might have pain in their belly;
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	There was no harm, but they remained in better condition, eating and drinking.
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	And they say that when there is a small wound inside the intestine, it must be treated like this:
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie,	take large pieces of fat, then join together the edges of the wound,
et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les .ij. levres,	and when the fat has opened its mouth, place it on the two edges,
si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	if its mouth joins together;
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier,	and then he grasps the head, and this is held so that it cannot be released,
puis met .i. autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	then makes another vibration in this manner as before, until the wound is completely treated;
et cout la plaie.	and finishes the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide,	Those who are so inflamed in the intestines, and do not cause any harm to the patient,
et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste,	And if one could tie the intestine with a fine thread which has been cut from an animal's intestine,
en teil maniere:	in a similar manner:
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez,	take the head of this intestines thread so that it comes out chewed,
et puis lie au chief de cest fil .i. fil de lin subtil tort,	and then tie its head to this thread with a single strand of fine linen string.
puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	Then thread the needle with the string, stitch the intestine together, and realign it at the opening;
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	And this method of stitch sewing does nothing other than following the way of practice and hope.
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	And if the wound is large and broad, especially when it's in one of the intestinal cavities, if there's no obstruction or damage, rely on skillfulness.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	from a fistula, or wherever it may be.
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule»,	Know that every wound or abscess, when it matures, is universally called "fistula",
et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	And similarly when it is covered and begins to heal.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor,	Fistula refers to a hard and yellowish swelling that is felt without pain, or where there is no sensation of pain,
et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	And it is covered like the feathers of a bird;
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	And sometimes it leaps clearly, and at other times thickly;
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	Sometimes barely a trickle, and at other times enough;
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char,	and I have spoken about the classification of wounds, that any unhealed wound, and if there is no pus,
ce n’est fuers que par une des .viiij. causes:	this can only be due to one of the eight reasons:
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	This is to know by the smallness of the blood or the wound;
ou por sa malice;	or due to its wickedness;
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	or because there is hard flesh inside and on the lips that do not allow it to grow hair;
ou il i a trop de bowe;	or because there's too much wax;
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	The limbs are sore, and the substance is of bad quality;
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	or the medicine isn't good in the treatment;
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	or because corruption proceeds like a plague;
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	or due to the slowness in that region of digestion and delay in recovery, it is naturally expelled.
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	where there are veins or bones:
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	and I have shown all these causes, and the signs, and the treatments with medicine in this section.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	So it is necessary for me to tell you about the treatment of a fistula which is done through manual work.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	Know that a fistula can occur in all limbs and organs;
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners,	because there are fistulas that come from large veins, arteries, and nerves,
ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes,	or in the small intestine, or in the bladder, or in any of the ribs,
ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	or in the spine at the back, or in any joint of the hands or feet;
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	and if it affects the main body's function and produces similar symptoms.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	And all the ulcers of this kind are hard to heal, and there is no exception except plowing, and lack of knowledge;
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure,	and if there isn't any ulcer that doesn't go up to what I've said, and you have the intention of treating it,
et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	and you should know how to identify it. If you use a spider web or iron tent, if the ulcer is straight, inspect it;
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc,	and if the ulcer is curved, search for it with a subtle snail's tent;
car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	for the dives bend moves along the complexity;
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes,	and if it creates a tunnel in stumps of hands and you cannot find it well by trying,
si la clisterize par l’un des pertus,	if you try to flush it out with one of the stumps,
car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	because moisture can flow from one stump to another, and it can be cleaned;
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont,	Then use your skill according to your strength, that you may know if there is bone or nerve, and feel them through the skin.
et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	And ask the patient about the pain they feel when your hand presses on it, and determine where in their body it is located;
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine,	And when you truly know its location, and if it's far from a joint, or a nerve, or an artery or vein,
ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit,	or in any of the locations I've mentioned, adjust according to what I've told you.
et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	And in the bone of the other side and the cartilage corrupted that are within;
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee,	and then the treatment until it has healed,
et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues,	and if the fistula is well cut straight through, you should follow its course as much as possible,
puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule,	then I put wet bandages in medical ointment and leave them just up to the tip of the fistula.
tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	While the medicine continues to erode what has remained at the bottom;
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then I apply healing bandages over healthy flesh, as long as it remains sound and healthy.
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit,	and if it is not healed by this means, then you should cauterize it as we have instructed.
et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	and if the bone is infected by the fistula, operate on it accordingly.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	If a vein or nerve is obstructed or if the principal limbs are affected, as we have said;
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee,	And if the bone is exposed, and there's decay or blackness, until the decay has been completely removed, so the king should do.
puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then cleanse off everything in that area until it becomes clean;
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant,	And if it is not clean, rinse it again as before;
saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	Know that you are not going far up to this point:
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons,	if it discovers and desires even when you are at the bottom,
et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	and remove all the corruption, then return to its place;
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	and if it is thus healthy, that's well.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	If this is not the case, know that corruption has gone too far, you cannot reverse it;
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	if there's no other way than to leave things to natural processes;
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles,	and if there's a small corrupted bone, and you can extract it with tongs,
si l’estrai a .i. estrument covenauble a ceu,	if the extraction requires an appropriate tool for this task,
et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	And if there are many bones, treat them all, do not leave any unattended;
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour,	and if moisture opposes this and there is neither error nor fear,
si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	if you manage both moisture and heat, and free the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture,	And if you cannot remove them within an hour, place something on the wound that promotes gangrene,
et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os,	And let them grow until the hairs are completely inside the bone,
et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	Then they will have the bones a little more lightly;
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse,	And if it's a large bone, like from the leg or thigh,
si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee,	and only let it rot until all the bone is blackened,
puis restoure la plaie;	Then heal the wound;
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	and if there is a large portion of putrefaction and it reaches up to the bone;
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	if it should be sown and covered all the way to where the putrefaction is, and then treated until it heals.
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint .i. home en sa jambe,	and I will tell you about a fistula that occurred in someone's leg.
si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	If you seek an example and assistance for your work.
Il fut .i. jovencelz entor .xxx. ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors,	He was a young person around thirty years old, who had a pain in his leg due to an issue that came from within the body,
tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	Until the contents reached the leg, and there was an abundant abscess, and no external reason for it to open;
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri,	But they opened it so much due to their folly that the abscesses burst.
et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	And it consumed very little matter, and formed a fistula, and brought about much harm that all sighed at the body's heat and moisture;
et maint mire i mirent cure entor .ij. ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains,	And many illnesses took two years for a cure, and no wise person existed in the art of manual treatment,
tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit,	As long as I was called upon, and saw her leg and the remedies used to treat it,
et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	And that which was being consumed by the pus with great body heat;
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	And became red the bodies of youth, and had a yellow color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus,	I pitched my tent in one of these nooks, and then searched all the nooks,
et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	and found that each was coming against the other from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os,	So I hurriedly worked and copied from one of the nooks until I uncovered a part of the bone,
et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	And I found it corrupted and pierced, and the corruption was reaching to the bone inside;
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	I realized that what appeared before me from the corrupted bone, and I thought there was no other corruption, because only this which I took out;
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	And began to restore the wound with medicines over time, and could not heal it;
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant,	and then I started again, and uncovered the bone as before,
et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	And I found the continuous corruption within the bone, and the soreness, and then I removed it, and I focused on joining back together the broken area;
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole,	but I could only do as much as I copied out to the inside of one palm of the bone, and I treated it with all its flesh,
puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment,	then I restored it with medicines; and he was healed and joined up quickly,
et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir,	and no longer needed to restart the operation except for due to the weakness of the patient, who could not bear it.
et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	And for the fear of death which I have of him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement,	For often there was bloodletting, but it was entirely healed.
et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	And in the place of the bone there grew a hard flesh, and it was well positioned with no harm or opposition at all from every side, neither inside nor outside.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	And if any bone of the body is broken, in such a case it should be treated like this:
pren .i. liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert,	Take one finger, and apply pressure to the tip of the bone that protrudes,
et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	and instruct it to extend upwards;
et met .i. autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os,	and place a second thread of thicker wool than the first one, and tie it around the flesh that is surrounding the bone,
et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz,	and hold the tip of the bone so that you pull out the putrefied flesh from underneath,
et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	And expose the flesh on the side of the body where you see hair, ensuring the hair does not hurt the flesh;
et met .i. tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	and place a coal or a board over the bone to warm the infected flesh;
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	it is necessary for hair to be as long as one can see and feel the decay, and also to have hair again.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie,	And if the bone is decayed and does not open, and the decay is in the middle or in a part of it,
si descuevre la char toute; puis met .i. tison desoz,	If you uncover all the flesh; then place one coal over,
et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption .i. poc, si com nos avons dit;	and then let the corruption spread evenly from one part to another, and may the silk be as long as the length of the corruption .i. inch, just as we have said;
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	and if corruption is in the joint, then cut the corrupted joint, and may the bone on the other side contain it;
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des .ij. jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	and if corruption is in the connection of the two joints, then cut where you need to, as long as you are able;
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose,	And if the corruption is or pinches with the hand, or pinches by the foot, that thing is quite strong.
mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	but still it must be asked about this corrosion, how it opened for you;
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	and cleanse in every way that you can, but so that the vein or nerve do not oppose you;
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous,	know that the incisal and the seams for shaping these bones are many, according to the setting of the bones and their appearance,
et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	And their size and subtlety, and their grandness and smallness, and their hardness.
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	And for this it is necessary to prepare each type of work with its corresponding tool;
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art,	and know that the work will show you the tool you will need, according to the knowledge of this craft,
et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	and it will testify about the ways of diseases;
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	If you intend to use the tool necessary according to what is required.
dou feu	with fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	The shoulders dislocate either from within, or due to fire;
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie,	and when you have treated that burn with medicine, and it does not benefit at all,
si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient,	it is necessary to cover that limb up to its extremity where the corrosion comes,
si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	so that the patient does not escape through this gate of death, or through wickedness, which is greater than the fault of the limb;
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu,	and the signs are that the limbs turn black, as if they have been burned by fire,
et porrist aprés la noiror, puis va celle corrosions de membre em membre,	and after the blackness, then comes this corrosion of limb to limb,
et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper,	And it affects all over the body; if you are quick with copper,
et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans,	and if it's due to the impact of certain venomous animals like sea scorpions and snakes and similar ones,
se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	if it's from corroding at the neck up to the second joint, if you address it quickly, and do not give it space to extend up to the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	And if it reaches up to the hand, if you address the joint issue promptly, ensuring that the corrosion doesn't extend up to the elbow;
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors,	And if it comes to the arm, then cut it with a knife; and if it passes the knife, that is death.
et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	and there's no remedy except for the amount of its virtue;
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	and do it exactly as you would in any case with the corrosion or rust: if it comes to the first joint, then cut after the other joint;
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	and if it occurs or is iron (rust), then cut all the iron.
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	And if it rises to the leg, then it affects the knee joint;
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	And if it goes above the knee, there is no other remedy but to force the patient to death;
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz,	And the way to fix or support a limb is that you bind it above and below,
et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont,	and stretch one of your assistants under one band, and another assistant on the other band upwards,
et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les .ij. liiens a .i. spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	And you remove the flesh that is between the two threads to one inch wide, until the bone is uncovered;
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part .i. drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain,	then cover it with silk or linen, and place one inch of linen on each side, so that the linen does not touch the healthy limb,
et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	and have another wound and abscess for him to wear.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment,	And if there is a bleeding during your operation, quickly cauterize the wound,
ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie,	When you place some restraining powders, then return to your medicine until its completion,
puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then bind the injured limb with a reliable bandage, and treat it until it becomes healthy;
et je te conterai k’il avint a .i. home en som piet:	And I will tell you what happened to one man in his illness:
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu,	He had a night where it seemed like fire was burning him,
et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	And this corrosion came first at his second foot, until it consumed all the leg;
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	And when the disease reached the corrosion, he would cover his leg with it, and became healed;
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi,	And for quite some time after that, the corrosion returned to my hand's second part, and it came to me.
et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	And I applied things that caused rebounding after the purification of the body, and could not stop the corrosion;
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	And I tell you that I will pass my hand over it, and I do not wish to have hope of removing the matter;
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist,	and also doubted whether if I were to cut off his hand, he would die.
car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre,	for the strength of his will was weak; and he completely lost hope, and returned to his land.
et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	and had them amputate his hand, and he became well again.
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	And I have included this solely for those who might need it elsewhere, if required.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	No abscess forms in the inner flesh, and stays so long as to cause a large gathering of pus;
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	Then it grows and penetrates, and the pus jumps, making its way through the veins, like vessels;
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com .i. drapelz deliiez,	The skin above is also as delicate as a single piece of cloth.
et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain»,	And do not extend until they reach the bone or nerve, and such diseases are called "blind",
et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	and it is not called 'fistula';
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	but if it extends so far that it reaches the bone on all sides, it is called 'fistula';
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	and in cooking, if you make sure to cook the skin all through, and even when it is subtle, as with a piece of fabric;
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	And does not heal due to its decay.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont,	And if you have heated the skin so that it burns, and the corruption is not quite perfect,
et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	and if the skin is thick with fat, let him be cured by enemas:
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor,	and see if his breasts are large, and the womb that is in it gives off a foul smell,
adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	Thus, use an Egyptian enema made like this:
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en .i. vassel au feu,	Take aloe, and oil, and litharge, equally, and cook them in one vessel on the fire,
tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	until the medicine turns red, and thickens as much as honey;
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel,	and then take of this according to your need, and prepare it with water and honey,
et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	And by enemas to cleanse the womb, and restrain the bleeding;
et laisse la medicine ens par .ij. houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	And leave the medicine in for two hours, then remove it by pressing out;
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	Do this many times until the breasts are freed and the milk is removed;
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres,	And each time, use water from ashes for enemas;
quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus,	When this treatment is unavailable, and if you take ashes from the vine's wood, and pour boiling water over it.
puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	Then let it drain, and create a poultice, until you know that the lungs are well inflated;
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres,	and if the patient cannot bear it, neither the Egyptian medicine nor the water of ashes,
si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	if instead you mix water and honey or add a little mercury ash;
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver,	When you stir with honey and mixed wine, where honey has properties of purifying and cleansing,
et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	and the wine makes the healthy one breathe;
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez,	and when you have done this, and you have ensured that the chest is well purified,
si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li,	if you stir with what causes meat to grow in it,
et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	And you need to make plaster casts for it, and do this with olive oil and wine;
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	or you should apply various medications and ointments to it, about which I have discussed their properties or written on the use of ointments;
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer,	and if the anus is too small and cannot accommodate the enema,
si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein,	if you widen it slightly with a rod, and then insert an Egyptian ointment tent,
ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	The use of basilikon balm, until it becomes broad;
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement .i. leu ou li clistere puisse entrer,	and if the wound is too wide, stitch it only so much that a finger or thumb can enter,
et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	and should there be a gap where blood flows above, stitch it as high as the elbow or even lower than I am.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	And when the wound is in perfect condition, do not allow maggots to infest it;
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues,	And if you cannot cover his chest as you see,
si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est,	if the instrument is held in such a way that it goes as low down on him as he is,
car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char	because when the instrument is perfect, do not let it wander off course at all.
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues,	and if you cannot cover his chest as you see,
si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	If it appears in a partial manner: have the bow bend lightly downwards, and do not let anything of the arrow remain;
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sein,	and take strengthening medicines to place within the breast,
et estent sus .i. drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sein;	and keep it covered with a linen cloth that covers all of the breast;
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein .i. poc plus large dou premier,	then apply in the area around the tip of the breast, one inch wider than the first.
pues estent oignement souef sus .i. autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus,	For there is greasing with fat upon one or another cloth according to the quantity of the burn.
et le met sus le pertus dou sein por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	and place it on the burn on the breast to ease the swelling, and do not remove the large cloth except after many days once;
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe,	and the one who is under the burn on the breast, often remove it to relieve the swelling,
et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	And know whether the blood that comes from the wound is venomous or little or enough, or digested, or undigested;
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non,	And take heed if the patient feels pain or not, and whether there is pus or not,
et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sein,	and when your medicine has spread in such a manner and you see the nature that jumps up on the rib above the heart,
si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	knowing that the breast is already inflamed, and move towards health;
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie,	and then release it in the morning, or on the third day, and when you release the wound,
si chainge .i. autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	If another garment changes, and revives the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if after many days, the breasts release an undigested liquid, know that the breasts are not well.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit,	And if subtle poisons linger for a long time, do not despair of your health.
car li santez aproche. Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	for healing is on its way. For there are people who take too long to heal from their wounds due to their actions in love, and for others it's the opposite;
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	And if the food undigested jumps across after several days into the stomach, know that the stomach is not doing this;
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut,	And if the wind in the stomach takes time to pass and is far off, adjust your medicine with dry substances and their properties.
si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	likewise as a transparent ointment, for it contains a large part of vitriol, and this is the last remedy;
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	take a transparent ointment, and make it with rose oil, and season it with old wine of equal strength.
puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez,	Then he applies and uses it; and this very thing makes it better when cooked thickly,
quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens,	when ointments that harden are present,
ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	or you take myrrh and aloes and incense, and grind them together, and the powder is mixed with honey while it's over the fire;
et puis en glue .i. drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe,	and then apply gum to one and a half drams, and spread it on the chest, and each time administer or give an arithmologist length of time.
et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	And roots of this celestial, which is also like flour many times and thyme;
et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	And in using simples or compounds: grind them, make a powder, and put it on the honey I mentioned, and use it;
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure,	and if the treatment lasts long and isn't treated with this remedy,
adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	Therefore know that corruption spreads throughout the body and manifests in the bones or hard parts of the body, or in injuries.
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	if dealing with the treatment of a fistula, as we have said earlier.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	from the abscess under the nail
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main,	Panarice is an abscess that forms around the nail of the hand's wrist.
ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	or on the foot, or perhaps forms in other fingers;
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient .i. aposteme chaus,	And when it has become old, and if one does not take care, if an abscess forms.
et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	And scrape and trim the nail until you reach the root of the nail, and by chance remove it completely;
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	And comes the corrosion down to the bone until there is stinking pain, and the shoulder joint swells to twice its size, and has a changed color.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie,	When you treat it as we have instructed in the section on treatment, and the treatment does not help at all,
si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle,	It is necessary for you to cut away all excess that has remained from the nail,
puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	The fire cautery is quite effective if the bone and nail are healthy;
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece,	and if the nail grows close to the flesh, it starts to poke and causes blisters,
si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char,	It is necessary for you to place the rod under the nail so that not a single hair remains.
et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement,	and the sponge at the top, and remove this small piece gently.
et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	and place on the sponge medicinal plasters that are hot and corrosive to remove everything;
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then perform a surgical operation as long as it is clean.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	And if the corrosion is within the bone, you must remove it, and apply force, for as much of the bone that has rotted, cannot heal;
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en .i. des nous si com il est devant dit,	and if you see that the knee is corrupted, remove it at one in two parts as was previously described,
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then scrape it until it becomes clean;
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	and if it is hard and painful, and smells greatly of pain, then it should be cleaned first;
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus,	Then cut across from above on the sharp nail, removing it.
et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	and ensure that the cut does not go through to the flesh beneath the nail, for patients would experience too much pain.
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	And if this happens, place something above it to soothe it.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	The pain was originating from the hand.
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus,	The task is to adjust what is born with some men by chance or having thick flesh,
et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle,	and by chance there's a part where bones are present, and sometimes it has a ridge,
et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	And none of them are born at the root of the joint, or the birthplace is in no way to be adjusted.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet,	Those that are born from any node do not move,
et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	And he who is born at the joint of the knee, by chance becomes immobile;
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	The size of that which is well-muscled can be so light, in such a manner:
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	Cut it at its root with a broad spatula.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	That which is born at the root of the joint causes trouble to treat: hold on with your copper.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os,	In the case of a birth or delivery issue, if necessary that you first grasp the round part until the bone.
puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then hold onto the bone with an appropriate grip, then treat it as long as it is sound.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The fuses that come together at the joints originate through birth, or through the healing of wounds, or through heat application, or through similar circumstances.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	If it is necessary that you repair this fuse, so that it should be restored according to its natural forms;
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	Then place between two wet tents or cloths soaked in rose oil,
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	Or you place between two small pieces of elastic leather, until the ears are sewn together, as is fitting.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	Sewing should be done with both hands facing down, if you make that seam as it should be.
Des vils	Of low quality
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	The veins are thick, enveloped bundles full of melancholy excesses, which affect multiple body parts.
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	And it happens more in legs of those who walk on foot and work and carry, than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	So you should then administer a single purge to him, and then heal him with basilica treatment.
Li cure de fer si est selonc .ij. manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	The iron treatment has two methods: one is where you cut open to let out black blood;
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	And another method is that you open the vein, and pull it all with force.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez,	The process goes like this: first raise the hot leg water quite strongly until the large vein becomes thin.
puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	Next, gently pull the leg from the thigh up to the part below the knee;
puis cope la voinne en .i. leu, ou en .ij. ou en .iij., d’une taille large,	Then cut the vein into 1 or 2, or 3 parts, with a width of one's hand,
puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	Then raise and draw out the black blood with your hand, from one end to the other, until as much blood comes out as the properties of the blood can bear;
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	and then tie it off, and instruct that he soak up the black meat with this ligation.
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	And repeat the evacuation and cleansing when the veins are full, which harms the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil,	The method of applying leeches to the affected leg is as follows: lift the leg from below where there are hairs, if there are any.
puis le met ou bain, et li. arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	Then immerse it in a hot water bath until she turns red, and swell the veins;
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	And if you don't have a bath, heat it on the fire, and then apply it along the vein from its origin to its thigh or at the part below to the ankle;
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	Then scrape the skin with an onion, and blister each side of the vein until you see it when touched;
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	And it appears red and black, and when it meets with skin it seems as if it is a white string;
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier,	Then heat up the cautery stick until it's above the skin level, and then place it gently at the point of hair growth.
puis le cope en .i. autre leu ensus iij. dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere,	Then keep heating for one more time on another level three times; then scrape the skin over the vein until it appears.
puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	Then move to the next level, just like you did before, and place it on another hook, just like you did at first.
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet,	Then take another size, or more if needed, then lift it, and shape it to fit the foot.
puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	Then pull and lift until the second size fits; then increase in size gradually, until all strength has been used, then shape it.
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil fort double,	And if you cannot pull and lift it, insert an awl with one and a half strands of strong thread,
et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz .i. rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	Then tie it and pull, and insert another two threads, and twist your hand on either side, until it comes out;
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	And ensure she doesn't become stuck, for if she does, then one cannot milk or lift her, and this harms the patient;
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have milked her entirely, place wet wool in vinegar and oil on the wound site; and continue to treat until it has healed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit,	And if her vision is tight, twisted, and wrapped together as a whole, and she is not straight, just like we have said,
si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And it is necessary for you to cut her tormentedly, but do not pinch her; and treat her as we have explained beforehand.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	The shape of the iron with which one works the screw is bent, and does not cut,
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	And is of great curvature, for if it were sharp, it would pierce the vein, but being thick as we have said, and this is its form:
De la voinne civile	From the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	This vein is confined to legs, in warm parts where no herbs or trees grow, and in soil lacking moisture.
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir,	And by chance it might arise from another place than the legs, and this occurs due to the corruption that comes from under the skin,
si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	just as if it originates within the body like snakes and worms, lying between skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation,	And if the signs of this vein's beginning are present, so that there is a very great inflammation in the leg,
puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	then the color changes, and the vein begins to protrude outward, like the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a .ij. З., et la noe,	When the shoulder is open, it's necessary to wrap around inside a strip of leather about three and a half inches in length up until seven inches, and fasten it.
et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	and hang the leather down by the leg, and every time there is a little left over, if you wrap inside the leather, and fasten it.
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	and if it's too long, cut off a part of it and wrap again, without cutting its root, until the entire piece is out.
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	but if you cut too much, it goes into the flesh, causes pus and decay or disease in it, resulting in a bad ailment.
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	For a matter related to her condition, it must be treated gradually and step-by-step up until completion, and not leave anything out or behind;
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de .v. paumes de lonc, ou de .x.,	and there should never be a time when this vein, once it has been treated to the length of two palms or more, or up to ten;
et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de .x. paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute .i. rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons,	and an honorable person came to me, from whom the vein goes out for ten palms, and when you grasp it, if you pull one or two inches or less, then pierce until you reach the bottom,
si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	so that everything can go out; and make the matter inside empty, and apply medicine to heal from within on any day, then treat it as you would with abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet,	And never at this vein through a rough entry, and equally when it opens at the connection of the foot, or at the heel,
et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And much blood comes out, and when it escapes; then treat it as we have instructed before.
Des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	Worms that emerge between the skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués,	This disease is called in our land "beef sickness", because it occurs frequently to cattle,
et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant,	And there is a small worm that emerges between skin and flesh, and travels throughout the body going up and down,
et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	And one feels it well when passing from member to member, until it reaches the skin where it was going, and jumps forcefully;
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	And it is infected by rotting fluids, such as coming towards worms and serpents and roundworms or in the belly;
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil,	And there is uncertainty about its nature, for when it passes through the body, and goes up to the head, and comes to the eye,
par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	By chance enters, and destroys the eye; and this happens many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	When you see it being treated and drained, one can only hope that when it is about to:
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement,	So then, it must be that you bind the area above and below with a strong tie tightly,
puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves,	Then, place your hand on it and press down, and if there's a fullness when you press within the muscle, and you don't find any.
si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	if you apply fire cautery to it,
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	and the greatest harms that it causes, are when they penetrate the eye, as we have said;
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	and if you see it coming close to your eye, hold something in front of your eye tightly, then raise up and pull firmly;
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries,	and one should use the remedy for purging away body fluids using medical solutions to combat bodily disorders,
et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	And if there is a rotting of meats from being overcooked.
De la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	Of the pain that comes from wind or cold.
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres,	This disease is called "vakirir" in our land, and it is a pain that affects any member.
et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	And it spreads from member to member; and I have seen what I am telling you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	I was called to treat an diseased woman, and she showed her arms to me, revealing a small swelling in the arm vein;
et .i. poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule,	And then, it grew as big as a worm at her shoulder,
plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	As soon as possible, just like quicksilver when it is taken from one place to another;
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule,	The pain leaves the one there, and pierces into the shoulder,
et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	And then a bit later spreads throughout the body, until it reached the other arm;
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	Then it was telling me that she twisted inside the body too, just as I saw.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I was marveling much how she moved thus from limb to limb, for I had never seen this disease in such a manner.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre,	In every way, I have wished for many things to move pain of him to another,
mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	but I have not wanted it, as I see it in the woman;
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes,	and I thought it was because of this that women had smooth skin, and their veins exposed,
et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	and because of this, the constriction windiness becomes visible;
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	And they do not appear according to this reason among those who are delicate, and have wet bodies and veins that respond.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit,	And when you see the treatment of this illness, and if the patient feels pain from it, open them as we have said if they show signs of it.
si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	If you see that the wind (here likely referring to air or breath) is escaping both up and down quickly, then hold this constriction until the disturbance of the wind in its place subsides.
et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz,	And apply the cautery to it; and if you do not see it working on your eyes,
si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	If one is treating a case of wind expulsion issues, such as stinking pills, venomous pill of the viper, and similar others.
Des saiettes	Of arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows are diverse, depending on their appearance and according to the location of their impact on the body.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	The diversity of them is such that there are those with large points, and small ones, and barbed, and soldered;
et de celles qui ont .ij. angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	And concerning those with two angles, and those with tongues, and those where there are fragments;
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc .ij. manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit,	And the one who urinates in no member but does so according to two ways: or in the main body it dribbles,
si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	as with the brain, heart, liver, kidneys, lungs, intestines, bladder, and other similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	And when she urinates in no part of these members, then the signs of death, which I will tell you later, become evident to you:
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	If it is necessary for you to proceed with the extraction of this arrow, because death comes after in various dispositions;
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	And when that bad sign does not become apparent, and the arrow is not entirely out, if you pull it, and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil,	And when that brain sign occurs when the arrow hits and pierces the bone, and there is a sudden rush of fluid from the head,
est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	And when blindness and numbness occur along with inversion and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and muscle spasm and confusion in understanding, and vomiting of bile;
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	And perhaps it affects the nostrils or the ears; and sometimes it causes loss of speech and voice.
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	And there is a moist white swelling resembling a boil, and in that boil also like burnt meat;
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	And if this sign appears, hold onto the treatment, and pull out the arrow if it hasn't been removed.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	The sign of the arrow when it's drawn or retracted is that it is close to the left breast, and also feels like it might be embedded in something hard, not empty;
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	And by chance the heart also beats as do the rabbits, and during black blood loss, and brings on coldness and cold sweat, and fainting:
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	So know that death is near.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of an arrow that never leaves its path is when blood spurts from the wound without foam, and the throat swells up, and the patient's face changes color, and they sigh loudly while their body grows cold.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrow stops inside the leg's fur, it is located below the small ribs; and there is great bleeding and great pain and sighing; and all limbs from the shoulders move.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if an arrow or stomach penetrates it, perchance something of the undigested meat comes from the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if an arrow or stomach pierces it, and if there is no meat in the intestines after jumping from the wound, then there's no hope for treatment, nor extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if an arrow penetrates into the bladder, and urine flows out and escapes after jumping from the wound, and patients feel intense pain: know that this injury is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other body parts, such as the limbs (including arms and legs), neck, throat, shoulder, elbow, back, spine, knees, and feet, as well as any similar parts, are safe according to various positions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When an arrow is in the nerve or artery and it isn't venomous, as I will tell you that this happened to me, because what you did was different.
Il avint a .i. home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	It happened in one instance where an arrow struck the right shoulder at the root of the neck:
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	I tried to pierce it, and from the other side through the fatty tissue of the ear, causing no sensation.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz,	And pierced with an arrow that struck in the fat near the eye below the paper sheet.
et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust,	And the arrow was returned, and one could not reach even its tip to the shaft,
et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout .i. fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And the arrow was long as a Turkish bow, about one hand's width without an ear; the patient was sound, and he suffered no ill accidents.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	And I shot an arrow from the throat to a Christian, and the arrow had ears for this one: Arab style.
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	I held my breath, and kept it as long as I shot it, and the Christian was sound.
Et traï une saiette a .i. home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	And shoot an arrow through one's body, if it was stuck in their back or belly, and thought that they would die;
et puis qu’il ot passez .xxx. jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	and after it had been over thirty days, if it did not change its position;
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	I cut through the arrow, set the instrument, and forcefully pulled it out, without any bad incident.
Et si vis .i. home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	And if you find one who was hit by an arrow in their back or front, and the wound has healed over;
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez,	And the arrow stays within, not returning to its natural position,
ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	And finds no harm in any of its natural works.
Et vis .i. autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	And to another man, who was struck in his face by an arrow, and had the wound stitched up;
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And it was like that, causing him such great pain; and there were other similar situations.
Et traï une saiette a .i. home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz,	And when you shoot an arrow from half a home distance to the king's prince, where it gets stuck halfway in his nose,
et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue	and was slightly tilted towards the right side; and the arrow was fully inserted.
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue .iij. jors. Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I was called to treat it after it had been stuck for three days. I found the wound very tight.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	I tried everything with my subtle instrument, but did not feel any change;
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	And he felt pain and discomfort around his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette	I thought it was from the tip of the arrow.
Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	I put on his head a restorative plaster, because the hair did not swell;
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	and I saw the arrowhead in the hair.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens,	I placed a plaster on for many days, and cleansed the wound directly, then kept the patient suffering long thereafter.
tant qu’il sentit la saiette .i. jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	Until he felt the arrow passing through his nose; and I told him about it.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte,	I placed a corrosive antiseptic on the wound for many days until it was opened.
et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	And I tested it, and felt the tip of the arrow as it was passing through to the other side;
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	Then adjust in the opening of the wound through this medicament, until I clearly saw the head of the arrow;
et trespassa bien li termines entor .iiij. mois,	and pierced well to the inner ends for three months,
et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	then I separated as much of the wound so that my forceps could touch both sides, and applied it from one side to the other, but it could not come out;
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris .i. jor as tenailles bien faites,	therefore I did not stop refining and devising ways of instruments, until I managed to use two well-made forceps for it for one day;
selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	According to how its form will come at the end of this chapter, as long as I handle it, and I shall restore the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	And the judges decide that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored:
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	I will thus restore it, and then suture the wound, and the patient's injuries will be completely healed.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes,	So I told you about the quality of extracting some arrows,
si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	If you place your treatment on what I do not say, because books cannot take everything into account;
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant,	but the wise masters compare well to small matters, and concerning what is current and lacking,
trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	True to new work, and a ninth instrument, for the removal of foreign things that happen in this craft.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc .ij. manieres:	I say that arrows do not lie in the limbs where they are stuck according to two ways:
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	By means of the arm where they enter, or from another side;
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	And that which enters by the arrow's wound when it enters in their flesh, this is the shaft within them, and now it enters only once.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	And if it does not enter now, let her stay until the flesh is fully healed inside, and wait for its release;
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	And likewise if it's stuck in the bone, and cannot come out, let her stay like that for a few days, and remove it each day;
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout .i. foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And then it jumps, and if it does not jump, if you pierce through all with one thin hole, as long as the hair in between is widened, and then insert.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil,	And if the arrow has been stuck into the skull bone, and goes up until one of the brain cavities,
et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors,	And some of the accidents that I have mentioned appear to the patient: if they do not remove it but leave it until certain days after, and then it becomes equal.
car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	because if the arrow has come up to the braincase, this is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac,	And if the arrow is merely stuck in the bone alone, not reaching all the way through,
et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	and remains for some days without any bad incident, provided that the extraction tool works well.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it's so deeply stuck and cannot come out at all, then use internal threads such as I have instructed you; then treat the wound until it is clean.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	And if the arrow has been returned to inside the body so that we cannot see it, then search thoroughly for all its parts;
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	And if you feel it, guide it with no suitable instrument;
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette,	and if you cannot do it due to the tightness of the wound, and because of the depth of the arrow,
et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	and there is no bone, nerve or vein, so you make it as long as the wound becomes large;
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient,	and pull out the arrow if you can, and if there are holes in the arrow where it holds,
si oste la char qui est ens fichie de .ij. pars au mues que tu pues,	if you have a bone that's stuck for half an inch, you should know how to remove it.
et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	and then break or bend the arrowhead's ears until you can draw blood from it;
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	Be subtle so that you do not break the arrow but draw blood more forcefully from it.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you can't do it in one go, leave it until its entire length is rotted away by maggots, then try to pull it out, as extraction requires effort.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	And if blood flow opposes you, then apply what we have instructed regarding treatment as described in our chapter;
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril,	and beware of incising near nerves and veins, and make the cut so that you can extract the arrow without risk,
ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens,	either quickly or slowly, firmly or gently; and place the patient in the position they were in before the arrow struck them.
car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	because it's best for them to be as comfortable as possible, and if you can't do that, place them according to what the medical sign shows you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	The arrow that comes from another side, or if it exposes any part of it, or if the skin is swollen in such a place that one sees or feels it distinctly:
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	So grasp at the arrow from above, as long as the tongs can take hold of it, and then pull it out: if it jumps suddenly.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if she is held in the bone, twist your hand round as long as she enters the bone and widens the bone, then pull her out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	And if she cannot come out, leave her there still, and start extracting again until she comes out;
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	And if there is an arrow involved, hold it at the entire shaft;
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre .i. estrument cheveit,	And if it's bone, and you need to administer thrusting (a method of treatment), then use the instrument that's suitable for bones.
si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer,	so that the tip of the arrow enters the channel of the tool; and then apply force,
et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute .i. estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	and if the arrow is stuck, use another tool with an entering tip to facilitate extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues,	And if the arrow is encircled, it must be that you grasp all the flesh inside or where I come in, if you can,
puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	then treat the wound as it becomes necessary.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	And if the arrow hits or pierces the belly or bladder or ribs, and it is close to doing damage, and you can reach it, then you should grasp it up; if you can.
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	And watch over not to cover the vein and the nerve, and then remove it, and afterwards suture the wound; that is the task.
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And keep the treatment until it has healed.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the pincers used for arrows is similar to the tip of a bird's beak, and here is the form:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And they come in sizes: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel,	The shape of the hair on the head is also like the feathers of a bird,
por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	for pushing at the tip of the arrow, as this is its form:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The shape of the pliers for pushing and pulling as such is like this:
des voinnes dou cors communes	from the horns of common veins
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont .xxxi., de coi il a ou chef xvi.,	The veins from which we cleanse are thirty-one, of which there is sixteen for the head.
c’est a savoir: .ij. batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	This means: Two small ones that are behind the ears, they are called the "two herbs".
et les .ij. arteres qui sont en .ij. temples apparans;	And the two arteries that are in the two temples visible;
et .ij. voines que sont en .ij. larmiers des .ij. eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	And two veins that are in the two eyelids of the two eyes, they are called "aspires";
et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	And the vein that is within the forehead; and the vein that is at the top of the head near the nose;
et les .ij. guindeges qui sont ou col;	and the two jugulars which are at the collarbone;
et les .ij. voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	and the two veins that are in the cheeks above the mouth, and these are the veins which are called 'aughershire';
et .ij. voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	and the two veins that run along the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont .v. en chescun bras:	The veins which are commonly treated are five in each arm:
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	One is the cephalic vein, and it starts from the left side of the chest, and they call it 'the common vein' or 'vein of the head';
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique,	And the middle one is called 'fast' and is made up of the cephalic and basilic veins,
et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit,	And they call it 'the vein of the heart'; and the basilic either is from or to the right side of the chest,
et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile,	And they call this condition "the vein of the belly", and it's above the pubis,
et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	and that which is healed, whose opening becomes clearly visible at the scrotum.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a .ij. rains;	And the salvation tool is the vein located between the index finger and the ring finger, and it has a diameter of two fingers;
et en la jambe et ou piet sont .iij. voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit,	And in the leg and where the patella is, there are three veins: one of which is below the knee on the left side of the body,
et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	And this is the second sentence which is at the ankle bone on the right side; and this vein, which is called 'nurse', is in the ankle of the other side.
et en l’autre jambe sont .iij. voinnes desoz celles.	And in the other leg are three veins next to those ones.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	The health of the veins that are after the ears helps with fevers and migraines;
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide,	And the qualities of a healer, as I tell you, it is so that you heal the head of the patient.
et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis,	And rub the area where the veins are with a rough cloth; then pinch the patient's neck at the base of their head.
tant que les .ij. voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en .ij. leus dependens dou chief:	until you see the two veins behind the ears under the second ear to the forehead:
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	place your hand there, and where you feel the pulse under your hand, if it beats strongly.
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont,	Then take the lancet, and hold the needle right above the vein up to the bone, then lift your hand all the way up to the vein above.
et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien .ij. dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	And cut and loosen the skin and the vein well two inches deep, and let blood come out as long as you see;
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	then hold and bind it until it heals;
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	and I have already discussed the incision and the cauterization in the first book.
Li sainie des .ij. arteres que sont en .ij. temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene,	The healing of the two arteries that are in the temples, if it resembles an old embolism,
et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	And indeed, and to the eyes accustomed, and on the body of feverous tears, to the eyes;
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	And that quality of the surgeon is such as I say:
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les .ij. voinnes aperent apertement;	And it happens that the patient strains their throat until both two veins are clearly visible;
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	and feels the pulse twice on each side, and then gives judgement on it;
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz,	Then lift your hand above the vein near your elbow and hold the scalpel steadily,
et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en .ij. autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	and lift the vein at the top, and the flap, just like you did in other veins, and let out the blood according to your need;
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	then release the hair, and place your thumb on the vein for an hour, then put cotton there;
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	And then the wound forms, and you should leave it until it heals; and we have spoken about this before in terms of its care and removal, or beginning of the book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	The vein in the forehead heals just as much as the temple vein when it comes to diseases of old like migraines and hives;
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	And its quality is that the patient constrains his neck by twisting, until the vein appears;
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	then take the tool called "awl", which has this shape:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	And place the tip on the vein, or extend your hand, or another thing, and let out blood according to the amount you see.
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	Then release the neck of the patient, and tie the vein as long as it is healthy and without any operation has not left a broad wound.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	Always remember, it is not right for the flames to be too close; and the skin should be cut diagonally because the bone is nearby. By chance, they may break the flames when they are subtle.
Li sainie des .ij. voines que sont en .ij. larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	The incision for the two veins that are in the eye sockets aids the eyes, and at the nose, and around the mouth, and at the ear canal, and for diseases of the face;
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	And the quality of their healing is such that the patient twists his neck by binding a certain ligament, as before;
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	Then the healing occurs, and so the wound passes through, somewhat along the length of a small flame somewhat wide, for there is no flesh.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flames are thin, suppose they break; then pour blood, as much as you need, and then cover with cotton, and bind it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice,	The healing of the vein near the nose is good for fever, and for hot baths, and for stomach illnesses,
si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	as when there is headache and heat coming to the face, and indeed when she is old;
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre,	and it is that the sick person so constrains her throat that they pinch her nose with their left hand.
et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les .ij. narines,	and take a subtle flame and insert it between the two nostrils into the space inside the lip.
car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	for the mouth does not open properly yet, and the operation will now begin to correct;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	And do not proceed too hastily with this, adjust your treatment according to necessity then leave them alone for a night, because it is very quickly restored;
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	and it takes the form of flame:
Li sainie des .ij. guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	The health of two gallbladders helps with constriction of the bile ducts and the beginning of mixers, and much disease, and in putridity, and corrosion, and herpes, and emesis;
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	and the quality of health is such that diseases are stretched in both their necks from one to the other, as we have said;
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus .i. siege,	And may the masters being on top of the head of the patient, and the patients lie flat on one side for an hour,
puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	Then open the vein as long as somewhat wider, then drain the blood moderately, or as much as is needed;
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement,	Then make another incision in the other vein, then release the knot, and restrain moderately the veins.
que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	That the patient doesn't strangle themselves; and leaves them until morning, so that the wound heals.
De la sainie des leivres	Regarding the healing of ears
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The care of veins in the mouth aids in collection within the mouth, and contributes to gum decay, and splits in lips, and nosebleeds and internal bleeding.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	And the quality of this care involves making the patient sit before you, and supporting their neck as I have described;
puis torne la levre, et regarde as .ij. voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre,	Then turn the mouth, and look at these two veins, one is on the right lip and the other on the left.
et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	and you can recognize them by their blackness, and by the fact that inside they contain small black veins:
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance,	Now handle both of them, and if you do not know which one, and you are in doubt,
si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des .ij. voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	If you handle the larger one of each part, and do likewise with both veins above and below, because it is the same method.
De la sainie desoz la lengue	Of the health of the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	The health of the veins located on the tongue aids after the head's health, and this is done by constricting the throat. It also deals with diseases of the eyelid, and diseases of the mouth;
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	And the quality of a healthy person is such that when their body parts are examined with the sun shining on them and they move their tongue, one can see black veins on both sides:
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	Then indeed both of them are healthy, and do not extend too far down; because there are the arteries beneath.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc .ij. manieres:	The veins of a cut, which are generally healed, are treated according to two methods:
ou em poignant a tout .i. flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	or by applying a broad, smoky heat from one type of flame (like that from animal fat), or from a fine olive oil if it's like the blades of a knife, and these are called 'anisel'.
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	and they are broad or fine depending on the width and narrowness of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The shape of the mirtin flame is very well known, and it's quite wide as you see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	And it requires to open veins filled with large visible blood clots, and those containing large amounts of thick blood.
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	and this is the shape of olive oil flame:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	And it's more refined and pointed, used to heal fine veins, or one with fine yellow blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	The healing of the basilica vein, which is one of these veins, helps with illnesses that occur in the throat, and neck, and stomach, and abdomen;
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	And it is necessary for the surgeon to heal skillfully, and to beware of the artery which is nearby.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	And if he cuts the artery, and bleeding occurs, it is necessary for him to stop it, as I have said;
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	and must not be held by the flame, but cut in such a way that it resembles a knife.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	And if the basilica does not open clearly, you should extract it and change to another one;
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement;	You want no blood from him, or you release it through his arm under him. It becomes clear clearly;
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And the incision on fire beforehand, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	And if you know where to make the wound heal, it is necessary that you straighten the arm, touching the place until you find the pulse;
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	Then mark where to cut, and then bind the arm, making a cut on the vein as we have said before.
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And make sure you do not cut into the artery when you see the limb swell, for this is from the artery: hear then.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	And if you see it bulging up as high as a child's urine, and the veins are red and subtle, know that these are veins from the artery:
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	Hasten then, place your finger for a while, then remove your finger when the bleeding stops, as has often happened;
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	Fasten his arm and leave it like this, don't move the patient's limbs; stay ready for fear, don't move until he is healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the wound is not bleeding, and you need to do so, and the medicine is not at hand, if you open the artery when it opens, because the head of the body withdraws; and stop the bleeding on the wound.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	And take a bark from a broomstick, and cut it, and take one of the halves and bind it well up to the other side.
se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	If the wound stops bleeding, that's good; if not, apply it as we have said, with powders that stop the blood.
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	And the remedies should not be applied in more than a few locations for the small size of the wound and the strength of the arm's joint.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz,	The treatment of blood flow takes place in the middle where she aids in the treatment of blood near the head above, and the heart below.
por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	Because it is composed of the basilica and cephalic parts, as we have said;
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf,	And it is important for the surgeon to be aware of the nerve that's located there, and if he doesn't go far enough, and he finds the nerve,
et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	And it inflames and damages health, and in case of accident, can't heal;
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	And this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in any of them due to its subtlety, then you should cut the patient near the tool; and listen for the sound of the nerve with your power.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is a vein between the two nerves, make the incision long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	The treatment for headache helps, as it draws blood from the head, and assists with the eyes;
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	And it is advisable to treat with the oil flame or with the mint flame, as this is the safest of all veins, because there is neither beside the nerve nor artery.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	Always, it's necessary to seek the lightest method, and one should not be troubled if they have to try once more, then retry.
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	And sometimes, swelling occurs in certain limbs after the first attempt, but one should not be troubled by this.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of health depends on your thought.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit,	The first thing you need to know about surgery is that health is managed through means only to preserve health,
et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	And to avoid future illnesses;
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des .iij. voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	and let the healing take place in one of the three veins that are or cut: namely, the cephalic, the facial, and the basilic;
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	and let healing begin at the start of prayers on one's knees, and in autumn and after meals during winter, when the sign of fullness is observed;
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés .ij. houres ou .iij. dou jor.	and let healing begin on the first or third day, after two or three days.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	The healing that is administered for illnesses does not have a set time, but only when need arises during the day or in terms of sustenance, at all times and in every situation;
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a .xiiij. ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	And it is not suitable for a surgeon to heal children until the age of 13 years, nor women who are pregnant for only one quarter of a month up until seven weeks.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	And it is not suitable for surgeons to heal the elderly who have surpassed sixty years.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier,	And when any wish to be treated, in whatever manner it may be, if it is necessary that they evacuate their intestines with a gentle cathartic.
s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	If there is a bit of fat retained, so that the veins pull out excesses from the intestines harmful to the main limbs;
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	Neither does one recover from those who are too full of meat, nor those who are drunk, until they are strong, or have dropsy;
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	And if one is well informed about the healer after colic passion, and vomiting, and bowel loosening, and frequent urination in women, and work, staying awake and exercising, as well as whatever consumes the strength, or due to something from the arm or injury;
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	Then make subtle the fluids, if they are excessive through meat and drinks and medicine, provided you have the means;
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc,	Then within or during a bath, if no thing breaks outwards, to thin out the blood,
et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	and heal her of the vein from below up to the middle third, as we said;
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	and guard that day from labor, pain, and excess, and similar things;
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras .ij. fois ou .iij.,	and tie yourself and rejoice, and let the nurse be higher than whom you are being healed, and rub your arm twice or three times.
puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	Then adjust the tie above moderately, for when it is too tight or too loose, it cannot correct itself without;
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	and then rub your arm with your hands until the veins swell up and you can feel them;
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier,	then moisten the wick with a little of old oil flame, then place your left hand's index finger on that vein slightly above the elbow;
que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	so that the vein does not burn or rupture from being hit.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit,	For there are veins that flow as cords on the bowyer, and there are such that are full of wind,
si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	so that when put over the flame, they retract towards the flame, and cannot open the vein, thus one is of those;
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	and if it opens the vein, then the wound is too narrow, for in such cases, the bowyers must be skilled in these matters.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein opens for the first time, it's good; if not, try again a little around that spot or quickly, as long as his arm isn't swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse .i. jor ou .ij., et ne liier mie le bras:	And if the limbs are swollen, and the veins appear, let it rest for one or two days, and do not bind the arm:
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	By chance pus-filled blisters may come out; do not enter water, then start the cleaning if it pleases her.
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	And if the pus pocket is small, or if there's a slight hole and you doubt that it doesn't drain as much blood as you see, if you pierce this pocket itself all the way to the root;
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And let the wound heal a bit faster, so that the limbs swell; because this happens many times, when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	If you see that the body swells, if you do not restart the healing process, and apply a little of olive oil, because it alleviates the body's pain from blood, and makes the oil stick in this area of the body.
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	and thus apply the olive oil to each healing you do on veins, to stop the flow of blood;
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	and similarly apply vinegar and wine when you put them on the body; if the oil is too thick, it separates from the blood.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite,	And when there comes about large abscesses, which occur often, just as when healing has not been completed, especially if the opening of the vein is small.
si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	If you are prepared, place on the limb a sponge moistened with water and wine for an hour and then remove it.
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	It is necessary that you perform this after the blood has flowed from the vein, and if it stays in place for several days without any blackness or greenness, then it does not harm it.
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if you see so, place on it something of myrrh or aloes, ground and made into a juice from comfrey, or similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	Many times pus and appearance of healing were seen in the cure of the basilica: so place your hand there, and if you find the limb soft to the pressure of your hand, this indicates an unhealthy condition.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, you should not apply anything from what we have discussed here, for fear of harming the artery; but have it properly plastered dry to harden the area, then proceed with another treatment until it heals.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And for each one give blood according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	And if the blood is black, let it flow until it becomes red; and if you see that it's large, let it continue flowing until it thins out; and if it's too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	And for the one who is full and free, needing blood extraction, it's necessary to make the wound larger and have wide flames.
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	And for him who is weak, do the opposite, and it suits better to serve him with small and frequent doses, and he must be cured by cutting across, not straight.
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And this way of treatment saves from the spreading of blood and the entrapment of nerves, and is preferable to prolonged rather than broad cutting.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc .iij. fois ou .iiij.	And for the patient whose body needs surgery, you should give them moist bread in the juice of pomegranate apples; if they are heated, let them drink three or four times this mixture.
Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And if they have a cold constitution, they should be fed moist bread in syrup mixed with honey or aromatic syrup containing spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and grains of paradise, along with a well-smelling syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil,	And if it loses strength after bleeding from some amount of blood, then it should inhale broth of fat and a subtle, fragrant syrup.
et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	and use the other things that we have said in the section or chapter on syncope, for the evacuation of veins.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if they wish to exercise their arm and strengthen it again, whenever applicable, when they are weakened by great bleeding, they should recover gradually, according to the amount of its strength continuously.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And if one wishes to exercise their arm after the first recovery, and they are in good health, they should recover for 7 hours after the first recovery, or after the new hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And for those who wish to heal elsewhere, if they must heal on the second day or the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	For there is much blood within the body that has now heated up, and it causes fever; if one must drain a large amount of it, and widen the puncture site until it discharges through the stopper;
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson,	Then when you fulfill all conditions of healing, and place your hand on the heart as it beats, so that death does not occur in its place,
et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	And this happens many times when healers are careless;
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	And it is not right when you see the arm being pulled out, and blood coming out the second time, and the wound is closed, that you press forcefully above;
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	nor if it is broken, to immediately stretch the arm, for this would be badly done;
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer,	but let it until it heals the second time; or you place its tip at the end of the flame, until the blood which has frozen in the wound starts to flow,
et met sus .i. poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	and put on one finger's breadth of salt immersed in water, and gently press it.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is swollen, let it alone and do not squeeze it, until the abscess subsides.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if you need to bleed again from the first place of bleeding, direct it onto the same spot or into another vein, or on the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein in the arm is clean at its point of connection with the main vein because it is separate from the neck vein due to its composition.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	And the method of cleansing involves having the patient soak their hand in hot water until the veins become red.
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	Then tie it somewhat, so you can see the vein clearly, then cure now through it, not too wide nor too long;
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	and make the cuts narrow, and cure very close to the wrist joint, and if it does not bleed out, then place the hand in hot water, and let the blood flow in the water as long as you need.
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	and if it's swollen, do not place the hand in hot water either, because one puts it more in winter than in summer;
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	and healing this vein is safer than with any other veins, there being neither artery nor nerve.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	The treatment for saving the right hand from liver diseases is as follows:
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	Stretch the hand and immerse it in hot water until the vein is swollen, if you can see it;
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	and if the veins are diagonally strained, and if you apply this treatment thoroughly all over, without causing any discomfort;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char,	and don't press too strongly, for the nerves are entirely bare of flesh,
et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	And then put your hand in warm water, if there is freezing in the wound, it cannot escape.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated the blood as much as necessary, place a cauterizing agent or a seal on it to quickly solder until it stops bleeding, and thus do this for each case.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The treatment of the right hand is equivalent to the disease of the mouse, and do everything as I have told you for the left.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors,	The treatment of the stomach suits all diseases that exist in the body,
si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	Like diseases of the stomach, and retention of flowers (possible reference to herbal medicine), and disease of the bladder, and in old legs and feet, and similar illnesses.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere,	And the quality of its health is such that the patient bathes in hot water, and rubs it on the body until she sweats,
et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	And above the joint of the foot; and if the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot, it goes into several parts of the bladder;
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	So heal wherever there is a larger vein, or at the ankle, where you would apply treatment.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you heal it on the foot, beware of the nerves that are there, and heal through the middle just as when cutting wood; let the flames be extinguished.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if it cannot pass without difficulty, then place the foot in water, and allow for thorough bleeding of the vein.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	And if the healing process needs to be done for the first time, then restart it on the second occasion a little higher up because the legs are salty;
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	Do not doubt about nerves, as we have said before, and do similarly with the other leg equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The veins of the sciatic region are at the ankle bone, and their health corresponds to the pain in the hip; when it is due to blood congestion.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville .iiij. dois en tordant,	And the quality of its health is such that the veins enter or expand, and are constricted above the ankle bone for four inches when twisted,
car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	for otherwise the vein does not open; and if it does open, heal it in all ways that you can, and across;
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	and remember to grasp it when you do this, for the veins are there, and she responds greatly to human hands.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	And if you cannot find it, if there's no opening or depth on either side of the heart, and towards the small diaphragm, and guard against the nerves;
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And do such a thing with the blood until you see it, then loosen the tie and put on cotton to press; she is now healed.
Des sainies de ventouse	Pleas note that "des sainies de ventouse" in Old French refers to treatments involving suction cups (like using a suction cup for medical purposes). But it's an obsolete term and isn't directly translatable into modern English language. This might be referring to bloodletting, or the practice of extracting blood from patients as a form of treatment which was common before modern medicine times. In essence, this could refer to procedures like leech therapy (where leeches are used to suck out blood) or the use of suction cups in medical practices.
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Ventouses are made from horns, or spiders, or leeches; and suction cupping is done in two ways: either by piercing and drawing blood, or without piercing.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	And this ventilation which can cause injury is done in two ways: or it can be at all fires, or with fire;
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en .xiiij. leus dou cors,	and the ventilation that is done by causing injury and blood extraction occurs in twelve ways in one's body,
de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col;	because some affects the entire head area; and others are situated within the neck.
et .ij. autres en .ij. costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	and two others on both sides of the neck; and the sucking action under the chin.
et li ventouse des .ij. espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies;	and the suction tool for the two shoulders; and the suction tool on the boils;
et les ventouses emmi les .ij. bras; et les ventouses des .ij. jambes;	and the suction cups for the two arms; and the suction cups for the two legs;
et les ventouses des .ij. chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char,	and the suction cups for the ankles; and the suction tool does not treat of blood, but rather small veins that are scattered in the flesh,
et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	and because of this I did not weaken myself, just as one would treat with a vein;
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And it should not be administered, nor with any fire or without fire, in any illness that comes from overfullness, until all the body is drained.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	And if suction is necessary due to diseases or out of habit, we should perform it every hour at the beginning of each month, or at its end, and continuously during any period.
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	for there are those who, when they need to suction, start weighing after much effort;
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	and if for such individuals there is congestion and redness in their face, and on their head, and at the neck, and discomfort in their eyes;
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	And those who find a drop of blood in their mouth, and have fainted, and are coughing up blood;
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And if there are such things that worry them, and they see by their noses blood and nostrils and death-like things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and especially at the beginning of each month, we command to drink after three hours during the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	The treatment of the nose helps with inflammation in the head... bringing the eyes, and it is not right that this should be done after the elimination of everything from the body;
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique,	And this ventilation is at the location of the head's health,
et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	And it is not suitable for those with a cold constitution, or who have diarrhea, because this causes them much harm;
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	And it is also not good for someone to use it if they suffer from cold conditions or diseases.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And whoever uses it often becomes forgetful, and due to this, it's necessary to place the suction cup slightly further down by the suspicion of forgetfulness.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis,	Ventilation near the neck is located beneath the head and the basilica, and for this reason it is beneficial to tighten below the elbows.
et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	and in cutting through the channel of the pulmonary artery, and everywhere, and in replenishment;
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	And you should barely push it, for if she holds too tightly, it may cause obstruction or stomach and heart.
Li ventosations as .ij. costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens,	Ventilation at these two ribs near the neck alleviates pains in the head, eye and toothache, and in strangulation, and in pain at the root of the teeth,
et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	And it is in the place of the healing of the basilica; and you should instruct the healer to extend their hand upon putting it, not to touch the artery, and not to wait for blood to appear.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	The ventilation under the chin corresponds to mouth diseases, and gum decay, and similar illnesses that are in the mouth; and it is in the place of the healing of the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	Ventilation under the shoulders corresponds to disease brought about by heat and congestion.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des .iij. voinnes dou bras,	Ventilation under the axilla is as important as three veins of the arm,
car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	for it deals with blood from these large veins;
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	and instructs the surgeon not to cut too deeply because the muscles are bare and sensitive to cuts, knowing nerves and arteries are located there.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The suction cup that is on the buttocks is effective for bleeding from the bottom and diseases around it. It is necessary that the suction cup be large, and made of animal skin, as it needs to be well treated; if by chance it were thin, it would break and cause large wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The leg suction cups are applied directly because they draw blood from the entire body and are beneficial for old pains in the kidneys, bladder and uterus, as well as reducing swelling; they are located at two shin points and the ankles, and all the while they weaken the body after long use, leading to pale complexion in various conditions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The method for using the suction cup is as follows: place it initially in an empty state and apply continuous suction. Quickly put it on the wound, move it evenly, and keep doing this action without stopping until you see the area turn red and swell. Then remove it, and reapply the suction cups; take care of the position of the organs because there are those with thick skin and clear pores: for these, one must pierce once only, make broad incisions, and go somewhat deep; suck gently.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the lump is large, it might require two piercings: once to subdue the path of thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the lump is very dense, it might require a third piercing; and when we wish to extract a little blood at a time, we should only pierce once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement,	And if we wish to remove some blood, we often reinitiate it; and if the heart is weak, we firmly press down on it, and the ends are such that they pierce through instantly.
et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	And it is necessary for one who has thick skin and hardness, and those with tight pores, that you grease the hands with sucking cups from which an opening is seen and dissolving:
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	if it's in the form of a bluish oil or an almond sweet oil, or an oil from the seeds of cucumber;
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	and if it's in the form of grease or oil, from mustard seed, or lily, or chamomile, or any similar.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the pus is large and cold, take oil of myrrh, or balsam, or anise oil, and similar things.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile,	And if the patient needs to strengthen flesh and large pores, there should be no use of oil at all,
mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	But it is advisable to wash afterwards with pink water, or cold water, or water from a rose, or water from a cucumber, or water from porcelain, or any similar thing.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And for those who have some moisture, if they rise with it, or from wormwood water, and sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	And those who have large excesses can be treated with old wine or water from sulfur, or decoctions of nettle or chamomile, or others like these;
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou .ij.; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion,	and there is no benefit in using suction cups before or during the bath, but rather afterwards for an hour or two; and one should not sleep after suction treatment.
et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	and it must be done when he should be suctioned and when he has been suctioned.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	And watch over those who are getting better if they were choleric, and let them not be too vigorous and inflamed;
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	If it requires cold things, like apples, endive, lettuce in broth, and similar items;
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And snails, meat from a castrated animal, and moist meat.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	And for those who have a cold constitution, they should consume honey syrup and aromatic wine that is halfway between old and new, along with small portions of snails, snails, and small birds like pigeons.
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	And on the day when they feel thirsty, they should drink more than eat;
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	And it is necessary to give some men no licorice or mustard before or after bleeding, in order to strengthen the main limbs;
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And desanitize the air, but it is not appropriate for those who are hot to drink.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz,	The suction cups that are placed to cause irritation are those placed on the liver, and on the spleen, and in gout, and on the abdomen and uterus, and kidneys, and hip, because this body does not tolerate being pricked by needles on wounds.
et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre,	and only do it forcefully to draw blood from limb to limb,
si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus lou ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	As when we place them on the nipples when the child is born; to remove the viscosity that's in the body, as we attach suction cups on the belly and on the buttocks to reduce the size of the body.
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	And ease the pain when there's an obstruction or stone, if it eases the obstruction by its attractive power by chance, or empties the stone from its place;
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue,	And thus does this when placed on the liver and stomach when there's retained wind.
et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede,	And these suction cups are used empty to draw out only liquid; and they are not used together with fire in any way, and sometimes they are filled with water instead.
si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	As with ailments of the tears in, and in such manner we make the suction cup filled with hot water, or with water that has cooked suitable herbs for this purpose.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The shape of the suction cup used heated like this is:
Et ait .ij. dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu .i. petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille,	And has two and a half spans in width, and at its center it is hollow halfway through, so as to be able to stick out like one would when piercing with a needle,
et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	and let it be made of iron or steel in such a way that it does not hurt the skin upon placing it on the limb;
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise,	And there is in the middle a rod across of an araignee or iron, for placing a candle taken hold.
et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	and befit both large and small according to the diseases and the condition of those who take them;
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	for the suction cups for children are different from those for adults, and the thin ones differ from the fat ones.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	And one must place this suction cup thus on the limb:
empren la chandoile de cire ou .i. linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse,	Take the wax stick or one thread, and place it inside the suction cup over the foreskin which is under the suction cup.
si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	Let the heat reach to the bottom of the suction cup so that it doesn't burn the penis;
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	Then place it on the member and you should do so at the point that we have mentioned. So when one wants to use it, if heat goes up, and removes the suction cup;
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	Apply the thread in the same manner as described before, and repeat this often, if you need to.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	In the suction cup method used in pleurisy disease, during all stages of fever, there is neither a sharp nor a dull pain, and it is administered only when the body is full of water, being placed solely on the member.
et c’est li forme:	and this is its shape:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	Wounds are not treated with suction cups except in limbs where one cannot place suction cups due to their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar areas;
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	and on the naked skin of a wound, like in elbows or knees, and other similar areas;
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	And if you find veins that are in clear water without inflammation when they are clean, take them.
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	and place them in lukewarm water until they become accustomed and have nothing in their abdomens;
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	then use bloodletting and suction cups, then rub the limb until it turns red, and place the veins on it.
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	and when they are full and start to ache, if there's a place where you can put suction cups, do so, because this helps very little afterwards.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	If not so, raise the patient first with solid help, then with liquid aid, quite well, then proceed to incision.
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille .i. drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	And if the patient dies too soon after the movement of the joints, due to bleeding. Apply one liter of cold water in linen cloth, and place it upon them, until the veins are swollen;
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	And if there are multiple veins, apply powdered vitriol or garlic, and similar substances, until the veins become swollen.
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	Or put half a peeled pea on the patient's skin and leave it until they heat up on the body, this will stop bleeding now.
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	And if you need more knowledge, take other instructions.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse,	And if the veins are unwilling to be taken, rub with a fresh blood source, or insert an awl until blood begins to flow.
et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	Then place them and soon as they feel the blood, you stir them;
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And when you see that they are bleeding, sprinkle a little myrrh and flour on them, or ash, they will bleed now.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	This begins the book of fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is many times necessary in the art of medicine, and restoring and resetting of fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	Know this, dear child, that the leaves of this chapter have been turned by you, and you saw nothing from the old books, nor did anyone ever read a letter of it;
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	And for this reason, the knowledge has been taken away from our land, because I have never found anyone good in this regard;
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	And I know nothing of this, for by the knowledge of old books, or with which I have studied so much that I dealt with the art, and through experimentation, and through my life's habit;
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces .ij. chapistres ci devant.	And I have described in this chapter what is contained, and abbreviated it at the end, and clearly shown the shapes of the instruments that are used, as I did in these two previous chapters.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	Therefore, it is necessary that we outline or provide an introduction to this book containing the essence of knowledge and the chapters where the wise person applies their understanding, staying true to reality. So that those who have experienced it may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	I state that when any fracture or dislocation or twists or contusions occur to anything, it is necessary for you to quickly treat the patient on both sides and parts, without allowing anything bad to happen, such as weakness in body, children, or elderly individuals;
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	If the place where you're tightening is too tight, or too cold; and consume cold meats, this means cold cuts, and liver and venison meat, and do not drink wine, nor consume any fatty foods. Do not fill up with too much meat that fills veins with blood, until you doubt of an abscess forming hotly, or spreading of matter in the limb; if the patient feels better according to their initial treatment as they have been using it.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary that you feed the patient with meats that cause significant nourishment, or have viscosity, such as cooked wheat in water, and onions, and chestnuts, and pies, and veal spleen, and eggs, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For such nourishment leads to movement and more quickly heals the breakage.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	And know that the bones of old and weak people cannot be healed or joined properly according to their nature due to the drying out of limbs, nor those also who are too tender, such as the bones of young children;
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet .i. gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	but take care, reset the broken bone. I.e., firmly apply and join the limb together, as long as it strengthens just as it was before; and do not rush with his work, for this requires feeding on large meats, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that breaks come in various ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For a break at the neck is different from a break at the knee or leg, and in this chapter I will tell you all ways of breaking.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there are breaks leading to war, and others through preparation, as with the size of a feather for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And in cases of injury along with breaks, and breaks resulting from a small crack.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	And each way has its own method, and its proper tool for restoration, according to what memory brings to its place;
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	and the break of the bone is known by the fact that the limb is twisted, and opens well through the skin, and hurts when pressure is applied to it;
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	And when there is no twisting or deformation of the joint, and the patient does not feel great pain, should there be no breakage;
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	but it can well have twisting, or a crack, or small breakage.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	If it is not suitable for you to move it by hand, but apply the remedies that come next, and then gently constrain it now.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les .ij. parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	And know that the break that went in the arm, and are two parts out of joint, it is suitable for you to put them at an equal point, thus that abscesses have to be worn inside or outside;
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	And if abscesses are pus-filled, if he leaves them for no day, until the abscess becomes calm;
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	Then place them evenly with what you can lightly and wisely do, knowing that the restoration of this is easier than the restorations when he has pieces; then extract it, as is fitting after this.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de .ij. pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a .ij. cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	And if within the bone are broken pieces, if they have been separated by two parts, whether it's hands or feet, or at your hand if it's a small member, or by two strings, or by one string and at your hand;
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	and place the limb according to its natural shape, so that when the parts of the injured member are healed, you can gradually reintroduce additions into their places as long as you can, and remember to ensure that in your work there is no harm or pain inflicted upon the patient.
et ajoste bien les .ij. chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And adjust well the two shoulder joints of the bone according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And feel it well with your hand if you think it's not quite right: if you treat it beautifully, and don't strain it too much, don't press it as those who bring it about by their method of pus evacuation and muscle contraction do to the limb, as we have wanted many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	And when the limbs are ready, carefully restrain the patient so they do not move, whether awake or asleep, while turning or in any other way;
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	Make sure that the limbs are securely fastened so that there is no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	For when he feels no pain, it is not properly adjusted, and it must be placed in an appropriate position so that he does not feel any pain;
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	and keep it straightly set, ensuring no twisting occurs when you reset it;
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	and the quality of the limb broken is as I told you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	You know that limbs broken are diverse in smallness and largeness, and in shape.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	For there are small limbs such as arms and legs and alike; it is necessary to wrap them in soft and fine linen cloths.
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	And those that are larger, such as the chest and thighs: it is necessary to wrap them in a broad and hard bandage. This wide bandage embraces all of the large limb, and constrains it evenly from all sides, ensuring there is no unevenness;
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, .iij. tours ou iiij. selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	Then bind them with lighter bandages, perhaps three times or four according to the limb, and hold your hand on for a moment all across the bandage. Then go above the wound and constrain less there, so that the wound can move slightly away from it;
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren .i. autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	And soften the bandage gradually and gradually, until you have made a large part of the healthy area, then take another bandage and return around it to the wounded limb;
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	Then return to the part of breaking and slightly squeeze it, not too hard nor too gently, as we have said in the first instruction above.
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus .i. bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	Then place the twisted linen bands or cloths between them until they are evenly matched in size, then secure everything by tying it with an additional band of cloth. And place your well-made stars on top; if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	And if there's swelling or pus, then place something soothing for abscesses on top, and that relieves the swelling, and leaves it like this for a few days;
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	Then apply pressure to the stars, and they should be half as wide as a small cane or stick, or made from what is used to make sticks, or from palm leaves, and they should be shaped like this:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	But it is necessary that the hot iron used on the burn mark outsize slightly more than the others.
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	and should also be as long as it is needed according to the size of the limb, whether small or large;
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	then hold it on the hot irons in the same way you did with the first application, then bind an additional thread over it, just as you did on the burn mark.
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	make it tighter, but not too tight; and it is necessary that the thread be neither too thick nor too thin, and should be made of soft linen.
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	For if the threads are thick, as I have wished for works of hemp that twist their lines together, and this is great error, because the line cannot be equal if it is too fine, and it does not suit to have less than half a denier's space between each thread.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the muscles are stretched by the bones after constriction in their joints, put over them bandages of linen or coarse wool, so they do not blister.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When a wound is bleeding and the joints are broken, I will provide the treatment below.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it is not proper to strictly bind all broken limbs on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés .v. jors ou .vij., ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	For when the limbs are large, it is not proper to tightly bind them for the first few days or even up to seven, or more depending on how serious each abscess that occurs is.
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	And here is the way of applying old plaster to restore breaks, dislocations, and twists: take some flour that stays on mill walls and mix it with plenty of eggs. Create a paste neither too thin nor too thick, use this application method, which is the common way of applying restorative plaster in various situations, equally suitable for men, women, and children, as it isn't overly harsh or cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another way to apply plaster that restores fractures and dislocations: take 3 parts of barley, dahlia, rue, and asafetida, and add gum Arabic and mint, with a total of .x.З.; myrrh and aloes, totaling .v.З.; garlic, in the amount of .viiij. З.; grind these ingredients to make a powder, then mix it thoroughly with eggs; if the consistency of this plaster is warm, use it for treatment, as it has a good composition, quickly sets broken bones right, and is effective on many people.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .viiij. З.; acaice vi. З.; bolic armenic .x. З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another method of plastering suitable for twists: take mugwort and wild savory, in 10 parts; myrrh and aloes, in 8 parts; cassia, in 6 parts; balm from Armenia, in 10 parts, grind well, mix with water or enough egg white, and apply.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu. Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	Another method of dressing joint injuries and exposed bones, to alleviate pain and help heal wounds: take new wool, cook it in fat and oil, then apply it on the wound. These dressings don't fully heal but are better for soothing abscess pain, and properly relieving bone pains.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another method of dressing broken bones for healing: take dried fig leaves and terrestrial elm leaves, grind them together, then apply as a plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme. Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Another method for dressing in the restoration of bone fracture and reducing pus discharge. Take root of wild marjoram, chamomile, violet flowers, groundnut flour, each of one part; grind them, mix with wine, and if your limbs are warmed, mix it with moist coriander water, or water, and use it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre. Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Another method for dressing better than the first one when pus is being restored within the limb. Take roots of wild marjoram and sesame seeds, balm, melilot, and mint, as well as violet and chamomile flowers, from each take a part; grind them, mix with salt water or sweet water, or wine according to the heat of the limb and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Ypocras in his book states that only balm made of beeswax and oil should be applied to the broken limb for restoration purposes, and nothing else. He also indicates it should be between two substances that are neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems like Galen suggests we should apply something to the broken limb for restoration; some things that are dry but a bit warm, such as mirr (myrrh), aloes, and incense, and similar substances, just as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another way to plaster for injury and pain: take maguey (agave) and wool from human corpses, or bird feathers, and mustard leaves, and equal parts of these, grind them, and make a plaster with them and apply it.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors	And then remove a little later, and be careful that the patient does not feel any pain, nor does the bone of its place move; if not removing with hands soon.
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	And if pain comes to the limb, or itching, without rest or swelling, then hurry, and remove it, and apply the plaster now; take a light cloth and a wet sponge from the sea, and immerse it in water, and hold over the area until the itching stops and the pain is soothed.
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	Then let the limb rest for an hour, then place it on dry wool, soaked in water or rose oil, and bind it with a cloth until you are sure of removing any pus.
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let the inflammation and pain in the limb settle, then relieve the discomfort, then continue with gentle re-bandaging, and a little plaster, but do not bind it as tightly as before; proceed with great care until it is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you notice that pus and redness, pain, swelling are still present everywhere in the area, indicating inflammation, then you need to apply plaster and bandage again, so start doing this as you did before, equally.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés .iij. jors ou .iiij. ou .v. ou .vij.; et aucune fois le laisse .xx. jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	And if you don't observe any of the conditions we've mentioned for the limb, or if it doesn't resolve until after three days, four days, five days, seven days; and each time, let it rest for twenty days, according to what is observed, as long as the healing process continues, approaching adjustment with flesh.
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	Therefore apply the constraint more than initially, and let his flesh grow bigger, as I said before; and if you see that his neck dries out more than it should, know that no improvement can come.
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	Apply hot water every time you reset the neck, and do this once a day, and loosen the joint a little.
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	Through this process, then cut the dislocated limb and treat it immediately as the laymen do, which results in permanently twisting the member back into place: this is harmful, and such treatments are dangerous. I see no other solution than to rest and properly open it.
des diverses manieres de brisure	Through various methods of breaking up
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	Many methods of fractures exist, and various shapes occur, with their causes being distinguished;
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	There are fractures caused by the impact of a sword, and necks crush all the bone up to the syfac which is below the bone, such as what a hammer or staff does; for this reason, this method of fracture is called 'crushing' or 'smashing'.
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	Or when the sword crushes the bone from above without piercing it, this method of fracture is called 'absolute' fracture; and both large and small wounds result from these two types of fractures.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is sequential impact, or a crack or neck of stone, or through stone, or other similar occurrences.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a break at the bone, which comes up to the membrane beneath the bone, or above it, and this wound is either large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	And if there's a wound that reaches into the bone as thin as a hair, and this crack is small, and because of this, it's called this 'hair-like' break;
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if the wound is made by striking with a stone or falling, or from some other cause, causing part of the bone to be pushed in and resulting in fractures where the limb ends like candle holders when they crack on the vessels; it happens inside the stone.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	And this happens more frequently in those with softer bones, such as children's bones;
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And occurs in all these ways of breaking where small fragments are extracted as with nuts; and I will speak about it in its proper place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And know all ways of breaking through extraction from them, and investigation with attempts, and through the corrupted matter which is upon them.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The appearance of hair is known by this: when one has exposed the bone and rubs it together, then the dark fracture opens.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of fractures, be vigilant about maladies and if you see no adverse event such as vomiting bile, loss of consciousness, stretching, swelling, fever ague, and if the eyes emit and turn red or other similar symptoms in various conditions, it cannot be healed without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see an alarming occurrence, yet still hope for recovery, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the nose comes to you first, and it's in winter, it is fitting to remove the bone before the fourteenth day after the month you could.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it's in summer, hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the pus under the bone becomes infected, and the accidents we have said occur.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues,	And if the bone shatters up to the membrane that covers the brain, it is necessary for you to split the broken part like this: and take hold of the head from the patient's side, and uncover as much as possible on the bone in all ways you can, and more than enough according to the shape of the wound.
et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	And if the flow of blood comes to reveal the bone, or pus pocket, then assist with what is required, and it is that you fill the wound with moist cloths infused in rose oil;
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc .ij. manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And let the wound rest until the pus pockets are relieved and there's assurance of blood flow; then begin inside the bone to extract, and this is done according to two methods: one method is that you cut in a narrow incision at the front, and it's the shape:
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then make another cut of about double the size of the first one.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second method involves making various cuts of different sizes, some narrow and others wide, with sharp points, made from iron; and you should do this gently so as not to injure the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is protruding and hard, it is necessary that you puncture through it internally, in such a way that you administer cuts with needles, not entirely so that they do not pierce beyond the bone's edge, and must have above the point a margin or one circle, which does not let the point pass beyond the bone; and you must have more than this, so that each goes into its place of the thickness of the bone, so that you have needles for all its edges; and this is the form of the three ways of using needles:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The quality for piercing through the bone internally is that you place one needle on the bone, and twist with your fingers until you know that the bone is pierced. Then put the needle elsewhere a little after, and do this all internally. After that, cut out the space between the parts of the bone using the incisors, and do so more finely and gently than possible, as we have said, until you bring the bone to your hand or any tool you have such as forceps, tweezers; and be sure not to touch the brain nor the spinal cord.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout .i. autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	And when you have pierced and cut the bone, it is necessary that you refine what remains of the bone with all one other tool resembling an incisor, but it must be stronger and more delicate than the other incisors;
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a .i. des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And if it stays without any small bones, or no scales, then gently manipulate with two fingers. Then heal the wound with bandages and treatments as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And another way of treatment is this which Galen stated, who says it is safer; and he pulls very strongly, and that's his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first to uncover part of the bone, where the break opens and moves, so that once you have uncovered that part, you will place under the tip of this oblong incision, which has this form:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en .ij. costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	And do not cut from one side only, and make the cut on both sides of the bone, so that when you cut it is towards the bone; then strike with a small hammer upwards, so that you gently scrape the entire surface of the bone, and take care not to damage the mesh that's there.
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	If it's close to bone, gently squeeze it, for bone reacts well without harm, and without fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the bone break doesn't go through the membrane, and only part of the bone is cut above, with small pieces remaining, after smoothing that area it is necessary to remove the scales using a fine shaver you must have in various quantities. To apply the most suitable for each place according to the work and the shape of the break.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	When facing large shavers, then proceed to finer ones, and never cease this practice until it's done well.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other hair cutting tasks and subtle breaks, you must adapt according to their direction; and this matter is not resolved for him who has devoted his study to this craft.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes .i. drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	And if the scar is uncovered, it is necessary that you take one linen bandage according to the amount of the wound, and smear with oil of roses, and place it on the wound;
puis pren .i. autre drapeil doublé en .ij. ou en .iij., et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus .i. autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	Then take another bandage doubled up to two or three layers and soak it in wine and oil of roses; place it on the first bandage; do this as gently as you can without burdening the scar, then apply another layer over it, without pulling it too tightly so that it only touches the wound.
et le laisse ensi .i. jor ou .ij., tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	Leave it like this for one or two days until the abscess has subsided, then remove the bandage and administer remedies such as the roots of lavender, flour of myrrh, incense powder, and other similar items; make a powder from these things, apply it to the wound, and then administer further gentle medicines without causing irritation.
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	And see that the wound is clean immediately, do not leave any pus or allow it to coagulate, because when blood clots on the brain's tissue, it circulates and spreads, causing great mischief to the patient; for when one places something sharp there, it pierces through from above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Therefore, take heed, if no accidents befall the patient as we have said, if it is doubtful, then there should be no fear.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et .iij. parties d’oile roset et en glue .i. drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	And if the illness does not come from anything that we have applied to him, given its nature of effect, should it be that case you must take a part of honey and three parts of almond oil, mixed with one spoonful of glue, then place this on your wound.
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Following are the methods of treatment until it becomes healthy.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Know that neither of the two neck bones above, or one by itself, should be broken for this reason; they are two bones. The one below is cartilaginous and does not break, even if you try to bend or twist it, and afterwards it heals.
Et se l’une des .ij. parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	And if one of the two parts is broken, you should bend your small finger or part of the neck, and make the same break inside with your index finger, and in front to the side, until the neck revives according to its natural shape;
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	Do this gently, and be sure that the patient does not feel pain through your operation.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is in the part above the nose, and cannot come to his nose, then it's necessary that you place him level with the head of a rod a bit thick.
Et se li brisure est de .ij. pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	And if the break is in two parts, then remake it, and hasten to restore the first day, if you can;
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	But if not, after the seventh or the eighth day, when the abscess has calmed down, then apply a poultice of linen to the head near the nose; if the break is in one part.
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Or you apply another poultice on the other side, if the break is there; and let them be large enough to fill the depressions near the nose.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor. Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	And it is said that one must moisten the tents with butter and change each day. I do not think this is right, but they should be moistened in the preparation of an egg yolk mixture and powdered flour; then let the tent remain until the bone is firm and the cartilage hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And sometimes one uses goose feathers instead of tents, and if it is one egg's worth of fat in the middle, and the wound heals, and breaths through the patient; then do whatever you see fit.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if pus comes out through the nose as you are working, then put moistened lint or cotton in oil mixed with rose water, or a spoonful of almond oil.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	And if abscesses do not occur, then apply a poultice on the surface, made of sawdust flour and incense powder mixed with beaten egg yolk. Then place light bandages over it but do not tie them tightly.
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	And if the fracture is small and broken into many pieces, then use tools suitable for this when extracting them, first cut along the break, and treat things that are in the contaminated flesh, and suture it. Then cover with suitable poultices or ointments.
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there is no wound within the bone, then treat with lint, until it has healed. Then place on it pieces of plaster, while it is still healing.
de la routure de la mandibule	On the rupture of the jawbone
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jawbone is broken outwards, and there is no wound outwardly visible, only the break is outwardly present, not being split into two parts externally but cracked internally. If one knows this lightly.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	It is necessary; if the breakage occurs in the right part, you press your index finger into the mouth near the wound. And if the breakage is in the left mandible, then press your index finger of your right hand, and gently press the break internally, and perform this action with the other hand outwardly, making sure it's even.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the breakage of the jawbone is split into two parts, it should be treated with an extension of both hands until they are even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if the movement of the teeth occurs, or a rupture, hold them with a thread made of gold, silver or silk. Then place on the broken mandible wax, and place underneath two double cloths; then place on one cloth a large triangle well made, or an equal piece of leather long and wide according to the mandible's size. Tie it in place as much as you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and have them eat light meats.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	And if you notice that the figure changes, release it on the third day and then reposition what has become distorted; apply plaster with some powder from a mill mixed with plenty of egg or saffron flour after removing the wax; place wool under the plaster for warmth, and if the plaster hardens and the patient's position does not change, let them remain like that until they heal; many recover in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if it comes to incision at the foot, then apply what we have instructed many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is both fracture and wound together, reward is null for any bone fragment that has been removed; such subtlety of extracting requires instruments suitable for this.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, enlarge it with fire according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all these pieces and there remains none, if the wound is wide, place one poultice suitable for this over it to encourage flesh growth until healing occurs.
de la forcele	by the strength
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The force breaks multiple times in front of the shoulder, towards it, and the breaking occurs in three ways: or it is broken and severed in two parts, with pieces present, and it is easier to restore; or there is a break accompanied by injury.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And for the procedures when the break is due to injury, have two ministers, so that one examines the shoulder where the force has broken; and the other extends the neck towards the part. Then set the break equal with your hands, so that its form be as it should, and let not any appearance or movement be seen.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you need to extend further, place a round sponge of cloth or wool under the shoulder towards the leg; make its size according to your needs. Stretch and lift the broken force, hold the sponge in your hand so that you can set the break equal, as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot draw the head of the force to the outside due to it coming forwards, then the patient should lie with their head on their shoulder blade, and place a pillow under one shoulder. The attendant should hold the shoulder down as long as the bone of the force is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then address the break with your fingers, and if you find debris inside, it is necessary to cut through. And pull the pieces gently, and if the bone cannot join by any means of pressure, then cut at one of the incisors that you have; but place this instrument against the force so as not to damage the gum:
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait .ij. chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	It should resemble a spoon, not being inside the cheek, and be as wide as it needs to be, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the work; and have two tips, as you see, and make one wider, and the other narrower, just like the cut made in the wound when treating the bones.
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	And when you are assured of the incision's presence, if you cut the wound, and if the wound rupture is small, or if you doubt about the incision, if you cover the wound with bandages and tents, according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if there are incisions from them that come out, if moisture one, apply oil and rose water and wine, and place it on top.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	The grinding of the bone, when it involves wounds and surgery, is to put on the bone a plaster made from powder from the mill and beaten egg white, and place light bandages over it, and put a ball under the armpit if you need one;
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met .i. drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de .iij. dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	Then take a very large bandage of one palm in width, then put two layers of cloth over the bandages and apply plaster; then take a slender stick of three inches wide and long, wrap it around this bandage so that the tip of the bandage hangs down.
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	And place the metal plate on the burn, and turn the bandage around the neck, and over the healthy arm, and over the diseased arm; and correct each part separately. And when you see that the healing is approaching the injury site, and you clearly see that the metal does not move above the broken bone, then reward yourself every day, and when you have removed all the bandages, then keep it restrained.
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort .i. petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a .xx. jors;	Let the disease heal on its back, and apply it when he sleeps. Place a small pillow under the shoulder to lift the shoulder up; this will relieve the strain of healing by aligning the shoulder blade, or tie his arm around the neck, and do not untie him lest any unfortunate events happen, for at most 20 days;
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en .xxviij. jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	Then restart the plastering if you see that it is needed, and apply and leave him like this until he recovers. And she/he will recover at best in 26 days, and less in some cases for certain individuals.
de la brisure de l’espaule	From the breaking of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus .i. drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en .xx. jors ou en xxv,  Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	Sometimes the shoulder breaks at its end or in the middle, and if it's damaged only on one side; you should handle it according to the shape of the break, and reset it according to its natural form, using any methods that are possible. Then apply with powder from the mill along with beaten eggs, light layers, and place two cloths over it; then place a wide and subtle slab, slightly larger than the shoulder, and ensure there's no movement in any part of the shoulder, applying linen strips to cover the slab evenly; and then compress tightly into one large band firmly, so that the slab doesn't move from its position, check each day; and with every slight loosening, you should compress again, ensuring the slab remains in place if it has moved out, and have the patient lie on their side; and the shoulder is restored in 20 days or 25. And when this number is completed, you can release them, provided you are sure, for it's not bone that quickly sets easily.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of the bone is exposed and not covered with skin, then it should be handled like an abscess from a broken wrist, and you do what we have said about treating a wound in the first chapter.
de la brisure dou pis	From the break of the foot
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer. Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	The feet are sometimes broken in the middle but this happens rarely; it does often occur at the end. When it is broken inside, it declines downwards and outwards, causing great pain for the patient, loss of consciousness, and vomiting blood, and opens within the broken bone, and one can feel well that something has happened.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And for the restoration, if the limbs lie flat on his back, and you place him, then between the shoulders, press the shoulders, and join the ribs of both sides to your hands, and apply gentle pressure in all manners that you can until the figure of the bone is as it should be; then place plaster and bandages over the delicate salted essence or a lighter kind of paste, and wrap it with one cloth, and fasten it onto the broken bone so that it does not move. Then return his back to its original position, bind it together properly, and reward each hour by turning him gently on his side; if he shifts too soon, then you would restrain him again; and if it suits, remove it due to corrosion or itching in the area, or pain or abscesses that come about at the back, or if he needs it, quickly release it, remove the plaster, and reposition as per treatments. Then reapply the plaster until it becomes sane.
de la brisure des costes	Of the breaking of the ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	Know that the breaking of the ribs only occurs behind the large spine and inside the back, and does not bend in this manner because they are oily; one can sense this well during examination at the chest.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient. Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And for the restoration if it is necessary to place the broken ribs evenly, just as it should be. And then apply the plaster, and tighten with a strap if needed.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the breaking of the ribs is occurring internally, the patient feels intense pain and punctures, like from crying, because the bone presses on the lining; and there are pimples, and sudden vomiting and a large amount of blood discharge, and this indicates serious illness, and the elderly have experienced great distress.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if someone says it is necessary to give foods that fatten the stomach, in order to expel the gas outward.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not do this; if no abscess was there, then no chaulze (a type of cauterizing agent) should be used.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it did come about, then heal it.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And it's said that none of us puts on suction cups around the neck in order to suck out phlegm, and this is considered reasonable; still, there's doubt as to whether the suction cup attracts excess phlegm into the neck due to its position.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they say that for the body of any one who must have a wet wool cloth with hot oil over it, and place cloths between the ribs to make the wound evenly hot inside, then apply the treatment for bleeding wounds, meat, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz .i. estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez. Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels intense pain that cannot be borne by the bone piercing the skin, there is doubt in the patient, whether it's necessary to cut into the body near the broken rib, and it's advised to place one instrument between the ribs to hold back fluid; then one must cut through the bone, drain lightly, and then stitch the two wound edges together, if they're large, and treat with plasters until healed. And if pus forms, one should put wet cloths in oil on the body, and place them over the wound; and treat while taking into account what's suitable for pus formation, and be careful where it is necessary on the ribs or anywhere else until healed.
de la brisure dou col	Of the breaking of the neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	No fracture occurs at the neck's bones, nor does bending occur. And similarly with the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent. Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	And when this happens to none and you wish to determine if it will heal or not, be cautious as you observe if his hands are swollen and dead, and cannot move or stretch. If you stick them with a needle and they don't sense anything, know that it is more dangerous in many conditions. And if he remains insensitive when they are restrained and then released, know that the joint of the bone has been saved, and the patient has been cured, provided that proper treatment was given.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit. Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet. Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	And when this sort of thing happens to the spine in the back, and you wish to determine if it will heal or not, be cautious as you see that his joints are softened and that there is a condition resembling windiness and weakness along his back; and if one observes him over his belly, he experiences an inability to void. And when he attempts to sit on his back, he cannot do so. Know that this is dangerous: if there's no work in its treatment.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if such an event does not happen to him, then it is a simpler matter.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the treatment is that you remove any abscesses if they are there, if you put on clove or egg yolk oil on the spine where it's done or on egg yolk oil, until it calms; then apply one of the soothing plasters and let them dry, bind with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest. And do not sleep on that part where they feel pain, until he recovers.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any bone splits open, you must cover it with a cloth; and remove the bone, then join the two sides of the wound together if it's large, using stitches, then treat with greased ointment until he heals. And if the tip of the bone is broken, which is called 'the tip of the knee', you should pinch your left hand's pouch against your right at your strength, then apply a plaster and bandage as needed; then squeeze it tightly, and for any split bone, cut and remove it, treating the wound until it heals.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	From the breaking of the bone in the hip
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	Sometimes the hip bone breaks and when it does, if there's a slight discomfort in the head; and stretches out long, declines towards the kidneys, comes to the patient's pain in the limb, bruising, and swells up where it is broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And for the restoration, you must extend your hand upwards as far as possible when you are over the breakage area; and know where the breakage is and its shape. If the breakage is only in the head, apply an equal pressure to that breakage point until it returns to its natural alignment.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the breakage is along the length or it declines towards the inner side, guide the patient so that their abdomen supports it, until you achieve the restoration of this breakage.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have placed it evenly, put it on the plaster, then place it onto a stick or a piece of charcoal, and hold the wound steady so that it does not move. And support the limb under the ribs, until the wound heals evenly.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	Instruct the patient to sleep on his side or on his back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if the abscess bursts and pus comes out, do not touch it until the pus in the abscess is relieved. Then place it on what we have mentioned before; then return to the treatment and apply according to how it should be done, as long as there are no bad incidents; this is the method.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the breaking of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The assistants are those that lie between the elbow and the shoulder head, and if it is broken, one must restore it according to one of these two methods: where one method is for you to hold a rod evenly in the middle, like this shape:
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And fix as two shoulder joints, and bend them upwards, placing the patient's elbow on one spot; then let your broken arm fall onto the rod until it reaches the armpit, having made a bend of the rod halfway. Then position yourself above any heavy object or with the support of your attendants hanging downwards; then place the wound's breakage in an equal state to their hands together, until the broken part returns as it should be.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other method is that one arranges the wound on their buttocks, and ties their hand to their neck, then instruct two attendants that one shaves where there's a breakage at their hands, and the other removes from each side up to half an inch, and extend each person to their respective sides.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint .i. liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part. Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes .i. liien moien desoz l’assele, et .i. autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre .i. liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if you see that extraction is more forceful, hold one band near the wound and another above it, spreading each of the assistants to their part. And if the wound lies close to the head of the shoulder, it is necessary to place half a band midway on the socket, and another towards the knife, near the wound; similarly if the wound is facing the knife, then one should gently apply force, without strain, until the wound is level with the top and the knife edge; afterwards make the incision equal, as fits, and restrain it, so that abscesses do not occur.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if sores occur on the heels, do not restrain them for more than seven days, and place wet linen and rose oil over it until the sores on the heels are relieved; then you should restrain them, and the way to restrain them is that you put plaster over the sore. Then assemble the arm against the shoulder support, and place your hand on the shoulder or chest; apply a cloth and restrain it over the shoulder support and the arm, so that the arm is in its natural position, without anything preventing it, or if the bone is not displaced.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you suspect that the bone does not move, use a brace, and place a wider and stronger brace under each wound compared to others, and leave an inch of space between each brace. Make sure each brace is large enough to pass through the wound by three inches from either side; then apply force on the braces as I instructed at the beginning of this chapter on wounds, applying more force than less when pulling apart.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns .iij. jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois. Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	And if you see the setting of the teeth, and the constriction, as we have said, in the ear that you restore the broken member, and you doubt about incision pus, if you leave it to be bound until the seventh day, as we have said; then examine every three days the bind, ensuring no itching or swelling appear at the site, or no ulcers can come to the limb because of its being too tight. If it's correct, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés .iij. jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire .i. cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse. Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en .xl. jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.  Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier .l. jors ou .ij. mois.	And if no such events occur, nor the setting of the dislocated joint, then let it heal for two or more days and allow the patient to rest on their back with their hands on their stomach; and place under them one cushion full of even wool, and watch every hour during the day that the figure of the broken limb does not move or soften the ligaments; if it heals by the virtue of medicine, and gives meat as we have placed before, in such a way that the meat is at its finest stage; and when they begin to recover, let them be large. And usually, the shoulder joint and leg should be recovered within forty days altogether; then one must release the dislocation and administer baths and medicines for the wound to heal properly. If there are ugly or tangled ligaments, it may need to remain under dislocation for two or four months.
de la brisure du bras	"Of the breaking of the arm"
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is made up of two bones, which are called the "foscile" pair. Of these, one is small and it's this one that surrounds the hand; and the other is large, and it's this one that is underneath, in front of the small finger. Sometimes only one of the large fosciles breaks, or sometimes the smaller one does, and occasionally they both break together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble. Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	When the small bones break, the treatment is light, both for restoration and healing; and when the large ones break, the healing process is poor, it's worse than if they broke together. If it's only the small bone that breaks, then it's sufficient to gently extend it a bit and make it even.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus .i. cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et .i. cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a .i. liien, et uns autres ministres a .i. autre au desus. Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And if it's the large bone that breaks, you should strain harder; and place him on one cushion, and raise the hand of his side higher than the others, and make each finger lower than their counterparts, and have the patient cross their fingers with themselves, and another cushion in front slightly higher to prevent any discomfort. Then extend both the doctor's arms towards the elbow part beneath their hands, or at a single elbow point, and one assistant at a single point above. And then place them even, according to their best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if in the breaking into pieces, you place each piece in its own place, and if there is none of them that holds onto his sense, and you cannot restore it to its place, then cut on top of and through the bone, as we said previously.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if with the wounding in an injury, I spoke about it in the singular chapter; then take care of the treatment.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue .i. drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie .i. drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez. Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir vj. esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en .ij.; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit. Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And if during the beginning of the restoration, abscesses appear, then apply a dressing.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer. Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And if any bad incidents happen to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, it is necessary that you immerse the limb in hot water until that itch is relieved; and let the limb not be allowed to rest. And then resume tightening, and once the ligament has been severed and the bone exposed, and similar actions have occurred, guide them accordingly.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if precautions are taken so that no injuries can come to the limb because it is too constricted, it is necessary to soften it with heat for a short time and leave it like this for several days until the pains disappear, and then you restrain.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a .xx. jors. ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en .xxx. jors ou en .xxxv., et par aventure en .xx. jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	And if none of the things we have said come to pass in the patient, or if he is not cured after twenty days, then allow him to move his hands towards his neck, and make sure that his neck muscles are evenly aligned, while taking care to avoid movement and digestion, and sleep on his back; know that this healing process takes place in thirty days or thirty-five, and by chance in twenty, depending on the compositions and the nature of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	Of the breaking of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	You know that on the back of the hand and with us the bones suffer little breaks, and no more than bend many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	And when the heel of the hand is broken or bent, it is necessary that the muscles heal in line and straight ahead just as they are; then place your hand on the stretched bed, and stretch out the fingers of the broken bones, and place them evenly under the eyes, until they are well joined; and apply the plaster and bandages, if there are no abscesses, then put an awl according to the size of the limb; and wrap it in one strip of linen.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the break is in the webbing between the toes near the belly of the hand, make a roll of linen cloth, and instruct the patient to place it on their broken toe; then stretch it with a long strip of linen, and position the awl as large as the hand's heel, stretching it accordingly.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the break is at the front, it should be that you place a splint above and another underneath in the foot part, so that your hand is opened and straight, then bind them entirely around the hand, and seal off the connection between the fingers.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the break occurs at any of the feet of the fingers, it's if they are splayed, as it should be; and you hold them with the foot, and if you see fit to place a small straight splint for lifting the breakage, and not let it move; and if the break is on other fingers, like in the index or among others, treat them equally, and bind with the healthy finger that follows; or you bind all together, so that nothing moves, or you set it on a splint, as when you hold up; take care in the restoration and arrangement of each abscess, and prepare for what comes to you, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	Of the broken thigh
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	The bone of the knee is often broken, and one can see it when it turns frontwards and backwards; and its repair consists in .i., tying above the breakage, and .i. another below it.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the glands lie on her face, then extend each minister his link to its equal part; and this is when the break is within the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure. Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses .ij. mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And if the break is close to the root of the knee, then have one link towards the foot and the other links below the break. And similarly if it is close to the elbow, then place the ligaments behind the elbow, and thus apply the plaster from above; then put the bone into its place equally with its two hands, as long as it follows its natural shape, and then apply the plaster and the bandage, and if no abscesses come about.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is pus at the site, let it heal then return to your work and treatment; the wound is made in such manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure .i. bendeil dur doublé en .ij. ou .iij., et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute .i. fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment .iij. tors ou iiij. sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as .ij. chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie .iij. esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is necessary that you wrap over the burn. I. e., bandage it with two or three layers of a thick material, leaving excess aside. Then place your leg until the heel reaches the ankle bone, and insert one long thread between the calf and leg, under the knee downwards, then lead the thread to the top above; after that wrap the bandage around both the leg and the calf, then put a stone on top of the burn wound, and place a stone over the bone of the leg. Then insert the remaining length of material under the calf and the leg with the sole facing upwards for equal pressure. Begin to wrap tightly in three or four rounds around the burn; when going beyond the burn area, do so with less tightness; then take two threads that you have inserted between the leg and calf, bind them with three stones placed above each other, after which return under the thread as far as you can go underneath the foot; and then tighten it, until it doesn't move from its place, then leave it like this until no further pus, inflammation or similar symptoms appear.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if it happens that the bones are dislocated, you should reassemble them in their correct position as we have mentioned many times; and if there are pieces of bone that are displaced, they must be treated accordingly if possible; and if not, it is necessary to cut through the tissue and draw out the bone; then treat it according to what we have said until it heals.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And no time is broken the egg until these are put in, such as in the shoulder and at the elbow; however, when restoration is made this way, there is no pain to the patient.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	Know that the egg is restored in one day, or somewhat less, or somewhat more, depending on the diversity of body types.
de la ruelle dou genoil	from the garden alley
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois. Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou .i. pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	Know that in the garden alley there is little breaking, but it bends many times. And if it breaks, it's usually just a crack or two small fragments, and occurs with or without injuries, and one feels this well.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And in restoration it means to place equal what is round on its fingers until it can move again. Then apply the plaster, and put a round bandage if necessary, then tighten it as seems fit. After that make every arrangement you have said concerning other injuries, like abscesses or similar; with each incident, use what suits each one until it's healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the breaking of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait .ij. os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i.	You know that in the leg there are two bones. The one is named straight by right - "hammers" and the other is called "shinbone"; and every kind of injury or breakage can occur just as it does with an arm, and for this reason the process of restoration is done similarly to that of an arm, and the operations are all the same.
Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	And if the two bones are broken together, then turn the leg from all sides.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the delicate bones are broken, then turn in front.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz. Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	And if the large bones are broken, one feels great pain and sees it clearly; then turn sideways. Therefore apply extension, set them equal, and fix the braces equally; however, when the break is irregular and there are multiple fragments, the extension should be smaller and more gentle; and adjust according to your skill.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed your work, take two sticks of wood that will support the leg on both sides, and they should be as long as from the knee to below. Then wrap around them with two lengths of leather, and tie in the middle so the leg cannot lean to either side; thus it is well done. And no one should administer a splint longer than the leg, made of wood, and place this on the leg to prevent movement; do this directly where there was an injury; and move the leg each day to check for pus or any other complications; heal as long as you are able.
de la brisure des os dou piet	From the breaking of bones due to injury
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	Ankle injuries do not come from breaking bones, but rather due to certain positions that the feet can be in, and there is only strength when in multiple dispositions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if there is a breaking of bones due to injury, and you see these bones mount over one another, place the injured feet on the ground as they would like to go. Then put your foot on their position, at where the bones are lifted, press it down until they regain feeling in their toes; then apply plaster and bandages around there, and place a small table under the belly of the foot. Afterwards, pull them up towards the foot insertion point, once you have wrapped the dressing tightly around, and do other things that you need to do.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days have passed, if you release the bandage, because you will find that the bones are even, whether broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if any of the ribs are broken, repair them, as we have said about the ribs in the hand. Then place a rib under each broken rib according to their length and make sure it's slightly wider than the broken one, then put down beneath it the board that I mentioned, and hold firmly with its edge; and if there are two or three, or more, broken ones, break them too, then place above each rib one corresponding to its quantity, wrapped in a linen sheet, and hold the board with its bottom. And stay standing on top of the table above the pit where the belly is, so that it cuts well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	It must be noted that you should not forget the other matters I have mentioned about other injuries, once we have discussed them; and assist each situation as it should.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	regarding the breaking of the bone in the hand
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com .i. sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice .vij. jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bone of her nature is broken, if it makes itself to swell, then lean her toward the lower part of her back, and hold her behind. Then fill the hole that was made by nature with cotton, and also put in as much as one egg; then turn out the woman, and lift her back slowly and slowly, and then let the cotton jump until it reaches the entrance of nature, and brings the bone along with it; and when she wants to urinate, take out the cotton, and once she has urinated, put her back again, do this for seven days or a bit more: thus will the break be healed. If you see, take a goat's bladder, tie a stick at one end of it, fill the bladder entirely in nature; then inflate it forcefully using the stick until the bladder is full inside: nature will heal the break. Then fill it with cotton and leave it like this for some days, till it is healed over.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre. Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	And when the bone of the thumb is broken or that of the hand, if it is restored in the same way as we have told you for the hip bone; and do not ignore these injuries near this to whoever devotes their study and use them, and listen to my book. For a break indicates more than several positions the right path of restoration: therefore, understand it.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the case of a broken penis, take an goose's throat and fill it with the penis; then wrap it tightly around using bandages, and let it be for three days or however long you can tolerate, and it will heal quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	Of breaking with injury
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for the one who has a break with an injury, even if it's large, as with bones of the wrist or shoulder blade or similar, that they be now treated, so that the treatments we have mentioned testify to.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound has healed, you should reapply vinegar, and if there's no other remedy, then start restoring the break in the same hour or day. If abscesses occur, apply them immediately.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if abscesses occur, allow the restoration up to a new day, until the abscesses are pacified. Don't touch them on the third or fourth day, for you would bring about bad accidents.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the bone is broken and visible through the uncovered thigh, it must be gently placed with your hands, in a small extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extensions are not yet equipped for your hands to make them even, take this iron tool you have, which is .vij. or .viij. inches long, and its width should correspond to the size of the wound; and it's necessary for the surgeon to grip around .iii. or iiij., according to what he needs for each treatment of a broken bone; and may be round and somewhat thick, so that it does not bend under compression against your limb during operation, and have sharp points ahead, and thick at the middle in front, like this:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre. Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And it is called "palainche" because the curved ends should be placed on the visible part of the bone; and strike once, until they return, and ensure that they are even against each other. And if the breakage is subtle, and the instruments cannot properly grasp the bone, then you must hold the tip of the bone as long as the instruments have control.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot return the bone back, as we have said, if you have an appropriate tool for this purpose, such as a scalpel or a knife, at your power; then cut the one that is stuck in the bone with hardness and small shavings.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil. Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille .i. drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	And when the bone is returned, and if there's great pain afterwards in the limbs, know that it hasn't been placed naturally. Do as much as to place it correctly, then moisten with one part of a black wine stiptic, and properly if it has healed; and don't put any ointment or other thing on the wound when there's an open sore, so that no infection or corruption occurs; then apply these remedies after you've restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cover it entirely according to the size of the wound, and be well aware not to restrain the wound with pressure; many times people have done this and brought about death or corrosion in the patient; and let your handings be softer than usual, as they do with other injuries.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie. Et quant tu vois aprés .i. jor ou .ij. enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And if the wound is bad or large and you suspect that harmful occurrences might have happened there, just like we've said before, and pain is felt in the limb, then it's not fit to apply remedies; but cover it completely instead of applying them. And when after one or two days you see a boil form on the wound, remove whatever you placed over it entirely with wine, and apply a healing ointment for wounds, like a tetrachemical ointment, and similar ones.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And you must dislocate the limb twice a day, in the morning and at vespers, until it is united and sound.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it should be that the limbs are placed so that the wound heals in such a way that the bone comes together lightly.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if the days pass and it cannot heal otherwise than at once with the bone, know that there are small fragments of bone, which is why you should work on the wound with traction, and remove all these unnecessary pieces that cause pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant. Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés .xx. jors ou .xxx., puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And if a fistula forms in the wound or there is another form of corruption, you must treat it according to what he instructed before in this chapter. And when the bone breaks and opens on the limb, such as in the bone of the foot or shoulder, or other similar large limbs, do not attempt treatment because many times death ensues from it; however, let it heal by itself until it discharges pus after about 20 or 30 days, then treat the wound if you can; and if you cannot, leave it alone.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	The blows that come from sweat
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	We often come across various effects after the healing of injuries due to the breeze. Indeed, it is something to see how the limb's shape changes; and by chance, cannot perform its natural tasks on the limb.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Take care then in dealing with these things: if they are inflamed due to heat or cold, administer stictic medicines like aloes, frankincense, myrrh, sarsaparilla, senna, and similar others, as you see fit among any of these substances, or all together, and mix them with stictic wine or with plenty of eggs or with garlic; and apply them to the wound in poultices, pressing it well, but not letting it move in your hands during the day; then remove it, and repeat another one until the pus is extracted; or you can apply on a well-made piece of plaster; for the properties of plaster are that it removes all swellings from the limbs; and if the pus has hardened like stone, so it needs to be removed, then scrape off any excess above it, and leave the treatment as long as it heals.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	The limb that is weak after a siege
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the breaking of the bone is restored, and after that the limbs are weak and subtle, it happens for many reasons: due to one factor being that they were tied too tightly, not as they should have been; or because there were too many bands, not allowing normal circulation in the limb; or because of an excess of swelling; or due to too large movements at inappropriate times; or because they have little blood in their body, making them weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the treatment involves making the patient eat well, and make the body tender until the pulse grows in him; then give them baths, and bring him joy and comfort. Afterwards apply ointment to the limb so that the ointment attracts to the large swelling, and cleanse it with water often, until the swelling corresponds to the limb; and restore its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	If the member is twisted after recovery.
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limbs are twisted after restoration, and if the bones are broken apart, while the shape of the body is ugly afterwards, it does not lose its natural function: nor should you believe those who say one must break the limb anew; many people do this in our land; these operations are criticized and cause great harm, even to the point of death. However, if the bruises and injuries are fresh, then they should be treated with hot water or softifying herbs, like leaves from valerian, roots, and thyme, among others; and apply a poultice made from them; you can also take fat figs, grind them with flour from rye, and similar medicines that reduce inflammation. And make an ointment for poultices, as properly done salve, and take valerian root, mix it with grease from lard or oil of safflower, and apply this as a poultice; alternatively, you can take fat figs, grind them with rye flour, and similar remedies that reduce swelling.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes. Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And each time the joint is dislocated, it should be treated by rubbing continuously and for a long period with wet hands. And let there be one movement of the limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the twisting is old and hardened, like bone, and needs to be removed with the iron, if it suits one must cut up until reaching the bone, with a slight, gentle incision. And apply concentration and study in the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	This begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, because it cannot move then, and the limb is misaligned, causing great pain and injury to the patient.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation affects none, if it suits now to bring back without hesitation.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	For if one delays, the limbs swell up, and by chance should it be necessary to reset them at their current location; for this does not suit when trying to move them while they are swollen: many times it brings on pus and other pains;
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	If this happens, instruct the patient's attendant to heal them first, allowing until all abscesses subside; then immerse the limb in hot water and oil, gently reposition it, and treat each part as their treatment would come naturally to its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters on shoulder dislocations up to this point.
des mandibules	of the jaw
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	It happens that the jaws are dislocated downwards, and the dislocations of both occur in two ways: either they are somewhat bony at their roots and slightly softened; or they are completely dislocated, hanging towards the chin, and expel saliva from the mouth so that one cannot hold it, nor close their mouth, and wrap their tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When a dislocation is small, it can return through various positions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	And if it's complete and fully occurred, you should reset it quickly without hesitation.
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de .ij. pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And in such a way that the surgeons cut near to where the hair grows, and place their thumbs under the root of the jaw dislocation within the mouth; if the dislocation is at two inches, one hand should be inside while the other remains outside for balance; command the patient to soften his jaws and move them around.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And hold the thumbs in place until they settle back into position.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if bringing them back causes pain, especially when the two jaws are together, so that the heads of bones from hot water and oil, as long as they are gently brought back; do not overly force it to bring back, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	And when they are brought back evenly, and the mouth of the patient is well closed to be softened, place wet cloths in a poultice made of rosin oil and beeswax, then bind it loosely with soft bandages.
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre .ij. cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	And let the patient sleep on their back, and keep the head between two cushions, so that it doesn't move neither to the right nor to the left, nor strain itself in any way. Instead, please feed them light food until the pains have subsided and the jaws are stitched together;
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And then taste this to be lightly lifted, and does not struggle with opening the mouth for eating and drinking, until the jaw is well set and healed.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jaws cannot be placed in their proper position within an hour, and are not returned to them, it leads to fevers that become habitual, and at times abdominal pain, and at times vomiting of clear contents.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	And when you see this, then know that it is loss; and many times, death has befallen those to whom it happens, within eight days.
de la forcelle	from the forceful (context unclear without more information)
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The forces cannot relieve the pain from within the body's continuity or from its backside; it can only be relieved once outside, and this is clearly felt.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	And the cure is that the patient lies on their back, and extends their arms; and then presses onto the affected area with your palm, and it will return; then place them on the plaster bed and the bendings, and hold them firmly.
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	And the head that is towards the knife cannot be relieved; if not, and if it can be relieved once, then you must reset it to its original position, as we have said; then place them on the plaster bed and the bandage, and hold them firmly, and command the patient to rest until they are well.
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And similarly, bring back the shoulder blades, when it has returned to its original position.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	Of the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc .iij. manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	Know that the shoulder is dislocated in three ways: of which one occurs when it dislocates from the part of the scapula downwards; and the second is at the part under the heel; and by chance dislocates from the upper part, which happens rarely;
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	And it never dislocates behind the shoulder or inside the nerves; and often dislocates downwards towards the scapula, even for those with little flesh, because in these cases it jumps quickly; for those with enough flesh, it jumps to points and returns to them.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And by chance happens to some men through impact or bruising, and swells the shoulder with an abscess, and they think it is dislocated due to this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	Therefore, you must verify it as long as you are certain; then you may begin treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	And when the shoulder is pulled towards the back, you recognize dislocation. You'll notice a clear distinction between the diseased and healthy shoulders, and you will find various differences among them;
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	You will find a hollow at the top of the shoulder. From the back to the neck, you'll see the protrusion of the top part of the shoulder like an opening; and the patient cannot bring their hand to their nose or move it in any way;
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	And if it's dislocated from above and not covered, you will clearly find this at the back;
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And this way of dislocation can only be remedied when it is new or if the child is unhealthy.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the method is that the ministers lift their hand from the flesh at the top, then place their palms under the armpit, and raise the joint up to its full height by force; and the ministers lift their hand and extend it up high, placing it underneath; if it comes too quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	And if it does not come as we have said in our hands for several days, then the patient should be bathed in hot water; and the attendant should apply soothing and calming treatment, such as decoction of fennel and fenugreek and milk thistle in water, and the treatment should be applied.
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	Then bandage the patient's back, and place a flat piece of wool under their armpit, neither too soft nor too hard. Then put the heel on top of it, and lift the shoulder joint in a virtuous manner, and pull the hand towards them.
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	And another minister cuts the neck of the patient, so that it doesn't move down; this shoulder comes back right now, and if you see to reset it according to this manner:
et est que tu faices estre present .i. home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	And make sure the place where you are is larger than the patient's injury; and have it straight towards the side, and push the shoulder upwards from under the collarbone, then lift the collarbone up so that the injured area hangs in an arc.
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre. Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And other ministers pull the hand from the injury downwards towards the belly. And if the injured area is too light, support him with something heavy, and the dislocation comes back now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche .i. lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com .i. pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	And you also reset it in another way: and is this you stick a long piece of charcoal in the ground, so that the shoulder is as wide as a bullet, and neither too large nor too slippery;
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	Then let the patient lie down on their side but make sure there's a support underneath them, and keep the affected limb long up to the body. Then extend their hand from the other side downwards, and the joint will return to its place promptly.
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren .i. tison de .ij. bras de grant et .iiij. dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	and if she does not want to return with all these things that we have said, then do this treatment: take one leg of .ij. arms and .iiij. sticks that are broad, which should be able to enter quite smoothly on the side opposite the dislocation, according to this shape:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	then tie the stem near to the body where it's covered by cloth, so that the stem doesn't hurt the patient, then place the stem on the side opposite the dislocation; and extend your arm along the stem up to its end, and fasten the brace on the stem, and the arm at the head of the hand, then place the arm on one stick about as wide as a stick, and let the hand hang down below, and leave the torso hanging from the other side: the joint will now return in this manner.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is done, no matter how it was done, if it should be that you place upon the joint a rod of hair equal, then apply an adhesive plaster with ground powder from the mill, along with incense and egg yolk, over all the shoulder and around, then remove from the joint addition, and rebind over the plaster, and hold your hands in this way. And let your hands remain like this.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	It should be that he eats little, until the limbs are strengthened, because it will heal faster; and then eat more after five days or seven, and move it; and if it is firm and it is not softened, it will be healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a iij. pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is weakened by the left due to moisture that has come or for another reason, it should be that you apply three rounds of cauterization on it, as was mentioned earlier in the chapter about cauterization.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this, and it dislocates after seven days, and the joint doesn't hold, and cannot lift your arm up, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is cut or extended or weakened; and know that the joint would never be fixed in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Dislocation near the buttocks, and breasts, or behind, is caused by pushing, extension of hands, and administration in another place; treatment should be applied as long as it's clean.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after the healing comes redness to the limb, and delayed movements, then immerse the patient in hot baths many times, until that redness is alleviated, and returns to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the shoulder joint issue
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	Know that the joint of the shoulder is dislocated at points, and it returns to those points; if it has been dislocated from all sides, as well in front and behind, and dislocation does not respond because you can see it clearly and feel it clearly; and it is dislocated according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement. Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	And when you unite the arm bone with the good side, if you can see it clearly. Because the joint is bony, and cannot bend the arm or touch its shoulder to any extent.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And you should reset it this way that the abscesses are closed, for if they were to be left open, there would be trouble in closing them; and sometimes it cannot be brought back completely, especially when it's at the back; it is worse than other dislocations and causes more pain, and by chance it brings death.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And restoration occurs like this when you can bring it back: extend their hand with both of your hands; and their arms are spread out, and the hands face towards the body along the length of the forearm, in and out, and hold the joint at its natural place or at the base of the palm, until they return to their original position.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And when it comes to dislocation in front of the body, it returns as soon as he doubles his hand on his own and holds the joint at the base of the palm with a tool that is set back.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	And if it does not wish to return to its place, administer strong extension; and when both hands extend the arm, and bend them both, so that they do not move during the extension. Then turn the arm in each part, then once you have wrapped a double length of cloth long and wide;
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	And when you grasp the joint with your hand, if you apply some oil to soften the joint, then push the joint back into place until it heals;
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And when it's at its place, place dry plaster with an egg yolk on it, push it back into place firmly, and let the arm hang down by the side of the body for some days, then release it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firmly in its place, release the ligament and let it be; and if you see that the joint does not sit well, redo the plastering and the bandage, and let them stay like that for some more days until it is firmly set; then release it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse .i. jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	And if it feels sore after the return of the joint and it moves again, wash and rub it nicely, pressing until it is relieved; or you can place a layer of fatty mutton fat on the joint, then leave it for one day and one night, then re-apply heat, and let it enter or take a bath.
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai .ij. fois ou .iij., tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And when it sweats, you should rub the joint gently, then place the bone back, and then immerse it in water; and do this twice or three times until it heals; and if possible, apply moist cow's fat mixed with butter on it and keep it there; if it works, it will return to its proper position.
li dislocation de la main	the dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The hand dislocation has occurred and the recovery is faster than for other joints, throughout the body. It's necessary to return it to its place as soon as possible, while it's still dislocated, so that the fingers swell or an abscess forms.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	And the process is as follows: you place your hand on a table and extend the minister's hand, then inspect it by making it equal, so that they position their palm against the appearance of the joint, and hold it until it returns to its original position.
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	In every case, it is necessary to ensure that they look at whether it is in place; therefore, have the patient place the back of their hand on a table during extension and retraction.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele aparance de la jointure. S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, have the patient place the back of their hand on the table, and inspect by placing their hand against the appearance of the joint. If it returns to this position now, then it is correctly aligned.
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If not, if you hold back with soothing plaster applications, and leave it there without needing to start over.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	And if they cannot bear it, and you can't put it back in place after some days, if the joint remains twisted;
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	And it doesn't harm the patient so long as their hands are in plaster, and they can't apply any force at all: then you'll know that a nerve has been cut, or an artery; if there's no other way to relieve pain than with fire cautery, and by chance there isn't anything else.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hands are in plaster, apply what we have said on plaster, then apply it and leave them for five days, then remove it and leave them as is.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he cannot move it well, and there is no pain, if the water is warm, and rub it until it becomes clean.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	Regarding the dislocation of the fingers of the hand.
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	The fingers of the hand are never dislocated from each other, neither at the back of the palm nor at the belly.
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	Therefore keep the fingers intact, and prevent the dislocation from spreading to his pockets until it recovers. Then support the head of the fingers, and bend it towards the part that is separated;
et le laisse .ij. jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit,	And let it be for two days, and then make him equal on that day; and without tie him up, as we have said, and loosen him each day, and make him move, and bind him again at night; and do this often until he becomes constricted.
et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	And do it in the same way, if it is dislocated in the belly of the hand, and do as you did before until it heals; and do it similarly, when it is dislocated on another side.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	Dislocation of the ankle, dislocation of the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When it is dislocated in the back or neck, or when there are multiple dislocations, if no cure is applied, because time rushes the patient into harm.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les .ij. cuixes ou li dui bras ou .j.	And the symptoms are that the evacuations start suddenly and against one's will, not being able to hold them, and many times various parts of the body, or both hands, or either arm, or one foot become weak.
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a iiij. pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	And many times the calf muscle splits into four parts; that which becomes stiff at the back is called 'gibbous'.
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	The treatment is to reward if this 'gibbous' has come from childhood: without any treatment or healing until then.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	And the one that comes from falling, impacts or similar things, according to old curing methods with big words, it did not bring any great benefit in all.
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	But I have shortened it according to my intention, and formed instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	I say that in the illness coming before the belly, none has health or strength;
et ausi cele que vient droitement en .ij. costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	And also that which comes straight to the two ribs, and cannot cure from anything else than what directly affects the back, as I say;
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en .i. leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	And it is that if the disease spreads across his flank in one length equally and has strain under him, so that he does not get wounded;
puis fiche .i. tison au chief en terre forment, et .i. autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et .i. autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	Then place a coal in the ground at the head and one more on the feet, and tie with a bandage around the armpits near the hair, and another by the hips, and knees, and ankles;
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les .ij. tisons;	and two people hold the bandages in place, one at the head and the others on the feet, between the two coals;
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	and make sure they are well closed, the coal as we have said, and she should place her palms on the back until she regains consciousness.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de .iij. bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	And if this cure doesn't revive her, take a board of three arms long and place it over the back, and if she's on her side, position the head at one end of the board over the back. Then put the center of the board under the spine;
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	Place the eyes of his feet onto the other head of the table, and press firmly, until he regains consciousness in its place; and if you can see, perform it on the wrist that turns towards the hand.
Et est que tu fiches .ij. tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez .ij. autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	And when you place two pieces of charcoal on the head of the leg from one arm across, and towards the feet of another, with each piece of charcoal, put in between them an arm's length of space.
et ait en chescun tison .i. pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns .ij. tisons ait .i. tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en .ij. tornans .ij. petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	Place one piece of charcoal (or the part that turns) on each coal, or where the wrist turns, and ensure the coals are firmly in the ground so they don't move; between the two coals place a turning coal, where it turns, and between the two turning ones have two small pieces of charcoal of an arm's length for turning the wrist.
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And then secure the first ligament between the elbows and head, and the second ligament towards the feet at the other elbow, and each servant turns their elbow to all the ligament, and the masters place the spine evenly as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de .iij. dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when they are even, place a desiccative plaster with plenty of egg on it and then coat it, then cover it with a tablet of three inches long, which makes the area of the boil and the healthy part of the spine visible. Then secure it with a ligament as we have said, use the patient's natural sweating process until it is healed;
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc,	And if anything comes at the end of healing, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines with the decoction that we have said earlier. And every time you administer one piece of plumb.
et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	And sometimes there appears the appearance at the bottom spinal bone of the back, and one should consider that it is a dislocation; and it is the bone that opens, for which reason we must not have any assumption: an accident might bring about death.
des dislocations de la hainche	dislocations of the hip
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	Know that the joints of the hip and shoulder only suffer dislocations, unlike other joints; and the hip joint is dislocated according to four parts: internally and externally, in front and behind; and more internally elsewhere, and less dislocated in front and behind.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	And the knowledge of its dislocation internally is that when one joins the diseased leg with the healthy one, it becomes longer, and the diseased knee opens more than the healthy one, and the diseased knee cannot bend to touch the fire;
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And it is when the limbs are swollen due to an abscess, because the shoulder comes there.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of him who approaches death, so it is that this event is contrary to what was before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of him who is coming towards death are such that his leg is well according to its fulfillment; still though, he does not double bend his knee without pain, and if you try to make him walk, he cannot move forward and retains his urine, and swells at his ankle, and when he walks, he steps on his heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of him who is behind are such that he cannot spread his knee or double it, and that leg is more curved than the other, and his ankle is flattened, and that shoulder comes up under his back.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The correction of this semblance of dislocation involves you rewarding it if the dislocation is old and remains according to its position, without any treatment needed; and there should be no assumption about it.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And for those whose dislocation is recent, and there are four ways of dislocation, if you act quickly to restore the joint, and stretch it inwards and outwards, and move it towards the right and left; perhaps if it returns on its own and no further treatment is needed.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles .i. ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a .ij. mains, ou a .i. liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	And if it doesn't return in this manner, then you should apply strong remedies, and hold the leg strongly with both hands or around one knee where it is tied to the thigh;
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	and apply other remedies while holding his hand above in such a way that he extends his hands beyond his knees, then he forces the body with one blow of force against the calf; and another holds the head at the strap.
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And extend both upwards and downwards at once, until the patient lifts off the ground in one movement, and stays hanging.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of extension is typical for four similar situations, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it's correct.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance. Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	But if it's not like that, then treat according to its appearance. When dislocations are in the pantedens (chest), you should have the patient lie on their healthy side and secure them at the root of the arm, then place the head over the armpit, extend the bandage towards the throat and against force;
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	Then take another assistant to hold the patient's arms, and wrap around the fleshy part of the diseased arm, stretching it upwards in this formation: if it returns to its original position now; and this method of dislocation is lighter than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les .ij. piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les .ij. talons, et sus les .ij. genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue .ij. dois plus que li autres;	And if you cannot squeeze it this way as we have said, then you must tie the two feet of the afflicted side together with a strong bandage below both the heels and above both knees, and ensure that the diseased leg extends an inch more than the other;
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre .ij. bras de lonc; puis comande a .j. ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	Then have it suspended from the head of a post, and let it be two arms' length above the ground; then instruct one minister to embrace the head of the leg, and have another ministers hanging with the afflicted side, who should embrace around the leg forming it into place, as now the joint is coming back quickly.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne .i. liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	And when the dislocation is at front, if you place the afflicted side as we have said in those with agility and strength, and pull one bandage properly on the diseased leg and also around the foot.
puis met .ij. tisons, .i. au chief et .i. autre as piez, puis fiche .i. tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	Then put two needles, one on the head and the other in the armpit, then insert a needle between the thighs of the patient in their shape.
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	and place wet cloths around them, so the patient doesn't blister, then extend each limb towards themselves, and set their dislocated hand in line with their body.
S’elle revient, c’est boin. Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If it returns to its place, that's good. If not, put them on a table and press them like we have instructed in the dislocation of the shoulder blade, then lie the patient down on their healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is in front, it should be extended as quickly as possible, following what I have said; and place their suffering limb on the back of their shoulder blade, then press with the other hand, and extend it downwards towards their knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les .ij. hainches;	And if the dislocation is at the back, it does not require extending the body backwards or lifting up from the ground, rather it should be placed in the same position as when the hip was dislocated behind, just like we have said about lying on both hips.
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	And if it's in the face, and the neck is stretched as we've said before, and pressure should be applied at the joint on the table;
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	And it will be right when the limbs extend their legs and they are equal; then adjust the thighs, and apply the plaster, and strain with a bandage, so that the hip doesn't move;
et se repose .iij. jors ou .iiij., puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse. iij. jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And let it rest for three or four days, then release and apply the plaster; and if you see that they are equal, strain again as before, and leave them for three more days; then release and allow them to move fully until the limb is strengthened.
de la dislocation dou genoil	Of the dislocation of the shoulder
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The shoulder joint can be dislocated in three ways: one should know that it can dislocate internally and externally, and behind; and does not dislocate forward.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	And the signs for this are that you instruct the patient to bend their leg at their knee, and if they cannot straighten it at their knee, know that they have dislocated.
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	And the restoration of all this is that you have the patient sit straight, and if they can extend their leg, place your back on their buttocks, and put their foot on your feet;
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les .ij. costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	Then take his knee in your hands and pull it between your fingers. Then bend the two knees gently, forming the shape of the knee. And have other attendants extend his foot as far as possible until the knee returns to its place and there are signs that he has correctly placed his leg slightly below the thigh.
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort .iij. jors ou iiij., puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And place the dressing on it, and have him stretch his leg to the thigh, then firmly unite them for three or four days. Then let him rest; and do not move any of the limbs until they are strengthened.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the limbs are not yet ready, administer strong extension exercises, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until they recover strength.
de la dislocation dou talon	On the dislocation of the heel
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heels are never perfectly reduced or completely dislocated, both inside and outside.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	And the signs for this are that the ankle is swollen, and it tries to move towards the part where it has been dislocated:
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	The reduction is gentle, and one should slightly extend it with their hands only when the heel is reduced.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne .i. ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	And when it is dislocated completely, it must be that you make the patient stand straight, and hold him two assistants off by his leg, above the ankle;
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre .ij. fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and then twice with the left, then lift him up, and firmly push the foot upwards;
et fai ce .ij. fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	and do this twice, as we have said, by pushing and pulling the foot; if it returns, that is well; if not, start over with the process, for it will return.
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche .i. passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	and if it cannot return like that, then have the patient lie down on his back on the ground, and place two stones firmly in the earth between his buttocks, and tie cloths around him so he does not hurt the patient.
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a .i. liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	Then the surgeons cleanse the wound, and some other surgeons stretch his feet or at two inches to the leg bone, so that they lie on the neck of the leg bone;
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	Then each surgeon stretches them equally, and the ladle shall always be placed between the thighs of the patient to hold the limb when it is stretched.
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	Then place the mirrors equally at the point of dislocation with both hands, and another surgeon cuts the healthy leg above it, and the dislocation will return quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	And when it is at the right position, apply the plaster and put the bandage on top, then tighten it properly, bind the leg to the body, and watch the nerves that are behind the ankle so that the bandage is not too tight.
puis le laisse .ij. jors ou .iij., et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par .iiij. jors;	Then leave it for two or three days, and if they relax, pull them out; then release it on the third day or fourth, and let the patient walk around for four more days;
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And if it goes beyond that point, it is not safe that it will not dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if abscesses are pressing on him and it comes to this, you must soothe him, as we have said elsewhere, until he feels better.
des dois	Of the fire cautery, command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the arms are dislocated, if they need to be properly stretched as part of their work, it is a simple matter.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus .i. leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	And if the dislocations are in no bone of the back or foot, it is necessary that you make the patient lie on their full length or on a table entirely straight, and place your foot where it opens from these joints, then press with your foot firmly until they come to themselves.
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a .ij. chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse .iij. jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when they are even and do not open anything, place under the foot of each pig a table with two heads, then hold them in shape, and let them for three days, then release it; and make it rest until it is well healed.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	regarding wound care and dislocations together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	When a wound accompanies a dislocation, and one seeks to restore it, many times the patient has died:
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	if you are not presumptuous in the treatment, and if you are knowledgeable in the art and have practiced it for a long time, and if you are compassionate and merciful but also patient, do not be rash.
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	And at first apply soothing remedies to the abscesses with cautery, and let the patient remain in God's hands, if you do not see hope of healing;
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	And when you see hope, then reset the limb into its place immediately, so that the abscesses stick and heal.
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	And when the limb is in its place, apply soothing remedies to the abscesses and treat the wound as it should be done, using dried ointments.
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	And if there is a break with dislocation and small bones are exposed, set the bones, and do as we have said for simple diseases.
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors. Amen	And guard yourself against the path of fear, according to what I've said, for this is your duty as per your Creator, and through knowledge arm yourself and know your body. Amen
Explicit le romen de fisique	End the discourse on physicality.
