To you, my very dear son, I have completed this book which is the summary of the science of medicine together with its content, and have brought it to an end through its explanations and declarations. And it has come to me in a vision that I shall complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
And because the work of hands is forbidden in our region and alien to everyone altogether, thus the science is lost and decayed, and nothing remains of it beyond the small descriptions in books of the ancients that have been changed by hands. And because of this, errors and vanities have arisen, intentions are closed, and wisdom is driven away.
I seem to want to revive this treatise according to the arrangement of this text in the way of exposition and declaration, and abbreviation; and I will come together with the shapes of the cautery instruments, and other tools of the work along with the adjuncts of the declaration and preparation of them, as it is necessary.
And because no good master of hands can be found in our time, the art of medicine has been lost. And he who is engaged in it should be summoned to the science of anatomy, as Galen says, until he knows the judgment of members, their forms and joints and separations, and have knowledge of bones and nerves and marrow and the number of bones, and their movement and the moving veins and resting ones, and where their issue is located.
And for this reason, Hippocrates said that the nail with the finger is not much, and with work it is little; the same is true in the art of surgery.
In the beginning of this book, we say to those who are not knowledgeable about the matters previously stated, be careful that you do not err and do not operate on people; thus, I have seen many times more than others who engage in this science and abandon science and experience.
I saw a foolish man who cut an abscess from a woman's neck, and cut her carotid artery; therefore so much blood came out that the woman died in her own hands.
And I saw another man who pulled an arrow from an old man, and the arrow took with it a piece of his bladder; and the man died within four days.
And I had already been called to treat him, and saw the condition of the patient and the size of the arrow, and knew well that if it were cut he would die.
And there was another surgeon who took care of a duke of our land who had his leg broken, and with the break came an injury; and the surgeons, full of ignorance, set the break over the wound with strong force, and did not allow any callus to form on the wound, but left it in that state; and he commanded that it should not be dislocated; and it remained thus until the leg became completely swollen and the toes died.
I was called to come to him and hurried to dislocate his leg; and when I dislocated it, he was in peace and felt no pain.
But all ways of corruption were already confirmed in the member, and it could not be healed; and the corruption continued to spread through the member until the entire member was lost.
And another mirror that sinks an abscess, and increases its thickness by the evil of its dominion, then sets it on fire.
For when it (the abscess) is purged of melancholic humor, it should not be touched by iron unless it is in such a place where all can be removed that is corrupt.
And therefore, dear son, it is necessary for you to know that the work of hands is divided into two divisions: one where there is danger in various dispositions; and I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and danger.
Because it is necessary for you to take care, so that foolish people cannot speak ill of you.
Take your weapons in custody, and approach your patients lightly and firmly, and use the best way so that through the grace of God you may come to salvation and be praised; and leave the diseases that cause great suffering aside; and remove your weapons from those who make you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you can come from this world to the other of glory.
Galen said in some of his admonitions: "Do not take on bad diseases, lest you be called a foolish person."
I have designed this treatment according to three chapters.
The first chapters are about fire cauteries and cold cauteries for ague, and they are arranged from the head to the feet; and of the forms of instruments, and iron tools for cautery, and of everything that is necessary in this work.
The second chapters are about cutting and piercing, and about blistering and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and these chapters are arranged and have the forms of instruments.
The third chapters are about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and they are arranged from the head to the feet, and have the forms of instruments.
Therefore, as we remember the work, it is necessary that I say the quality of the aid and the harm of each complexion.
I say that the quality of the aid, and the harm, is a long discourse and subtle science and secret responses; and many wise men spoke about it, and agreed with this; but few of them followed their words, for I shall shorten it.
I say that cautery helps universally in all complexions where there is matter, whether it is two complexions: namely hot complexion with matter, and dry complexion with matter.
In a hot and dry constitution, some said that the fire cautery is of great help; while others said the opposite: that the fire cautery has no value for the disease caused by heat and dryness.
For the nature of fire is hot and should not be used to cure hot diseases by heat or dryness; however, those who said the opposite claimed that the fire cautery brings great help to hot and dry diseases in men's bodies. When you understand the body of a man and his moisture according to the nature of fire, you will find that it is cold.
And I agree with this statement. For I have found it by experience once.
And every way, do not interfere except those who have tested it and know by long experience the chapter on cauteries, and the diversity of human complexions, and their dispositions and causes of diseases, and their occurrences and the time interval; other complexions we do not fear, especially in cold and wet diseases. And all mirrors should conform and agree to the cautery.
And know, son (son is an informal form of address for a young man or boy), that cautery combined with fire is among the secrets of healing, and of greater benefit than cautery of burning medicine.
For fire is simple, and does not harm anything except the member that is burned, and does no harm to any other member.
Burning medicines come from one member to another by spreading, and bring diseases of great suffering to the sick member, and possibly kill the patient.
Fire, due to its power and the goodness of its substance, does not cause harm if there is no excess.
And I have found this for you by experiment and through the length of my service and the study I have put into the art, and it is in accordance with the truth of things; and because of this, I excuse myself for the length of the speech, for I do not like to deprive you of the secret that is concealed by fire, and the quality of the work, how it drives away diseases from the body, as the philosopher says in demonstrating; now receive it in your thoughts.
And know, son, that they agreed on what time the cauterizations should be done, and chose confidants.
And I say that cauterization is appropriate in all times, because the harm happening is held back by the aid of cauterization; and similarly, if cauterizations are for necessary pains except when a greater evil cannot come to the member beforehand.
And never think about it, dear child, as the foolish do; because a disease that is cured by cauterization has no return; and they say thus; but it is not as they believe, for cauteries are not only medicine that changes the complexion, but also dries up the humors causing pain, and its value exceeds that of other medicines due to its speed and the virtue of its work and dominion.
And sometimes the disease comes according to the complexion of the patient and the nature of the disease and its properties; and superfluities are collected in it through the consumption of foods and similar things, unless cauteries are administered where there is little superfluity and moisture, as in cauterization for pain, and similar things, and this pain does not return; but this happens rarely.
And many people do not understand why cauteries are called the "remnants of medicine," but it is true; however, they do not believe that cauterization is worth more than other medicines, but their beliefs are false, and cauterization is called the "remnants of medicine" because when we administer means of treatment in any disease and they are of no value, then we apply cautery, and it is effective. Then it is clearly stated that cauteries are at the rear of medicine, not as the foolish interpreters intend.
The ancients said that cauteries made of gold are more effective than those of iron, and they said this only because of the quality of gold and the rarity of its substance; and they said that the heat of a cautery does not cause burns, but this is not true for everyone, as I have proven, and found it to be true in some cases; and cauteries made of gold are more effective than those of iron, just as they say.
And yet when you heat an instrument of gold, you are not sure if it is heated by the color of gold, and at times it may cool down; and if it is overheated, it will ignite the fire; and in this way there is enough hindrance.
And for this reason we use fire cautery, which we have found appropriate for our work.
I have instructed you this chapter of the head up to the feet, so that the veins may be easier to find.
olive oil cautery
This cautery is beneficial for both moisture and coldness on the brain, and it is used in treating a disease called "soda," as well as various fluids that descend from the head to the eyes and ears, and numerous dreams and pain in the teeth and throat, and also all diseases caused by coldness such as paralysis, sode, apoplexy, and similar diseases.
The form of this cautery is that the patient should be purged by a soluble medicine clearing the head, three or four times, depending on what the properties and age and accustomance of the sick person can tolerate; and then make them sit backwards over the head of the sick person.
And then make them sit crosswise between your hands, and place their hands on a pillow; afterwards put the root of your palm over the root of his nose between his two eyes; and where your thumbs will come, it will bleed. Then heat the cautery called "olivare", as shown in this form:
And place it on the spot marked with ink, and make movements and straining your hand up and down repeatedly until you see the bone protruding even slightly; if you do not see the bone, continue to press the cautery as I told you until you can see the bone; then take one scoop of ointment, put it on a piece of soft cotton and place it on the spot, leaving it for three days; after that, place a linen cloth soaked in butter over it; leave it until the heat is gone; afterwards, treat the wound with the ointment called "tetrafarmaçon" until it heals.
And the ancients said, when an injury remains open for longer, it drains more; and thus, if it heals faster.
They said that the fire cautery should be left until part of the bone is burned, and then the burnt area of the bone should be reset and healed.
And they say that the fire cautery should be left on top for as long as a wormwood leaf, which women put in their vaginas because the humors come out quickly; and then the wound should be kept open for a long time; after that it should be cured and soothed.
And these two methods of cauteries do not seem good at all to me, except in some men who have fear; and I think I should leave it; for the head is weakened by continuous solutions of nature, as we testify in other members; and even when the head of the sick person is naturally weak, the first appearance of cautery seems safer and more beneficial to me, and from this practice I work in place of salvation.
of old pain of the head
When there is long-lasting and chronic pain in the head, the sick person should use herbs and pills called "cochie", and purge of the head and oils and plasters; and if you do the cautery that we have said before, it does not work.
Take care that if the shoulder of the patient is strong and not too cold, then cauterize beneath it a little as we have said above.
After performing the cautery on each horn of the head as we have said before, and perform one cautery or tool called "vasselz"; it is one in which ventouses are placed; hold your hand so that you cannot see to the bone: the patients feel more intense pain in this cauterization than others, and I will speak about it later; and the cauteries on the horns should be finer than those used for the middle of the head, and this is the shape [of the cautery tool]:
The cautery of the head When sudden pain comes in one part of the head and the disease spreads to the oil, and the head is purged by various medicines, and other treatments have been performed as I have said in the division of diseases, and none of it helps; then cauteries are made according to two methods, that is, medicine hot and fire.
The cautery by hot medicine is such that you take a small onion, remove the skin and cover one end with two heads, then make the temple where the pain is in such a way that you can replace the onion under the skin; and when it is replaced, press and hold it well and leave it for twelve hours; then unpress and forcefully draw out the onion, leaving the wound so for two or three days; then put cotton dipped in butter on top.
After the treatment with onion, let it be healed; and if you see that this does not work, then use one of the burning medicines which I have written about or the tenth method for treating burning medicines.
The cautery of fire is as follows. Heat the iron rod according to this shape:
And it is called "close" because the top is made in the shape of a claw or has one inch of curvature and the thickness of a little finger; and place it on the painful area, and press the iron slightly but gently, until half of the rod's thickness is burned; and withdraw your hand so that the artery does not burn, which is away from the target, and draw out an abundance of blood.
Then place cotton in oil and apply it for four days; then put moistened cotton in butter, and afterwards treat the area with ointment until it is healthy; and if you wish to cauterize this abscess with the cautery called "cultellare", at its sharp point, be careful not to touch the artery in this abscess that is not old.
From migraine
When curing migraine as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and it does not improve, and you find that cauteries mentioned before in this medicine and iron do not help, then it is necessary that you heat the cautery called "cultellare" until it turns white; and so place it on the side of the jaw line half a finger's length long, and press once with your hand, but do not cover the artery or reach the bone; and beware of the jaw that moves when eating, and let nerves have no sight except for the moving one and spasms do not come to the patient, and beware of the discharge of blood from the artery when it is cut, where there is great fear and especially in those who are not acquainted with it, and unstudied; leave the operation in midway; but I will tell you how to stop bleeding when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it should be in this book.
And if you find that this cautery does not help the disease and the patient suffers, cauterize it in the head as we have said, and heal the wound until it heals; and if you see, administer the cautery mentioned or chapter on the extraction of the artery, with the cautery having two blades; this cautery is better than that one and more helpful.
From the pain of the ears due to coldness
When pain in the ear occurs due to coldness and medicines soluble and other treatments mentioned in the division have been applied to it but the pain does not subside, then warm this cautery called "poins" which is its shape:
After pointing the entire sick ear, or around the two places where the pain remains in both of them, move slightly away from the root of the ear since you have marked the place; and have 10 points around each ear; after healing the place until it is healed.
The torture of the mouth [in Old French] translates to "the torturing of the mouth" [in Modern English].
The torture that should be cured by cautery is only found in those that move due to flux (flow or discharge), as we have said in the divisions of diseases; and not to perform cauterization on similar cases that come from exudation (secretion) and spasm of nerves.
When curing this type of torture that moves due to flux of eyes and spurging of head and gargarism (gargling), it is not worth it, so you must cauterize the patient with four cauteries: one in the root of the ear, another a little farther from the temple, and the third in the angle of the two lips; place the cautery in the part that opens healthily, and make it cauterize towards the top of the ear slightly below the horn of the head, and another in the temple as long as a finger; leave the cautery until its middle is burned; and this is the form of the cautery:
And the appearance of the surgeon's tool that we have mentioned is similar, but it is slightly more subtle and the knife should be a bit larger; after curing the wound as I have previously said, take care to ensure it is healed before proceeding.
When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, and it does not improve, the patient does not have fever, then perform four cauteries: two on top of the two horns of the head, one in the middle of the head, and one in the vein that is called "vas" as we have previously mentioned, and the last cautery on the mouth of the stomach; cure it as we have said before.
The liturgy (de litargie) refers to a set of religious services performed according to the prescribed order of prayers, readings from sacred texts, hymns, and other ritual acts in Christian churches.
For this ailment, give the patient large years and round pills made of cerebrum; afterwards, wash the head of the patient entirely, and place the plaster of mustard (sinapi) on the occiput which is written or treated as a plaster; and this is the method of cautery: do it as I have said.
If it is healthy like this, it is good; and if not, make four cauterizations on the head from the forehead to the neck, and have a distance of two between each cauterization; and heal it as with others, and if you see it growing worse, apply one cauterization in the middle; and if necessary, two more on the two horns, and heal it until it is healthy; and let the cauterizations that are called "olivare" be as I have said before.
of the coldness of the head It is necessary to clean the head (skull) for years and as previously stated; afterwards, clean the patient's head, then perform fire-cauterization on the head and on each horn, one behind and three on the spine of the neck. If more is needed, and the body is moist and the patient is enduring it, and the disease is severe, perform four cauterizations on the spine of the back. Leave it to burn until the most painful spot is seared, then withdraw your hand; afterwards, cure it until it is healed, and heal the cauterization called "olivare", as previously stated.
of epilepsy
Epileptics should not use fire-cauterization except for those who are phlegmatic, and it is first necessary to clean the brain for years and other treatments as previously stated in the division when the patient is large and enduring pain from taking medicine.
And if it is an infant who cannot endure [the pain], give it gargling and frequent chewing of the brain with good foods; afterwards hold the head still, and make one cautery as I have said before, and one cautery on the swelling, and one on each horn; and if the patient is strong and bearing it, make cauteries as I said to him who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cauterizations be olive-shaped as I have said.
If the patient is an infant, make a subtle cautery like this:
When due to melancholy, the superfluous matter or corrupt and thick phlegm accumulates, then cauterize with such cauteries as we have said for someone who has paralysis.
And if the excesses are descending towards melancholy, and the body of the sick person is moist due to melancholy, then give him something to drink by which the brain may be purified, according to what has been stated earlier in the division.
Then place the linen bandage, well-made like a wheel, around the head of the sick person; cross him and hold him tightly from all sides; then apply the liniment made of old goat's butter; heat the bandage moderately so that it can be pressed on him without causing discomfort; afterwards empty the wheel-like bandage from inside the head, and let it cool; do this to the sick person every week with good management, until he is well.
If you wish to cauterize him, make multiple punctures all over the cautery. This method of cauterization moistens the brain greatly; then place soft cotton soaked in goat's butter and linseed oil on top.
Of the eyes When the eyes are affected first by the signs I have said in the division, then begin and give the patient something purifying to drink, and guard him from all moisture, and make him sweat or bathe several times on an empty stomach.
Afterward, command him to lean his head back, and make a cautery under the chin, and apply two cauteries on the temples where the affliction of the eyes is in both or one; and burn all the veins and arteries that are under the eyelid, and let the cautery be long according to the size of the temple; and take care not to allow bleeding, and if you see too much blood flowing out, stop it with your power as you have.
And I will teach you in the extraction of the arteries and the incision, how to stop it; and sometimes a cautery or heat is done under the two bones behind.
The tears of the body
When the eyes are old and accustomed and are above the veins, or from the arteries that appear on the outside of the head; and it is seen that this is superfluous cold fleumatic fluid, then you do the cautery that I said at the beginning of the treatise: one cauterization in the head, and two cauteries above the temples, and two cauteries or cauteries below the eyes; and if necessary, cauterize skillfully above the eyebrows with a small cautery.
The tears of the body inside the eyes
When you treat the patient according to what we have said in the division and it does not help, then give the sick person four cooked eggs to drink; after that, burn the head with oil-based cautery or apply mild oil cautery; and make two cauteries called "clavilis" on top of the two sores, a little under the hairline; be careful not to cover the artery. And this is the shape of the cautery called "clavilis":
When the paper of the oil is softened by disease and moisture, then use this oil-based cautery called "olivare". Here's its shape:
And if you wish to perform two cauteries on the two witches as long as they are, just like witches are; do not leave the hand unless the third part of the paper is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
the hair which points the oil (this line seems to be incomplete or missing something) Occasionally, the hairs of the oils are converted to scabs and prick oil, and then a cautery is performed in two ways: either by fire or by burning medicine.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they have grown and are even, then put the patient in your care; afterwards place a figure on the hair similar to the fennel seed, at the beginning of the burn sign; then put cotton soaked in egg glair and musk of parsley on the oil, then heat the cautery to this shape:
After cauterizing on the figure you have drawn several times, let the coagulated blood appear at that spot; and the signs of the healing of the work are that you see the paper retreat, and the hairs rise to the point of the oil; then withdraw your hand, and leave it so for three days, then put cotton soaked in butter until the cauterization is removed; afterwards cure with ointment until it heals.
And if afterwards hairs grow, and the skin is softened, then repeat the cautery on the same spot as you did before; and if the hairs are curved, cauterize until the skin rises to its natural level, and becomes even, and the hairs do not prick the oil.
The hot cautery of medicine is that you instruct the patient to let their hairs grow long and even, then make a parchment in the shape of the leaves of myrtle; then take French soap and live coal, each one cubit, and grind them together well; heat it quickly so that it does not cool, then apply onto the parchment as you have made with myrtle leaves, and put on the skin of the patient; if the patient holds only one oil, then it should be worked on in one place, and if in both places; and put cotton dampened with egg white under the oil; and the shoulders of the patient should be clean and you should place your hand showing over the medicine, and press a little pot every time the patient feels the bite of the medicine, for he feels the bite like fire. When you have done this for a long time, remove the medicine from your hand. And when the bite has healed, lift up the bone and check if the stone is raised as it was by constraining fire or incision; and if so, it is good. If not, add more medicine on the bone, or if the medicine hasn't worked, until your treatments are even, and the eyes (incisions) are aligned; then put moistened cotton on it until the burn heals, after applying the ointment called "dyafenis" and others, until it is healed.
If you need to be careful about your treatment so that the medicine doesn't leak out from the incisions. And if the stone becomes soft afterward, and the hairs prick in the oil, repeat the medicine on the bone which has been properly softened by the stone, as you have done before; afterwards heal until it is healed; and this is the shape of a mullein leaf (vervain).
And know that the hairs of men are different in size and according to that, your treatment should be varied; do not change the correct path for him who is studying this art.
Treatment of a fistula by cautery
When treating a fistula as we have said in the division of diseases and your treatment does not improve, then it is necessary that you perform cautery on it according to this method.
Instruct the patient to put their head in your lap; and the assistant should hold the patient's head between his hands so that it does not move or change position; after placing a piece of cotton dampened with egg white or linen dipped in oil on the fistula, heat the cautery until it is red hot like the tip of a falcon's beak, and apply it to the fistula as described by the shape of a vulture's head. The cautery should be shaped accordingly, pointed from one end to the other, or like a tent; however, the former shape is more suitable for your work.
After opening the fistula if it is open, remove the pus and dry it; if it is closed, open it, remove the bowel, and apply the hot cautery to the abscess formation, and hold your hand on the cautery at the part of the oil so that your hands do not go astray; and immerse the cautery in the oil and corrode it.
If you start the cautery up to the bone, it would be good. If not, repeat the cauterization once more, and do so if necessary, and leave it for 3 days; then put soft cotton in butter on it, and let the ointment of the drying agent act until it is healed, and if 40 days pass and it is not healed, apply corrosive medicine to the bone as it comes in its chapter.
And there is a way of cauterizing a fistula that none of the ancients mentioned. This refers to a fistula, and you should lance it; afterwards put one thread of fine camphor in the opening (that is the shape of this form): and they make it in the amount of one walnut shell; hold your hand tightly with camphor, and the patient must not move at all, so that the melted plaster does not spatter on his oil; and you should put cotton soaked in egg white or olive oil on the patient. The plaster will heat the fistula and heal it miraculously.
And if the fistula is healed by the cautery we have mentioned, it's good. If not, you must administer a purgative to the patient and bring the fistula into the body of the warm (patient).
cavity in lips Often cavities in lips called "hairs" occur, even in children's lips.
When the treatment of these cavities as we have described in divisions does not help, then burn (with) a small cautery spoon in this shape:
And place him urgently into those cavities until it reaches the fountain; afterwards, cure the place with sulfur until it is healed.
of the abscess from the throat
When an abscess comes in the root of the throat or eye, or palate, or roots of the teeth, after it has become pus-filled and grown and becomes a fistula; and you treat it as we have said in divisions, but it does not help: then you must have one cautery according to the size of the fistula; afterwards, plug or seal the fistula, and hold your hand until the iron is hot at its source and where it ends; and do this once or twice, after the treatment as we have said in cures, until it is healed; and if it is healed in this way, it is good; and if not, then you must uncover the place and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
The double movement of teeth
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you cure it with medicine but that is of no use, then put the head of the patient in a hot bath; afterwards, heat the cautery in such a manner as you place a cane on the tooth; and push the heated cautery into the tooth quickly, hold your hand so the patient feels the heat approaching the root of the tooth; after that, release your hand and repeat the cauterization according to your desire; afterwards, fill the mouth of the patient with salt water, and keep it there for an hour and rinse thoroughly.
And in such a manner, the moving tooth is made firm, and the softened gums are kept tight, and the corrupted moisture dries up.
Of the pain of teeth
When tooth pain comes from cold or wetness, and there is either cold or fever, and the medicines do not work, then it is necessary to use a cautery according to two ways: a cauterization with butter and a cauterization with fire.
Cauterization with butter is as follows: take butter from a cow, and heat the end of an iron or brass spoon; then take cotton and wrap it around the point of a tent, and moisten it in cold butter, and apply it to the painful tooth immediately and hold until it is cooled; do this often until its power reaches the root of the tooth, and if you see the cotton and linen moistened with cold butter, apply it again, and heat one hot iron on top of the tooth.
The cauteries together are of such a kind that you take a cane made of iron or bronze, and it should be large enough so that the heat does not reach the patient's mouth; after heating the cautery, the form will come out as follows: place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery is cooled; do this often, for the pain will be alleviated that day or the next. And it is necessary that the patient fills his mouth with good butter in the hurry of applying the cautery, and then blow it out; this is the form of the cautery.
When scrofulas are of a cold and moist nature, and are not obedient to digestion by medicines, then heat the cautery hair as follows, and make two openings for the smoke to escape from the other part; and place the heated cautery on the abscess once, or twice if necessary, until it reaches the base of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, apply cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it in this state for three days; then put moistened cotton on it to draw out pus; afterwards cure the affected area with ointments and poultices until it heals.
When humors prevail over the channels of the stomach, and especially when it comes from a cold constitution, then the patient should first be purged with soluble medicines; afterwards do cautery at the root of the throat, but not too close to the throat, only a little bit. Afterwards make another cautery at the jointure of the neck to the head of the spine, and use the cautery which is called "clavile" as we have described before; and heal the area as we have said previously until it heals.
of the tooth When all and the disease of the pormon are caused by cold moisture, and the patient does not have fever nor sore, and the disease is ancient, perform two cauterizations on the elbow; and another cautery between two breasts; and let the cautery that is called "clavile" according to the form that has been mentioned.
And if you wish, perform a cauterization by pricking with the tip of the cautery that is called "point" according to the form given in the disease of the ears; and let the point be up to 30, or as necessary around it. After curing the elbow as mentioned before, let the cauteries be at four fingers according to this form:
And for this reason, the cauteries are lighter, because you make four at a time.
of the dislocation of the shoulder When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. After that, the patient should lie on his back and on his side; then take hold of the swelling inside the affected area with your left hand's fingertips; if the joint is dislocated inside, heat the cautery that has two nerves as follows:
and apply the cautery to the swelling until it pierces through to the rib, and brings forth the figure of the cautery with four cauteries; and for this reason, the cautery is made with the cautery that has two nerves, because the figures of cauterization are such; and the nerves are according to the subtlety of a tent, and this is the form of the cautery that has two nerves:
And sometimes it is joined on this, namely the nerve, for which there are eight cauteries.
After applying the cautery, break it with lard; afterwards make the patient rest, and do not move the limbs for a long time until they are well comforted.
If it is dislocated above [the injury], which happens rarely, then apply a cautery on the thick part of the large nail, or many cauteries in pricking. For the joint is rejoined, and the moisture is removed and the patient recovers.
of the plaster cauterion
The ancient ones said that one should perform cauterizations for pleurisy using the roots of aristolochia, and in this manner: take a long root of aristolochia, the largest one you can find, and let it be dry, as big and long as your thumb; dip it in oil, put it on fire, and cauterize one cautery between the armpit and the neck, and two small cauteries a little lower in the area below the beard; and two cauteries between the fifth rib and the sixth, inclining slightly behind a little bit; and one cautery at the side, and one other on the stomach, and one between the shoulders, and two on the sides of the chest away from the cautionery that is between the shoulders; and do not press your hand, but do it gently as when smelling.
And one ancient said that a man should use a cauterization like a razor and heat it up and put it between the ribs until it reaches an abscess; then the pain subsides as we have said in the abscess of the liver. But in this work, there is fear or the patient dies now, or a fistula comes which cannot be healed.
mouse
When you treat the disease of the mouse as we have said in the divisions of treatment, and it does not improve, then consider the following three methods of cautery, which are all good.
The first method is that you make four cauteries, or six, in a line according to the length of the mouse, according to the figure of the cautery from the liver as we have said before; and do not hold your hand to the entire cautery, and let the patient be aware on his back;
And another method of cautery is that you heat the cautery with two nerves, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and shave the fur that is toward the mouse, or the place where the patient's pain comes from on the left side, and lift the area that you are shaving according to the length of the body, and the cautery should be according to the width of the body.
After inserting the two inflamed nerves, heat them until their core is pierced from the other side, and then pull out the cautery. In this case, there will be four. If you see, if you cauterize the entire cautery at the four nerves. Afterwards, cure when it has discharged pus for a long time, and it is necessary that the other treatments mentioned earlier are done before this.
The translation for this line is:
Cautere is not suitable for ydropsies, except in the manner known as "asclytes." When you treat it according to the methods that we have stated in divisions, and your treatment does not help, then it is necessary that you make four cauteries around the belly, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the spleen, and two behind the back near the spine, and one near the genitals; and let the cauteries be close to the base of the vein.
After leaving the fire cautery open for a long time to expel pus, do not neglect the care of the patient after the cautery; and healing would be hastened, and the two intentions will be achieved together with the help of God.
The form of the cautery for the abdomen is the claw as we have shown before; and that for the back is olive-shaped, as it has been described before.
of the swelling of the feet When the feet are swollen in someone who is edema-afflicted and filled with watery citrus juice, you must cauterize on top of the foot between the little finger and the ring finger; and dip your hand with the cautery without turning. And do not enter too deep, lest the watery citrus juice burn fiercely, and let the cautery be in this shape:
After making .2 cauteries in each leg at the point of the knife, let one be beneath the knee and the other outside, within the leg; and leave the cauteries uncovered for long healing time, until the water subsides; after healing other wounds as we have said.
reduction (of swelling)
When the hernia of the belly comes from cold and moisture, as long as the digestive and retentive powers that are in the stomach and intestines are blocked, and cannot be cured by means of treatments; and you see the patient suffering greatly and of strong constitution, then do the following: make a large cautery on the stomach as described earlier in the text "cautery of the stomach" or "circumferential cautery"; and four subtle cauteries around the navel, one subtle cautery at the clavicle, and two cauteries on the hips.
If you see excessive moisture and the patient suffering, perform a cautery on the arm, and one cautery on each joint, and two small cauteries on the stomach to the side of the large one, for the treatment is beneficial when aid is available.
The Treatment of Hemorrhoids
When the hemorrhoids are founded, one or more, and are old and are of thick cold and corrupted humors, and are cured as we have said in divisions, but it does not help if you perform cauterizations: 3 on the spine of the back, the one which is completely turned outwards below the coccyx and gradually triangular, and 1 under the buttocks. 2 times;
And if you think his stomach is chilled and the meat does not cook, and one sees the face swell, then do a large cauterization on the stomach as previously said, and another on the liver, and another on the spleen with the entire cautery claw; leave the cauterization open for a long time. After curing the place, let it heal when it is healthy.
Of the charnosity (called) "thelul"
When you deal with thelul (the abscess), if you heat up the cautery that seems like a razor, and then place it all burning on the abscess, leave your hand there so that the cautery comes to the opening of the vein, cutting off the blood; do this once or twice, and if there is much abscess, cauterize each one as we have said; afterwards, treat with ointments until they are healthy; and if you cauterize a large cautery on an ulcer, it will have more help.
of a poorly healed wound
When the patient cannot tolerate incision or opening, which we shall describe in its place, this disease comes that can only be cured by cautery.
When a fistula appears, grows and is filled with pus and corrupted moisture, you must examine it thoroughly and ensure that the examination is complete. Then, heat the cautery that seems like a razor and insert it into the fistula according to the size of the opening that the fistula has made, and continue heating the cautery until the body tissue and corruption are burned, once, twice or thrice, depending on the extent of the damage; beware of burning the nerves and large veins. If the fistula goes towards the bladder and the intestines, beware of these areas and only perform this procedure in a charcoal-lined area, thinking that it is not dangerous; afterwards, cure the area until it is healed, and if the area is infected, and the matter has been removed for a long time, know that the area is healed entirely; if the matter has not been removed, then know that the area is hollow, and the bone is rotten in that place; and as one of these we shall describe in its place.
of the kidney disease When cold pain comes to the groin and with great swelling, and it does not respond to female treatments, then you must perform fire cautery on both sides of the groin using the sharp-pointed cautery as previously stated; and if we apply a thousand cauterizations in a line, it will have more effect.
of the bladder When the bladder becomes soft and weak from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then perform fire cautery in the area outside the bladder, where the pubic hair begins, one on the right side and one on the left, each cauterization should be as long as your thumb; and make one cauterization behind the back, or two if necessary; and make the cauteries sharp-pointed according to the previously mentioned shape.
of the marriage (or union) When the marriage (or union) is cold and moist, and does not allow conception because of this, and the flowers are corrupted and their term is delayed; and when they come, they cause great pain: then it must be done that you apply four cauteries around the belly, as we have said the cautery for the bladder, and two cauteries behind the back; and let the cauteries be sharp, as we have said.
of the haunch (the upper part of the thigh)
When viscous moisture descends into the hinge of the knee joint, causing it to move out of its place; and the signs are that the leg is longer than the other when measured together; and the joints at the end of the limb are visible if necessary, then you shall cauterize the patient on the knee joint with a cautery resembling a circle, and sign before the joint around the hinge so that the hinge is within the circle; and if the cauteries are like those used for cauterizing the stomach.
And if this cautery is not present, make four large olive-shaped cauteries, and let the cauterizes be as sharp as all other knives; and apply them until it heals.
of the pain in the knee When pain comes in the belly of the loin, and it is due to coldness and moisture; and the patient is treated as we have said in the division but the treatment is not effective, and the disease is old: then you must purge the patient with pills made from foul humors, or other good-seeming pills.
After that, perform the fire cautery; and the method of the cautery is according to two methods: either with burning substances and the cautery of fire. The cautery of fire is according to many methods, one of which is as follows: you shall cauterize on the belly of the loin four triangular cauteries according to this form, and make a good depth and width, and have space between each cautery the size of a thumb, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped; sometimes, the cautery is made in the middle on top of the loin, so there are four according to this form:
And if you see, it should be cauterized with the circular cautery that we have previously mentioned in the dislocation of the loin; but make it in such a way that the circles enclose the entire loin, and all the fat around the kidney is burned.
And this is the way it is done in sciatica, when pain persists in the lower back and does not reach down to the thigh nor the leg. If it reaches down to the thigh and the leg, two cauteries are made where the patient says the pain is located, and one cautery above the ankle, 4 fingers width from the left side; whether the cauteries are made with a blade or burned, the thickness of the skin should be removed; if the patient feels that the pain extends down to the knee or near it, the cauterization should be made at the point where the pain is felt, using 3 or 4 points or the cauterization called "points".
And if necessary, do more; and if the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, make a cautery with a blade or circular cautery, but be careful in all your cauteries to not overdo it so that you burn the nerves and large arteries, and cause the patient greater harm and contraction.
And I myself have seen many who made a cautery on the ankle of the foot and burned it so much that the leg became completely swollen, and the toes also, and all the toes were pierced and corrupted. After a belly purge, they died.
And if the pain is in two places together, perform cautery on one and the other in this manner. The wise men will say for the cautery of the armpit, as follows, make one iron rod and let it be as thick as a finger joint or slightly less, round or flat between the joints and extend from one to the other with a space equal to the size of a nutmeg; and let the rods be opposite to each other by two parts, and shaped like nuts, and have one handle of iron well made; this is the shape:
And let it be heated until it becomes completely red and hot, then place it on the sick armpit and turn it over the healthy side; and cauterize once with the iron rod lengthwise and leave for four days; then apply a poultice of butter, and keep the wound open for a long time; after the healing ointment until it is healed.
Albucasim says that we should use this cautery sparingly due to fear of its gaze, and those who use it sparingly; however, this is a good cautery for those who can endure it, and the place where it burns.
Of the pain in the back
When pain comes from the back, either from falling or from blows or from too great evacuation, or from similar causes of cold matter spreading, none of these causes should receive cauterization except for one who receives an infusion of cold matter.
It is necessary to proceed in this manner for the patient to be given pills or similar substances placed on the back where the pain occurs, marked with three lines of incision, and in each line five or more cauterizations according to the power and quantity that the patient can bear; and the cauterization should be made as described by the cautery called "poins"; and if you see, do four cauteries or two at the medium-sized cautery in accordance with this form:
This malady often comes to small children, and the signs of its onset are that they have narrow anus when they strain and fear; you will find it in the lower spine of the back and observe its appearance above the other spines.
When you see this [condition] and wish to treat it, cauterize it using the cautery of this kind in this form.
The cautery should cover each part of the spine evenly. And if you see [a condition], cauterize around the spine with a pointed cautery that is 2 or 3 lines wide, and the points should be close together. After treating the area until it heals as we have said, take care not to administer cautery in gilbositeit where there may be nerve damage.
Of the pain of joints
When pain in the joints is due to swelling affecting every member of the body, and when pain comes in the feet, which are called gout properly, and when it is caused by cold and medicines cannot cure it, it is cured by cautery in this manner: make the patient lie down with the affected joint on a bed, and the cautery should be olive oil shaped according to this form:
And if it is necessary to press on the face of the foot, make the cautery at its entire length that is called "point". And if pains come up to knees and other joints, which happens many times, make a cautery over each knee four or three times, using the olive-shaped cautery for all of them; and if necessary, do more, but do not hold your hand away from the burning coal for too long.
And if the pains descend to the genitals and back, administer the cautery as we have said in its chapter. And if the pains are in the hands, make punctures around the wrists .ij. lines; and if no pain remains at the thumb, make punctures on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come to the elbows or shoulders, cauterize each part, and give good care to the patient and think about medicines. For if you give him good care and purge phlegm, he will be healthy with God's help.
From the dislocation of the sifac (this term might refer to a part of the body that is not clearly identifiable in modern anatomy)
When the dislocation comes in the form of an angry boil that descends into the joints and occurs suddenly, it is necessary to treat it when you see it. You should not let him eat anything on that day; and you should use things that loosen the belly, so that the phlegm descends from the stomach. After that, make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to grip his wings (possibly referring to the arms) until the boil is repaired, and hold his elbow with both hands, and press on the bone of the joint at the base of the thumb, and give a sign similar to half a circle above the torso. Then heat the cautery in the shape as shown here:
Keep the hairs long and even until they are white and shed. Then reset the joints to their place; make sure the assistants hold their hands above it so they do not return; work well on the patient's thighs, put one cushion and one belt around the thighs, and another on the affected part that holds the hands; then place the cautery over the affected area all over your hand, hold it straight and keep it until you reach the bone; if you don't touch the bone the first time, try again until you reach the bone; be careful so the buboil does not boil when doing the cautery; do not burn it; and make sure the patient does not die or suffer any other harm.
And know that if you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing. The cauteries for children should be subtle according to their size, and those for adults should be as big as them; after 4 days cure the wound from the cautery with butter so that the burn is removed; after that, cure it with other remedies until it is healed, and let the patient lie on his back for 40 days so that the wound is well healed; and it is necessary to leave their bandages long enough so that the buboils do not rise when they want to go to the rooms.
And after 40 days, when he wants to get up, a bandage should be provided and kept for another 40 days; let him have good rest, so that he does not overwork or overeat, and drink too much alcohol; and if he follows this instruction, he will be completely healed. I will say more about cutting in the next chapter on tailoring. of the hernia of the belly
When hernias appear in other bellies and are recognized, and you see that they do not grow more, then do one cautery according to its size, and it should be burned the third part of an inch; afterwards, heal as we have said; and no one of the ancients said that it should be cauterized at four angles according to this form:
But first mark the edge and make a line above the hernia, and another below, and then take your hand all along the cautery handle. But the first cauteries are lighter and more movable.
of ancient pain in any member When pain comes in any member, whether from falling or injuring, and this pain lasts for a long time and medicine does not cure it, then you must cauterize it with the cautery called "poins", and the cauteries should be according to the length of the member, its smallness and weakness, its nature and its virtue and its location for twisting and pain. If the first cautery is healthy, that's good; if not, repeat another cauterization on it, as it is customary that the member closest to the injured one should heal first, so you must perform the cauteries until the patient recovers.
When pain comes in any joint, whether from falling or injuring, and this pain lasts for a long time and medicine does not cure it, then you must cauterize it with the cautery called "poins", and the cauteries should be according to the condition of the joint and its size, weakness, nature, virtue, location for twisting and pain. If the first cautery is healthy, that's good; if not, repeat another cauterization on it, as it is customary that the injured joint should heal first, so you must perform the cauteries until the patient recovers.
The remedy is sometimes aided by cautery with great help, and equally the illness that comes from the putrefaction of fluids and melancholy. If you see it being cauterized, be careful if the disease is at the beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and do not remove or remain, and doubt that the corruption does not spread throughout the entire patient, then make 5 cauteries on the head: one on the forehead to the end of the hair, two on the two horns (corner bones), and one behind the neck; and leave your hand so the cautery reaches the bone, and so that the scabs come out and the vapors of large humors are released; and cauterize on the swelling according to what is before.
And if the disease (meselerie) is spread everywhere; it will certainly perish, you must cauterize it with the cauteries that we have said, namely one cautery on the neck, and two cauteries on the spine of the neck, and six cauteries on the spine of the back, and one large one on the shinbone and one small one there as well, and two on each shoulder; two on the sides, two on the thigh tendons, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; beware not to burn the nerves that are near the last calcaneum, and sometimes a cautery is made on the bone of the finger, and one on the bone of the stomach, and one on the liver.
Know that more cautery is more help, and it benefits more; and know that the sick do not feel pain from the cauterization as the healthy do, because the body is already completely corrupted. It is necessary that the cautery be large or small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in the ways of iron. After curing the wound with flour several times with honey and other remedies until it heals.
inflammation
When a swelling appears in any limb and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and it is not healed, then perform cauterization on the limb according to its size and the smallness of the member; and let the cauterization be a little hole in the flesh's depth. Then cure it with ointments until it is healed. And sometimes, they make cauterization at the hand, foot, back, at the nerve issue that renders the limb immobile, and thus the swelling is removed; and in no case should anyone interfere if they are not familiar with the members and the issues of moving nerves.
When a boil or abscess occurs on any member and it is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, but does not heal, then perform cauterization on the limb according to its size and the smallness of the member; and let the cauterization be a little hole in the flesh's depth. Then cure it with ointments until it is healed. And sometimes, they make cauterization at the hand, foot, back, at the nerve issue that renders the limb immobile, and thus the boil or abscess is removed; and in no case should anyone interfere if they are not familiar with the members and the issues of moving nerves.
When the disease called "albaras" matures, and the medicinal remedy has no effect, then cauterize it with a deep cautery, according to the size of the flesh's depth, until the bladder is expelled, and its color changes; then cure it with flour and lentils mixed with rose oil and plantain leaves, and cow blood and hawk blood, each in equal parts; mix everything together, tie it with a cloth, and apply it to the spot until it is healed.
The treatment of scrofula (chancre) by cautery.
When scrofula (chancre) begins and you want to stop it, if you cauterize with the cautery that appears to be one circle around the entire scrofula.  And yet wise men say that cautionery should also be applied in the middle of the scrofula; and yet this does not seem good to me, because I fear that it will ulcerate and corrupt, and I have seen it happen once before; and a more proper thing is that it should be cauterized with the cautery called "circular", as we have said in the discussion of cautioneries.
The swelling that cannot grow.
When someone has a disease called "adubelati," and it takes time to heal due to its excessive nature or because the patient is old, weak, with little blood, or for other reasons; and you see it hastening to heal: then cauterize it around with many small cauteries by pricking; afterwards leave it as such. For it will hasten to heal.
And if you see it pierced with all the cautery, heat the cautery in this manner:
And place your hand in the middle of that disease called "adubelati" until the cautery has pierced the core, and let the cauteries be such that the patient feels relief in this way so that the course of the ailment is alleviated. After that, heal it completely when it is perfectly healthy.
The cure for fire is with iron
Another kind of disease is called "corrodens," which is nothing but an ulceration of a member, for it consumes the members just as fire dries up dry wood. If you see this disease in a place that can endure cautery along with fire, then heat the cauteries quite small and large, according to what is appropriate for the location or the site of the disease; after the cauterization of all parts until all corruption is eradicated, and nothing remains of it, let everything corrupted be removed. And then leave it for three days, and apply ointments made from softened cauteries with oil so that the burns caused by fire are healed, and all the corruption. After the cure of the medicine producing char, if after three days you see that healthy char does not grow, it is good; but if not, repeat the cauterization on the parts that remain corrupted. And this ulceration has sometimes been cured with medicines for ague instead of fire cautery; however, cauterization by fire is of greater aid, and I have already said the cure for the medicine for ague in the division: take as much as you need.
diseases that come to the feet
Often times, in the feet, a disease named "clos" occurs which is a large swelling that hurts the foot. The cures for this disease are according to two methods. This includes the fire cautery and the hot water cautery. The fire cautery is when you heat one cauter iron as a pen tip of a plow, made from good iron with subtle margins so it can pierce all around the swelling, and leave it hot on the swelling for four hours until it begins to discharge pus; then make a poultice of malicious herbs boiled with oil and leave the poultice on all night, and the swelling will shrink and be uprooted from its roots. After that, treat the affected area with healing ointment until it is healed.
If it is turned outwards by swelling, often in hands and feet, you must use the hot water cautery; this is done as follows: take a rain pipe or iron rod or a plow pen, heat it on the coal and apply it to the swelling; hold the pipe so that it surrounds completely, then put a little hot water on it, and keep your hand firm, and press your hand while turning so that the edges of the pipe reach the root of the swelling, and can find the hot water deep penetration until it reaches the root; allow the patient to bear the bite of the hot water for an hour; then leave it like that, and it will uproot completely from all its roots. Do this again for all the affected areas in the body, then treat them with ointments that promote healing.
The healer treats the shaking.
When someone trembles from cold or quartan fever or other causes, you must perform four or five fire cauterizations on the spine of the back, one between each vertebra; and one at the foot, and one above the stomach with the olive cautery; this will make the trembling stop, and the healthiness will depart from the cold disease.
of putrid buboes
Sometimes the body shows boils that are putrid and come from decayed matter. In the first instance when they appear, it is necessary to perform a cauterization on each head of the boil: a thin cautery made of mirte wood, the point of which should be taken by fire, or of long aristoloche root, or with the lenticular cautery. Sometimes they are cauterized at their beginning, according to this manner, and they cannot grow further, but the superfluous matter from them is broken up, and they become healthy; however, it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
When the artery is cut Often there are great losses of blood from the cut artery at the wound or in the incision of an abscess, or in the cautery of a limb, and similar things; it is a very bad thing to let it flow.
However, when this happens to anyone, hasten to place your finger on the wound of the vein, and press it tightly so that the blood is stopped from flowing out; then apply several small and large olive oil cauteries until they are all red; then take .i., either large or small depending on the size of the wound and the location where the artery is damaged, and place the cautery on that vein or the finger you are holding, and hold the cautery there until the blood flow has stopped.
And if the artery suddenly jumps when you press your finger on the vein, and the cauteries go out, take quickly another one of the cauteries that are in the fire.
And do not stop performing one after the other until the wound is closed; and beware that you do not burn the nerve that is exposed, and no other harm comes upon the patient; and know that when a vein stops flowing from the artery, it cannot be kept closed by itself when the artery is large, unless it is by one of the four ways we have said: either by cautery, or by extraction if it is not treated, or by tightly tying it with thread, or by medicines placed on it that have the power to keep blood in; and it should be tied and held together.
Whoever brings a tight binding of linen or places hot things or similar things on it, if it does not help, will not profit.
And if this happens to anyone and he does not have any medicine present, he should put his finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and stretch it tightly over the wound and over the vein; and do not move it, but the cold liquid should be often applied that is very cold until the wound is frozen and thickened and closed; and make inquiries ahead about what kind of cauteries and medicines are needed.
We have told you in the first chapter about every disease where cautery of fire or burning medicine is necessary, and we have discussed its causes, instruments, forms of cauteries; I have placed that chapter at the head, and I will continue in this chapter along the same path since those things are easier to understand.
And as I begin this, it is necessary, dear friend, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of the cauteries, and for that reason, it requires greater caution.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I advise you not to embark on folly. For many types of people come for treatment. Some come who are so entangled with their illness that they die easily due to the insanity caused by their disease, and from the severity of its malice; and it is this that should inspire fear. And among these are those who give you their opinion and say: "Wait, I am healed"; but the disease is deceitful. It is not advisable that you consent to those who come to you in this manner, but put more importance on your honor than on your desire, and do not rashly but wisely trust in what you are certain of, and in what you have observed; and use prognostication and indication in the treatment of your patients to convert health; and this will help you acquire good reputation, glory, and memory of praise.
Dear noble son, Our Lord grants you good understanding and righteousness, and if you wish to aspire to the holy inspiration of His hand, Amen.
I have divided this chapter into sections for easier understanding, following the order of the 'cauteries' section, which I have already explained from head to feet, as you may find it easier to understand what you need.
a head full of water
It is known that this illness often comes to children during childbirth and when the head of the child is squeezed too hard; sometimes it occurs for reasons unknown.
And I never saw this illness in anyone other than children, and all those that I have seen hurried toward death; therefore it seems to me that it is worth my while to abandon the work in some treatments.
And I saw a child whose shoulders were filled with water and the head swelled every day until it could no longer sustain it; and the moisture was assembled under the bone near the skull; therefore, when the moisture is between the skin and the bone, and the abscesses are small, you should make a large incision in the head; and it should be as long as two fingers, so that the moisture can run out; and here is the form of the lancet:
If the moisture is deeper and the abscesses are larger, you should make two incisions in the shape of a cross, as follows:
And if the moisture is beneath the bone and the signs that you see show the joints of the head opening on each side, and it jumps sharply when pressed with your hand inside, and it does not respond: then you must make three incisions in the head.
After the incision remove all moisture entirely. After that bind the incisions with linen and powders, and apply vinegar and oil, and leave it thus for five days; then release, and cure the wound by applying plasters and ointments, and keep the head stretched out until it has healed, and give the patient dried meat from the moisture until the limb is comfortable and healthy.
And another way of incision is that you look for the size of the abscess, and where the sharpness is; because sometimes it is in front, sometimes behind, sometimes on the right, and sometimes on the left.
Therefore, make the incision where the abscess is open and empty the liquid; perform the procedure as you are able; and be careful not to cover the artery; if blood flows, it may cause the patient's death from excessive bleeding and evacuation of fluid.
Open the affected area and drain the pus. Perform the treatment as you can; be mindful not to close off the artery; if blood emerges, it could lead to the patient's death due to excessive bleeding and removal of fluid.
When it happens that a disease called "cataract" affects the eyes or worsens, and medicine does not help, then the final remedy is cauterization by burning the two arteries.
Therefore, when you wish to cover [the affected area], the patient should bend their head backward; afterwards, rub the spot with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then grasp the patient's neck with one piece of cloth; then look where the veins bulge, and the shoulders on both sides are found behind the ears, and then they are placed back in position; then mark the places to be tied, then pierce them both with a sharp spatula of two parts until the incision reaches the bone, and this should be done by the width of the head.
And if you pierce [the vein], push the spatula beneath the artery and strike it above, making an incision like two fingers' width through.
And when the vein is pierced, it jumps up continuously without ceasing.
And if the artery does not open when felt, it is necessary that you measure the space of three fingers, then press and cut until the bone; and it is required to remove seven cubits of blood, and in case of accident it can be a little more or less according to what the patient can endure, and the filling of the artery; then examine the wound: if it remains on the bone without opening, the arrowhead that we incise does not come, then press and tie the wound and treat with ointment until it is healed.
From migraine
When an old migration comes and a sharp catarrh, due to moisture of the tears and the heat in the temples and old senility madness and similar things, and it is treated by means of medicine cures and all that does not help him, we should expose the arteries of the temples and cauterize, as we have stated.
And the method of extraction is that the patient bends his head backwards against the hairs on his temples, and listens to the artery which opens in the temple, because it opens well by its beating, and is not difficult to locate except in some very cold people; and if it is located, the patient pulls on its neck with some cloths, then rubs the area with a sharp cloth, and warms the area with hot water until the artery appears clearly; then takes the spatumile, as shown:
Then, lightly cut the skin to expose the artery, then pull it up towards the tweezers, and separate well the cloths that are on each side of it; and if the artery is thin, turn it at the end of the tweezers, then press that part according to the size of the two heads. Because if it is not pressed, it will not flow out completely.
And draw blood from the .vj. c/, up to .iij.; and if the arteries are large, it is necessary that you tie it with a double strong silk thread so that pus does not come out before the wound of the cut, and there is flowing of blood; then cut off the excess between the .ij. ligaments at that very hour, and if you see, then cauterize the wound made by the cautery knife up to the bone until the joints are cut; and this is the muedre operation, if the patient does not have fever and he is of a warm complexion.
For cauterizing is aid to end the swellings: for this reason it is a greater aid to swellings. For the extraction of arteries, it is necessary that a person fill the place with old cotton and put good stitches on top; and when they are untied, it should be cured with dry medicines that make pus, and with stitches until it is healed; and if without a cut from the artery as you work, hurry to cover with cauterizing, or use vitriol and strain your hand so that the wound does not bleed; and if this is not available, put your finger on the place until it freezes, and scrape the place with cold water until it stops bleeding, and tighten as necessary; and that which is muedre (festering) and easier in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein of this sharp cautery twice, but they should be well thickened to keep their warmth longer. For when the straw is too thin, it holds less heat. And it should have between the two blades, one thick of space, and then when you have signed it with incision on the two sides, and you place the iron hot over it until it reaches the bone, and cut open the vein in the two sides; and they should be separated from the two heads because it is not welded by this cautery all over; and this is the shape of the cautery:
tears
When the eyes are draining from veins that are above the head of the testicle, and there is no help from medicine that one can make, and you see the patient writhing in pain, and the forehead seems to shiver like with tremors; and they are tender and moist so that the hair of the scrotum falls out, and the scrotum becomes inflamed, and burned by the heat of the eyes, this type of treatment is necessary.
And they called it the "contused cure" by the ancients, and it is that you make incisions at the back of the patient who has this disease in the hair on the forehead, then you make three equal incisions along the length of the forehead; one of them should be as deep as two fingers all the way down, and the other two are each two fingers apart above the scrotum, but avoid cutting the arteries that are above the scrotum; keep your hand away from the continuation of the lower jaws, and let each wound have a size of three fingers joined together.
From the first incision at the temple to the second incision; and scrape all the cartilage that is between the two cuts along the bone, then continue from the mid-incision to the other second one, and then pull out this spatula.
If you insert the instrument called "cultellaire" in the first cut, it should be very sharp on one side and soft but not sharp on the other, and this is its shape: And place the incision along the chest toward the hard bone as desired, and the incision should soften towards the bone, and press until it reaches the middle incision. And close all the vessels that descend from the eye to the bone as long as the incision is continuous until it opens at the middle incision, and then continue in the middle incision until the other side is reached; and then equalize the blood, and press firmly for the blood taken; then put a tent of old cotton into each incision, and place wet linens soaked in vinegar, oil, and ashes on top, and make sure no pus comes in; on the third day, loosen the ligament, and apply strong hot mustard paste, then the cure of ointment with basilicon and oil, and other cures for wounds, until it heals.
the root of the eye(s)
When a sudden cataract usually comes, and you see the eyes becoming weak and small, and the vision becomes blurred, and the eyelids burn, and if the patient experiences pain in the head, and the patient coughs; then you should know by these symptoms that these materials and the cataract do not come from a single vein, but rather many. And the treatment for this condition is as follows.
And you instruct the patient to bend their head back, then make a large incision along the forehead and another one wide. From the left temple to the right temple, let the incision reach the bone; keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move when eating; when the bone is exposed, suck all the blood out with a sponge, then press between the two edges of the incision and put old cotton, then linen threads; then cover it with damp cloths soaked in wine and oil, and be careful not to cause an abscess to heat up; when it is removed, you must rub the bone until char flesh starts to grow, then treat it with things that promote fleshy growth.
Then mix two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony, and make a poultice with it; administer it to these wounds to promote fleshy growth all over.
the stoppage of the ears
Everything that falls into the ears is one of the four things: grains, animals, stones or similar items such as iron; seeds, such as peas, beans, lentils and similar things; or something flowing, like water and oils and similar things.
When something falls into the ear that does not fit or grow in the ear, put the ear to sunlight. If you see the object, distill a little purple oil or camphor oil on it, then bring extraction; and make him vomit with ginger, and stop his nostrils when vomiting occurs, and put pieces of cloth or wool around the ear; and elevate the ear above. Often farting comes from this treatment; and if it does not come, extract it with fine tweezers as follows:
If it farts out with the tweezers, that is good; if not, extract it using fine tweezers with a small loop; and if it does not come out this way, make a catheter of beeswax, push its tip into the ear canal forcefully, and stop the surrounding area with soft wax so that air cannot enter with the catheter; then pull it out forcefully, as farting often comes in this manner; and if it does not come out in this way, take a snail (glut) of what you need, put it on any instrument suitable for this purpose, and put a piece of cotton around it; then press the snail onto the object or whatever it may be, and pull it out. And if the ear does not jump from all these things that we have said, quickly cut the ear before an abscess or spasm comes, and the method of the cutting is that you first drain the patient's head of the cephalique fluid, then draw out the blood according to the measure of its potency, then seat the patient between your hands and turn the ear upward, and make a small cut in the root of the ear where the fat or flesh hangs; and the cut should be like a moon, until you reach the bone, then break it as much as you can, and suck quickly with your mouth; and cure it until it heals. If it is pus that swells, administer extraction; and if it cannot come out, administer a thin, subtle spatula in this form:
Then administer incision of that grain. But do not do this when you think the grain is moist due to the moisture in the ear, until you have made many pieces; then extract it with delicate tweezers and a sucker, as we have said, so that the extraction is even.
In the ear when water falls, instruct the patient to use an eardrop of the first kind, and fill the ear with old cotton. The patient should lie on that ear itself or where the water fell. If it jumps out due to this, that's good. If not, take many small and light pebbles according to the size of your finger, heat them slightly in fire; then make the patient hold a piece of bone from his ear and press with another stone on the stone within the ear; do not stop pressing one stone against another until the water jumps out completely, causing it to jump out entirely; if you observe, take a strip, and push one of the bones into the ear, and grasp the other end of the strip with fire until the bone closest to the tip is burnt; then repeat this process with other strips until the water completely comes out, as we have said in the stone.
In the extraction of an animal, if it is small like a flea and similar things, treat it as we have said in the division; but if it is large that can be felt, bring forth extraction by tweezers; and it is the lighter thing to remove that is within the ear.
In the removal of worms in ears, when you treat it as we have said in the division and where distillation is used, but the treatment does not help, then you should observe the ear under the sun: if any worms open up, remove them with fine tweezers, and if no worms appear, take the snake-shaped device shown here:
And let it be narrow beneath and wide above. And push the most subtle head into the ear according to the degree of suffering of the patient, then suck the whole canal thoroughly; do this frequently until all the worms emerge. And if they do not obey to come out, stop up around the canal with cotton as I said earlier; and if they do not protrude as we have said, administer distillations that the ancients have proven effective in removing worms, and you will find where to administer distillations or treat distillations; and if you distill your oils and medicines into the ear with this instrument, it will be shaped as you see:
And let it be narrow at the bottom with a small silver or brass tube and wide above for distillation; and for pressing inside the distillation with an instrument of brass well made for this purpose, and if you see, take a scraper and wrap cotton around its tip; then pour in your oil or juice, and whatever medicine you wish into the canal, and let the canal be in the ear; then push the scraper into all the cotton and press your hand gently until the oil is distilled or the ear becomes heated; and let the patient smell inside, and let the distillation be heated for a moment as it would be in the ear; but keep it from being too cold, for the medicine would not be good.
of stopping the ears
No child is born without some kind of swelling in the ears; and this same thing happens in men due to an injury or abscess within the ear, and this swelling sometimes completely fills the ear, if it cannot be seen; and sometimes there is only one hole visible, and it can be easily seen.
Therefore, when it completely fills the ear and cannot be seen, it is difficult to treat in various positions, and in this case you must place the sick person's ear in the sun; look inside: if you see the swelling apparent, you should open it with a spatula of the kind shown here:
And let it be sharp and thin all around so that it does not burn the ear; if the swelling is from pus or cartilage of the ear, hold it with fine forceps and press lightly until all the pus is removed.
And if the tumor is fully inside the ear, take a fine, sharp instrument and heat it slightly over fire, then place it in the ear cavity. If you feel the tumor, which causes the patient discomfort in hearing, make a small incision lightly, making sure not to injure the nerves of the ear; then put a bandage in the ear according to the size of the wound, and moisten it with the Egyptian ointment.
Every day, as long as the wound is healing, take a bandage and moisten it with rosewater, and powder fine vitriol on it; if you see swelling in the ear, it is necessary to remove the bandage and apply another damp bandage made of rose oil and wax until the swelling disappears; then continue to heal it until it is healthy.
If bleeding occurs, immerse a sponge and cloth in cold water and place it on the ear, and use other treatments to stop the bleeding which are either to treat distillations.
of the flesh (or skin) of the papery ones
That which comes from the skin of papery ones (when they are moist and dry), should be stretched with tweezers and forceps, and then struck at its roots with a spatula; afterwards put vitriol powder on it.
And if it cannot be peeled off, then cauterize it with the subtle cautery of lentil size and after incision is worth more; and many times it repairs itself, where nothing remains from its roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, the roots are burned and do not return.
of the scab
Often times, in the paper of the eyes, something comes that appears to be hailstones in shape and hardness, and because of this, it is called "hail", and it is a collection of large moisture on the above and below sides of the paper; the procedure is as follows: keep watch over when the hail becomes silent from both sides, and this is an easy thing to know; then make a large opening, gently peel off each part, take hold with tweezers, and crush it. If you cannot cover it without piercing the paper slightly, do not worry the patient; if the crack is large, assemble it with a stitch and let it heal until it heals; if it is small, do not apply force, as ointments will restore it quickly and damage the skin.
If the hail is descending inside the ear towards the upper part, turn the paper over and take hold of the hail with tweezers, crush it and press from both sides; if the paper is displaced by the incision, do not worry about it; when the hail has been crushed, apply salty oil and heal the affected area until the patient recovers.
of the fat of the eyes
Exinach is a grease that is impregnated in towels made of papyrus paper, and this happens more often with children rather than with adults, and it greatly irritates their eyes, and they get catarrh in the mornings, and cannot look at the light of the sun because tears hasten to their eyes; and for this reason, they lie down on their faces immediately, and sleep on top, and their towels are moist under their eyelids that the exinach has opened in the oil. And when you press the leek between your fingers and feel the exinach between them.
And the method of work is that the patient puts his head in your lap; and then take one linen cloth, and prepare a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity that contains exinach from each part, then place it on top; and press with both hands from one side and another, so that the exinach is assembled within the circle; then make a cut in the middle using a sharp spatula with a width not larger than the wound that one makes when opening a vein; and cut the skin as far as you see the exinach; and sometimes exinach comes out from the cut, according to the shape of a white piece of fat.
Then take a piece of coarse cloth between your hands and turn your hand left and right until it is spread out; and ensure that you do not add to the cut, that you do not come all the way to the oil, and that you do not injure it.
And if the incision does not open at the start of the wound, lift up the wound slightly; then pull it apart as we have said, then wet cloths in warm and cold water, and place them on the wound, and hold bandages.
For those men who grind oil and place it on to corrupt the moisture that remains; then cure it until it is healthy. And if an abscess comes to the place hot, cure it with plasters cooling it until it is healthy.
hairs from paper (translated literally)
When paper lice are born with hair unlike nature, and grow up, they harm the eyes, and bring about kinds of diseases such as tear ducts that become accustomed to weeping and softening of the paper, causing destruction of the eyelashes; and the cure is in four ways: either by cautery together with fire, or by medication according to what is mentioned in the chapter on cautery, and it is done either by incision and stitching, or by tweezers, as I shall say.
You must hold the patient's head in your healthy hand, then turn the paper lice from the oil to your left hand; if it is turned over, that is good; if not, push an awl through one of its filaments; and cut it off at the edge where the hairs grow out of those eyelashes, and pull one filament up across the entire paper, then shave it; then make an incision under the paper, under the eyelashes, all the way from the large tear duct to the small one; then draw one filament, and place a small tent of cotton and gauze under the paper, then sew a fiddlehead of mirte or similar material on top of the paper, and it is essential that the figure be according to the quantity of the paper you intend to raise.
And if a large quantity of the paper needs to be removed according to the softness of the paper; then make an incision along all the two lines that you have marked, and start from the large tear duct to the small one; and let it be one of the slits close to the natural hairs, then insert the onion into one of the angles of the wound, then peel off the outer layer; then sew together the two lips with a stitch of fine woolen thread, and remove the blood, and stick the surplus filaments over both eyelids to any gluey substances, if you wish to do so; and if not, leave the stitch and the filaments for 2-4 days; then treat the wound without stitching with drying and constricting agents, since the paper reattaches at the edges of the wound and its assembly, but the stitches are moved (as the ancients say), and this is an operation without fear.
And if in another way: and it is that you bind the paper with a figure such as the fiddle of myrtle, as we have told, at three openings according to the following form:
then draw equally across the small openings according to the following form:
And if you do not have the power to hold the pliers, and the things are not equal, take a needle with one thread, and pass it through the figure; pass one more thread from the large opening, and the second thread from the small, and assemble the threads equally between your fingers; then move your hand equally, and move all the skin over which you have drawn, as we have told, then close the two lips of the wound with stitching, and treat it until it is healed; if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with cerote and similar ointments.
And sometimes it happens that the hair of the papyrus is converted: you must use what we have said about incision, but sewing in one and the other is more artificial.
The cure for boils is as follows: You must convert the papyrus and make it inside according to what I have said, then make 2 caines by art, and 2 fine threads as long as the papyrus and the width of a spatula; and tie together the 2 parts where you hold the threads; next, assemble the one and the other subtly on top of the papyrus covered with oil, and bind the 2 caines from the 2 parts together; leave it for some days, and the skin that is bound will rot and die, until it bursts through.
If it takes a long time, if you must force it to burst, then cure it until it is healed; and when the wound is closed, and the papyrus can no longer be felt through it; and this is the shape of the 2 caines that you will make according to this figure, and according to this length and width:
1. The work (ovraiges) is such that you take a fine needle, and insert a thread of silk and fine yarn; then assemble the joints carefully and put them together subtly, and let the length of the threads be about a palm (of your hand); then arrange another thread of fine silk briefly, and tie its end; then make the patient place their head in your hand; and expose it to the sun so that the work is visible, for it is subtle and delicate work, then push the needle through the entire length of the channel in the root of the hair next to the natural hair, and pierce it quickly into the paper until you pull it over the natural hair; then pull out the hair up to the channel, and insert the channel with the hair, if there is one or two or three or more; then pull your hand so that the hairs come out of the entire channel with the natural hair.
And if the channel is treated and the hairs do not come out with it, you will draw the channel below to the thread that you have arranged, until the channel comes out through the hole and can be seen by the oil; then you will draw the channel and the thread, close the oil and leave it for two or three days, until the hair grows in its place and new flesh forms; if the hairs are small, accompany one long natural hair and let it grow with this one, until it is elongated and then cut it.
of the purification of the oil
When this disease called "aleacrati" or porridge comes in the oil, it has two ways: one natural and the other unnatural. It happens suddenly through a wound, or a cut, or cautery, and similar things.
And the method of working in it is that you cut through that joint, separate its lips, and put within them linseed soaked in hot oil until it is healed; and you must not use drying or binding agents in this treatment, for if you do so, the disease worsens more than before. However, work with things softening, such as fenugreek; and the rose of water or leeks and flaxseed should be cooked, and then diluted in any oil, and wrap it in a linen cloth and heal it thus.
And the treasure of your treatment is that you take care not to let it heal in its original form; and this work, which we have said, does not remedy this disease unless it is addressed correctly so that it does not return in its original form.
Of the fat that comes in oil
This disease, which is truly called "achrati", is both natural and accidental. The accidental part comes from wounds, cuts, cauterizations, and similar things; and the procedure for this in it is that you take an awl, with which there should be a double thread, and poke into the fat, and make it pierce from the left eyebrow to the right, so that the threads come out in two hairs of the fat; then raise the fat above the awl, and press it with one spatula wide.
And if the shape of the paper returns according to what is necessary, that's good; if not, take a rasp and put it in the cut, and turn the paper, and make two cuts where the thickness is inside the paper; and let the hairs from the two cuts be at the four corners of the incision you made, and make an angle so that when they are assembled, the shape should be like the shape of a letter with the name "j. greek"; then remove that fat, according to the thickness that its sides are curved underneath the paper, then join the two separated parts, and sew them with a linen thread; then treat this as we have said with medicines softening and binding, until it is healed.
And if the patient's illness comes from a wound or stitching or cautery, then you must make a clean incision under the hairs of the papery area, as previously stated; then press between the two layers of a tent, as I said; and the work should be done according to the shape of the disease, because it is very diverse in form, and wise masters prepare an engine with all possible skill so that the figure returns to its natural shape; and the patient themselves, according to what the work and instruments require in various positions.
under the papery area
When this kind of suture occurs in men in such a way that the papery area above is sealed with white oil, and it cannot move or perform its natural functions, then you must cut the tip of a razor under the papery area, lift it up; hold it with forceps until you reach the subcutaneous fat, which should not be too sharp nor too deep so that the patient does not suffer from a sharp spatula piercing the oil; and your incision, from which you scrape that assembly, should be gentle, so that the papery area returns to its natural form; and this entire assembly becomes healed, and sometimes it is made salty with acidic oil, and the acidic liquid lifted, and colloid; then place between the papery area and the oil a tent of linen, and place wool dampened with egg on the oil; and after three days use the colloid and other healing substances until it becomes healed.
of the nail of the finger
The nail has two manners: it is nervous and resembles a hard thing, and another that is not nervous but resembles white moist matter congealed; when it is touched by iron and cooked with tweezers, it cannot heal; and both resemble toward the large root, and grow little by little until it covers all the nail and all the light and movement of the finger.
And the manner of incision is that the patient places his head in your hand, then opens the eyes; take paper with your hand, then clip the nail with small tweezers, and lift it up; then take a needle, and put a horse hair or ox hair, or strong thread on it; double the tip of the needle a little and pierce it into the nail, and pierce it all the way through with the needle, and tie the nail with thread and lift it up, and shave all the hair from the side of the nail that is near the skin and the silk to the hair until the root, then grind away the rest in the root of the finger to the softest part and smallest forces, and leave the natural flesh or root, so that the body does not produce tears as usual; and sometimes the nail is set on the incision only, and at the fillet, as we have said; then shave off all the soft part of it in this way:
And be careful that the spatula does not touch the flesh layer and tear it, and that the needle is not pierced; and after the incision pour oil a small amount of crushed egg yolk, and from collyrium made of litharge, leave it until the next day; then treat it as necessary until it is healed.
If the nail is not nerve-like, and you cannot insert a needle, and the tweezers cannot enter, this type of nail is often treated with medicine; and they grow as I have said in the division, if you see it covered, open the oil of the patient, and take the spatula, sharp point according to this shape:
Then cut the nail thinly and if you see that it does not shrink at all and the reason is pressing, distill from your mouth into the oil collyrium made of litharge and red collyrium and crushed egg yolk, and stop the oil until the next day; then repeat the other work according to this procedure until it is completely removed.
If nothing contradicts you in oil, like an abscess, then drain it and first heal the abscess until it is healed, then continue the work as before, until it is healed.
And if the appearance of the flesh from the wound worsens in oil due to great harm, suspend it at the incision, and cut a small part, not all, so that tears do not come; then distill red collyrium oil made of litarge.
of the flesh that grows on the cornea
For certain men, a red swelling sometimes grows over the eye and covers it under paper and turns to the side, resembling a rosebud on a trellis; and in such cases, the patient places their head on a support, then they cut open the eyelids, and all that red swelling should be removed with appropriate scissors and held firmly; then cut the first piece of the swelling, and go on cutting to the end, ensuring not to injure the eye during the procedure; and it is an incision with a spatula as mentioned in the incision of the nail and the small forces used for removing the skin around it, as the form after this chapter demonstrates.
And when the incision is complete and all the swelling has been removed, apply oil of linseed or you distill red collyrium and resembling corrosive medicines, and place cotton with egg white on it over the wound to keep it warm; if anything remains, and the wound is swollen, and you doubt the wound is warm, leave the oil and cure the wound with things soothing warm wounds; then return to your procedure until the wound is healed, and do this for all swellings treated in oil by this method.
But it is necessary that you take care of each oil treatment with natural method and accidental method using iron; and do not put your hand in any of these treatments until you see that the limb is resistant to this procedure.
veins of the eyes
These are the veins covered over the eye, and they perform their work and weaken the eye for all days. Therefore, it is necessary that you first examine if it is indeed the eye that has this problem, and there is no other disease present except for the eye; then treat it in this manner: instruct the patient to place his head on your hand, then press those veins all along, according to your wisdom, and let the pressure be subtle, double, according to this form:
And there shall be two pressures by degree in one hand, according to this form:
Then, gently press the veins with subtle forces, and withdraw the blood hour after another, until you see the veins move away from the oil; and be careful not to pierce the oil with the points of the spatulas, and perform this task at noon in front of the sun, and be very warm in your task so that you do not catch anything but the veins; and when you have done this, if you distill into the colyrium green and red oil for those who remain stuck in the scab.
And if you cannot collect all of this in that hour, apply a plaster on the oil of soothing things for the pain of the eyes, and leave it for some days until the pain is alleviated and assured of being healed, then continue according to this manner as before until it is healthy; and this is the form of the forces:
of the oil duct
The mirror is called "arissati" fistula: when you treat it with cautery and burning medicine as I have said before, and it is not healed, there is a cavity in it where it should die, and you must cut open the abscess, removing all the moisture that is there until the bone is exposed.
And when the bone is exposed, you will see the corruption and blackness, and you shall shape it with all the tools as shown here; and it is called "sharp head", and it should be made like a reamer for one head, and pointed like a file as shown in the present form.
And place it on the corrupt bone part, then turn it between your fingers and press your hand a little until you know that the corruption is reduced; and do this once, then restore the place of healing medications.
If the joint is fused, and char (perhaps referring to a type of swelling or inflammation) arises, and the body of the bone is fused and remains so for 40 days, and it does not heal and is not abscessed, and no serious accident occurs, know that it is healthy; if not, there is no other remedy but to return the fistula (perhaps referring to a type of passage or channel) to its original position as follows: and it is that you expose the bone for the second time using iron, and with medicines that are hot, and when it is exposed, take one iron rod according to this form, and let the head of the rod be at three angles, and the shaft be tapered to a point as you see here.
Then place the iron on the bone of the joint, and move your hand away from the oil by one span, then turn the rod completely until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it through the vein if he holds his hand upon his thigh; and then restore the joint with dry medicines as I have shown you, and when the char (perhaps referring to a type of swelling or inflammation) arises and hardens the joint, the matter goes to the neck; this is an easier thing for the patient.
of the oil exit
When the eyes are completely opened and there is no disturbance to the ship (meaning, when there is no swelling), it is necessary that you hold the patient; then clean, then apply ointment or oil of rue without causing injury, then apply oil made from acacia and aloe, incense, and sarcolocate, and then bind the oil, and plaster it over bandages and cloth; and the manner of the cloth is such that you take soft cloths, fold each one in four, and put one on top of another according to the amount required by the eyes; then bind with a strong bandage and repeat the ointment application without causing injury; then remove the ointment and leave the bound oil for day and night, and if the bandage becomes loosened, it is necessary that you tighten it; then remove the bandage after day and night, and if you see the oil healing, it is good; if not, repeat the application of the ointment, plaster, bandage, and oil until it heals.
For the bursting of a burst bladder
When disruptions occur in the burst bladder, then it fills with paper like a grain of resin and is easily visible; therefore, if you see it covered, the treatment is as follows: take an awl and insert it into the root of the part below up to where it is above, then insert another awl or a double-filed thread from the edge of the wound; pierce it, leaving the first awl according to its position; tie a part of the bladder around it and bind it tightly, then remove the awl and apply moistened linen oil abundantly; leave it until the filaments adhere with the bladder, then heal the oil of comforting things until the wound is healed; and sometimes the wound is held in place by the bladder itself using a circular bandage of cloth until it is healed.
And if the eyes show a large appearance, pierce it with a subtle spatula that comes fully filled with oil, and clear away the moisture albugine and dissolve the eyes, and enter immediately; then draw it out when it is healed.
of the oil bowl
This disease called "alcunnati" is not caused by any other source than the oil bowl, resembling an ulcer descending like an eye; however, it is not actually an eye infection. The appearance of the work is such that you have the patient sit on a chair arranged and upright. Then take the head between both hands in two parts, and move it until you see the oil bowl coming towards your eyes; then it should be inserted and the light should be cleared away, and let the patient observe things as they normally would; if it does not clear away from under the bowl, know that it is an eye infection, and if the removal of the bowl is not done as described above, then you must sit the patient between your hands, then take a subtle spatula and push it on the cornified tissue and bone, along the continuation of the conjunctive with the cornea and cornea, until the bowl issues; when it has come out, it should be distilled in hot, sweet, boiling oil (or water and honey, or water and fenugreek boiled with honey), then cured with another treatment until it is healed.
Of the waters of oil
We have the similarity of waters in division, and what is required to pierce; if you work according to its health. You must make the patient sit between your hands crossed, away from the light for the sun, and hold the oil clean and squeeze it very strongly; then take the paper of the oil with your left hand, where the eye is on the left side, or with your right hand, where the eye is on the right side; then take in your right hand, if the eye is on the left side, the instrument called "almagda", or take it in your left hand, if the eye is on the right side; then place the tip of the instrument near the crown by the thickness of a finger in that corner of the oil at the lower eyelid, then push the instrument called "almagda" firmly and hold your hand as much as it penetrates into the oil, and feel that almagda enters the empty space; and it is necessary that the path of almagda be at the full length of the measurement of the space from the pupil to the end of the iris; and this is the crown of the eye; then you will see the bone in the paper due to the brightness of the perforated paper, and then place the instrument up to where the water is, then press down a path after another. If the water now comes out, the patient sees it before him and the instrument in his eye.
After a short rest and if the water rises again through the second path, apply force with the instrument, and when it is firmly inserted and does not rise, gently rotate almagda in a circular motion with your hand; then place another small amount of gem oil within. Then place wet cotton wool or damp cloth soaked in rose oil and egg around it and hold it with clean oil. We, and those of our time, place crushed camomile with abundance of egg on top.
And if the almond cannot enter into the oil because of its hardness, for there are some men who have very hard eyes, then you must take the instrument that is called "alberit", of which this is its form:
Then perforate only the conjunctive and do not go too deep, but make one shallow incision first, then insert the almond as previously mentioned; and when the work is completed, arrange for the patient to sleep on his back in two layers of darkness; and be careful of all movements, and provide light food, and do not move his head either to the right or left, and bind him according to his position until the third day; then unbind him in the same dark place, test his sight, and let him see some things, and then re-bind him for seven days; and do not perform this procedure during the time of cure or immediately after the incision, but you should relieve it because the aqueous humor rises quickly.
If an abscess has appeared, then you should unbind the oil before the seventh day and direct those who soothe the abscess; and when it is soothed, you should unbind the eye and place .1. eyepatch over it for a day or more, and remain in that dark place. Then gradually leave the house and convert to his room; and know that no disciples should interfere in this case.
And one came to us who was from the Yrach, who told us that in his country they do a remedy for almagda, which causes the liquid to flow out, but I have never seen anyone in our land with it, nor have I ever read about it in the books of the ancients; and perhaps it is a new thing.
And these are the symptoms of almagda, because those who do not know them will see them; and they are from araignée properly speaking:
And the head of these is of the same subtlety, and the tail in four corners.
Of the flesh upon the nose
Never are or nose sores born in different places, causing some to resemble scorpions from their feet; and if there are such sores that the flesh is swollen of a fox color, and if there is a sore soft of bone color. In those cases of the soft sores that are not swollen, it is necessary for you to make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun; and open his nostrils, and pour the honey onto the sores, and pull them out; then grasp what you can hold with a fine sharp spatula on one side, until you know that the sore is completely removed.
And if any residue remains that cannot be grasped, open it all with fine and light instruments, until there is nothing left; and if the sore or abscess remains closed, use the proper care; and if it is malignant abscesses, hasten and cauterize it as much as possible so that the pus is drained and all the sores are removed, then pour in honey or vinegar.
1. If the neck does not work and moisture comes up to the palace (throat), know that it is sick; and if moisture does not pierce as it should, know that there is pus in the bone above, so the instrument does not come for cutting: then you must apply a thick flax thread, no larger than your finger, with space of less than one inch between each thread. Place the patient's head in the thread in its neck to the extent possible, and pull it out smelling until it comes from the neck through the mouth; and children do this frequently at school, and it is easy for whoever wants to do it; then hold the head that comes from the neck with one hand, and the other head that comes from the mouth with the other hand, and know each other in turn by us who are holding the thread. Do this until you know that the threads have corrupted the pus, then pull out the thread, squeeze the blood, moisten the thread in Egyptian ointment, and put it back into the neck as before; do this for 4 days or more, until the ointment corrodes everything that remains of the pus; and then put a plug of wood into the neck for some days until it is healthy, and if there is a need for drying medicines, use them; and this is the form of the instrument to purify the head, as oil and medicines are distilled in the neck.
And it should be of silver or brass, resembling an open lantern, like a cane, and you should lead it so; and if you see, then make a closed cane, and let the instrument be full for purifying the head; and have one handle on the head to hold when heating the oil or any liquid.
of the pus in the neck
Many times a disease called "telul" arises in the head of the nose and grows and becomes large until it can be seen; therefore, you must cut it at the beginning, completely excise it, then place the fire cautery or burning medicine on its place; and if one delays covering it while it is still large, beware if it is hard, discolored, insensitive: do not touch it with iron as it is a worsened abscess, because when it is covered once, it brings great harm to the patient; and if the abscess is of soft touching and not discolored, you can completely cover it. The patient empties it and covers it with fear, and cures the place with drying and constricting substances.
when the nose is cut and sewn
When a solution of continuation comes to one of these cartilages, it is useful in only a few men. Therefore, when this happens to anyone, check if the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then bring the two lips together for stitching, heal it until it is healed; and if the lips have already separated from each other, you must cut all the areas of their cartilage so that they heal, then bring the two lips together for stitching, tighten them, and sprinkle powder on powder of dragon's blood, and incense pulverized; and place the powders over an emplastrum piece (a medicated dressing) of strong or another emplastrum adhering, and leave it until it exudes through it, then heal with ointment until it is healed.
The method of sewing is that you assemble the solution: either with needles, as I have told you in the abdomen stitching; or with thread, as I have explained to you.
of abscesses on the lips
When abscesses on the lips are hard within, similar to grains of wheat, and greater or smaller in size; then you must turn the lips, cut an incision on each side, take it with pincers and crush it in each part; afterwards use vitriol powder over the incision until the blood is stopped; then apply alum and dry cures to heal the wound until it is healthy.
Of the flesh of the jaws
Often, pusillanimous flesh arises on the jaws that the ancients called "albulus"; you should hold it with tweezers and cut its root, allowing the pus to flow or the blood; then place vitriol powder or other restricting and drying powders on the spot; and if the pus returns after the incision, as often happens, you should cut it again, and cauterize it: it will not return after the cauterization; and this are the shapes of instruments for covering.
Of the sores
Sometimes teeth or gums assemble together near the chin within the mouth between the gums, and they are ugly and rough; sometimes the teeth become black and yellowish and curved until the corruption reaches the gum, and the teeth smell; you must make the patient sit between your hands and the patient's head should be in your lap, and clean the teeth or the rough spots that appear, as long as nothing remains; and do the same for the blackness and the greenness, and the yellowish and other spots, until they are cleaned; and if one removes the one that is present at the first reason, it is good; if not, you should start again on the second or third day and the patient as long as you have everything cleaned; know that teeth require different forms of instruments to clean them, according to what the work shows, because the instrument used to clean the teeth has other forms than the one used between the teeth; and these forms and others are prepared for you.
When you cure the tooth of its pain, it is necessary to wait as long as possible before pulling it out, because this should not be done at all; for this is a very high substance until there is no excuse to remove it with the rasp. Then when the patient is forced to pull out a tooth, it is necessary that you be certain of which tooth needs to be pulled out. Many times the pain deceives the patient, and believes that it is the healthy tooth, and pulls out the good one; yet the pain does not go away because the bad one remains, for we have seen this happen before with lords; and when you are certain about which tooth needs to pull out, you should cut around the tooth all around. Use a strong spatumile for protecting the gum from all sides; then move it with your fingers or subtle tweezers at the base of the first root and root, until they are well loosened, then firmly tighten the tweezers; and keep the patient's head in your lap so it does not move.
After extracting the tooth straight without breaking it, if it does not come out easily, take one of these instruments and gently push it in from each side, and move it as you have done before. And if the tooth is perforated and chewed, you must fill it with bandages, where the hole is; and hold it subtly with pliers so that it does not break when pulled; and it is very careful to work around the gum to remove the tooth.
And be careful not to break it, and leave a part behind, and return pain to the patient because of the root even greater than the first. Be careful not to do as ignorant lords often do, who in their haste and bravery sometimes break the cart and never bring what we have mentioned; but sometimes they bring about great illness through the roots that remain, or through the broken chariot as we have often seen; and when the tooth is pulled, wash the area with wine or oil and linen; and if bleeding comes out, which often happens, use vitriol powder; and if that does not work, cauterize it.
The shapes of the instruments, which often silence the teeth first, should have long points and thick handles, which do not bend as you pull the tooth; and these are the shapes:
And let them be large members that do not yield when pulled, and let them be hard made of iron, and sharpened to hold onto things.
From the root of the teeth When the root remains when pulled out, you must put cotton moistened in butter on it for one or two days until the tooth socket is softened. Then insert the pliers called "algefri," causing the teeth to resemble a beak of a pincers; and make them inside like a chisel, and that's their form:
And if the roots do not want to come out with all these tools, you must uncover the flesh entirely around the root, and put in the instrument called "althali", that is known as a probe, which is shaped like this:
And be thick and large so as not to break it, and if the root jumps out through these tools, that's good; if not, help with all the instruments, of which the forms come after:
And if help is given with this instrument having two prongs, which is shaped like this:
And other instruments that are before them in reason of teeth, and of this tool which seems like great pincers, whose shape is:
And this tool must not break, and know that many instruments of teeth are; and also other tools, which are not listed; and the wise masters themselves find their tool by themselves, according to what their work and the disease show, because there are such diseases where the ancient ones did not teach any instrument due to diversity among them, and if it breaks the cart or other bones, or if it can, then he will search for the tools that are necessary, which I have told you, and help with gestures, of which this is the shape: And be large and sturdy to hold the bone, so it does not slip, but can hold and remove; and then restore the place with medicines suitable for that, and if there is pus in the bone, and it is small, then use this entire tool:
When the teeth appear not as natural according to the body, and their form is ugly, especially in women, you should know that if a tooth has not grown after the tooth falls out, and it is not in the correct place, it cannot be set or filed; then pull it out; and if it erupts with another tooth, take this instrument whose shape is similar to a small beak, sharp at the end, and made of iron.
And the handle of the file is held with hands for many hours due to the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the others; if it appears that it can be filed, file it with a small file shaped like this.
and is like the file used to make needles; and file the tooth gently with this small file for many hours, until it stops hurting; then plane it at the end with any rasp, and if the tooth is excessively sharp and bites the tongue, you must file down its sharpness until it is even, so that it does not bite the tongue or corrupt speech.
When the teeth fall out
When the teeth fall out by either falling or being knocked out, and the patient cannot bite down on them when eating, you should treat them with medicines that tighten, but this is not effective; instead, you must tie them up with a gold thread because silver threads turn green and rot, but gold does not change; let the thread be neither too thick nor too thin, according to the space between the teeth; if the teeth are pointed towards each other, take the thread and place it between two healthy teeth, then put the roots in the gaps where they may be one or more, as long as you can see clearly up to the healthy tooth on the other side; then continue covering until the part where you started, and hold your hand subtly and accurately so that they do not move; let your grip be at the root of the tooth so it does not escape. Then take the roots with tweezers and assemble them, and place them back in the gap, making sure they do not cut the tongue; then keep them tightly closed for as long as they can stay in place, and if they come loose or the thread breaks, tie them up again with another thread; if they remain and serve for a while, and this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the alignment of two healthy teeth and two roots, as you see:
And when the tooth falls out and is put back in its place repeatedly as we have said; do not interfere with anyone who is not wise and compassionate, and sometimes the shape of a bone from a cow is used, and it is placed where the tooth is missing, and it is tied up as we have said, and it remains for a long time.
To cover the ligament of the tongue
Sometimes this ligament comes under the tongue due to nature or by accident from a healed wound. The treatments are such that you open the mouth of the patient and hold their head still. Then lift the tongue, cover the nervous ligament with a large bandage while the tongue is dislocated and if there is hardness or pain, it is from sudden injury, so put the forceps and cover the healed wound with a large bandage. Make sure that the incision is not too deep to avoid the artery that is underneath. After doing this, raise the swelling with cold water and vinegar or cold water, then place a linen tent over the tongue and have the patient bite it each night so the swelling does not heal. If blood discharge comes out, apply vitriol powder; if it does not heal, cauterize it with a slow fire cautery which is good for this purpose. Then cure it with other treatments until it heals.
If you see the swelling becoming pale or black or hard and the patient does not feel it, do not touch it because it is a chancre; if it is declining towards blenchor and there is moisture, throw the forceps and use a thin spatula to deliver it from both sides. If it does not heal at your treatment, apply vitriol powder until it heals completely. Then raise the swelling with cold water and vinegar, and cure it with other treatments until it heals.
Abscesses of the throat
There are boils inside the throat that are called "godath," and they are properly called the two almonds. And when you treat them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, be careful: if it is a hard abscess of small size and reddish color, do not touch it with iron. And if it is red and the root is thick, do not touch it with iron, also for the reason of blood flow; but leave it until it becomes ripe, and then you will cut it open or it will burst by itself; and if it is white-colored and the root is subtle, prepare the instrument to cover. But first, make sure that the abscess is calm and soothed. Then make the patient sit in front of the sun, and his head should be in your hand, and open his mouth and take the pincers between your hands, and press the tongue under the whole instrument, in this way it is shaped; and it can be made of silver or fine copper like a knife:
And you press the tongue to this whole instrument and see the abscess, then take the awl and poke it into the almond, and pull it out upwards more than you can; and pull something from the cloth with it, then hit it on the instrument in this way, which looks like a hammer, and although the head is curved, one end to another, and they are very sharp, it is made of iron or copper.
And if you do not have this instrument present, use pliers of this shape:
Then take pliers of the following shape: and when you have gripped one of the almonds, grip the other in the same manner, and after incising, pour hot, sharp, and astringent liquids over the wound, and if bleeding occurs, pour more hot liquids or scorched pomegranate skins or myrtle leaves, and similar things until the blood is stopped; then cure it until it heals; sometimes other abscesses arise in the throat instead of the two almonds, so grip them as you would the two almonds equally.
I treated a woman with an abscess that was inside her throat, specifically one of small size; and I had pressed closed the entire throat so that the woman could not exhale due to obstruction, and could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if she stayed like that for one or two days. The abscess was so high up that it had filled two inches through both nostrils. So I acted quickly, pierced one of the nostrils with a cannula, then pulled it out, taking out a large piece of pus; then I re-pierced the other nostril and opened the mouth and pressed the tongue; after that, I inserted the cannula into the abscess, took a part of it, and did not let any pus come out except a small amount of blood; and in this way, the obstruction of the throat was relieved for the woman, and she began to drink water, then wine, and did not stop cutting off that abscess for a long time; the abscess grew again, filled up the space I had made, becoming quite large; then I trapped it and cauterized it inside the throat: it stopped growing; I left those parts and let God do what He wished with them afterward.
Of the eye
When the eye is swollen and elongated, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is thick and round, it is called "eye". When it is treated as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help, and you see that the large abscesses are soothed, and it is subtle, it must be cut; and if it is round and swollen but not elongated; and it is red or of a dark color or black, it must be incised. For there is great danger on the patient. Therefore, when you see it, according to the manner that I have said, you should first make the patient sit in front of the sun, and press his tongue with the instrument which we have described before; then insert the probe into the eye, pull it out, and cut it at .1 to .2 inches as I have said in the incision of the 2 anvils. And you must not cut more than the superfluidity that is beyond the natural term; for if you do so, it hurts the voice and speech; and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the 2 anvils, and treat it until it heals. And if the patient is afraid to be cut, use an instrument for cauterization to ease his fear. And the manner of cautery is very painful. And it is that the patient places his head in your hand, and then presses his tongue with the instrument which we have described or chapter of cautery, and boil with hot live coals, so that it is not too thick nor too clear; and use the handle of this instrument, as shown here:
And if the patient has hair or a tumor at the eye, apply the medicine with a scoop-shaped spoon, and place the instrument over all of the medicine on the eye; the patient lies on his side so that saliva and mucus flow from his mouth into the medicine without reaching the throat or nose, then hold your hand over all of the medicine and press it on the eye until you see the swelling and abscesses subsided and the pain caused by the medicine has been alleviated; then take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, moisten the cotton in the medicine, insert the instrument into the canal above, so that the cotton sticks to the eye; repeat this process until the cauterization is complete, then let it dry for 4 or 5 days. If you need to start over with the cauterization of the medicine, restart it and after the cauterization, irrigate around the eye with cotton dipped in butter, clean what is around the medicine; then wash with cold water and treat with gargling until it heals.
This cure is more subtle than incision, or cautery; if it is cured by fumigation in this manner, take calmander and yarrow and origanum and rue and chamomile and savory and similar herbs, and put them all together or some of these in .i. pot, and add ashes, and let it boil; and the pot should be well sealed with strong clay, and inside the pot there should be .i. hair-like instrument according to this manner: And it should be made of silver or tin, and one of the eyes should be inserted into the mouth of the patient as long as the steam rises to the eye through the tube while the eye is being destroyed; afterwards, repeat often until the eye dries up, and ensure that you do not do this at the beginning of an abscess's heat-up, because many things occur then; and do not use it except during the decline of an abscess's heat. And if this instrument is not present, take a tube and insert a chicken claw into the head of the patient so that the patient's mouth does not become too hot; for the chicken claw does not allow the steam to burden the mouth, and it is good medicine along with salvation.
Many times it happens that bone or a spine of fish or something else gets stuck in the throat, so you must remove what you can see and press the tongue against the sun with all the instruments until you see movement; if it does not open by itself and remains lodged in the throat, you must make the patient vomit as soon as the meat is cooked in the stomach. Perhaps that will expel the stuck object through vomiting; or the patient should swallow a piece of sponge, a piece of cotton, a root of lettuce, or one morsel of dry bread; tie a thread to the sponge and then swallow it; when it reaches the location, it will stick, and you will draw it out; and if it does not come out due to what we have said, take .i. instrument made of wood according to this form:
And let the instrument be curved at the tip so that it can more easily enter the throat, and keep the head raised high; and watch that you do not touch the epiglottis, as the patient should not push it down or force the bone within; rather, it is better for the patient to push the instrument in, because they are pushed or the matter is loosened; if it is pushed down, or pulled out all the way, it should be equal throughout the length of the instrument until it is removed.
and remove the saliva from the throat
Sometimes medicine is the saliva, as I have said in the division, through the use of medicines; and when it does not help, then look into the throat of the sick person facing the sun, press the tongue against the instrument that I have told you about. If you see saliva, take a small pair of scissors or very thin pliers that are suitable for this purpose. And if that does not work, take a hair comb, and put it in the throat of the sick person, then move the tip of the comb with hot iron repeatedly. Dip the sick person in cold water all day long. Then take a full vial of cold water, open the mouth, pour it in without swallowing, and move it around in the mouth often; as soon as the saliva feels the water, it will fall out.
And if it does not fall as we have said, you should subdue the patient with asefetide, at the instrument that I mentioned in the fumigation of the eye; do this many times, for it will persistently recur. The method of fumigation is that you take one pot or one having charcoal inside, and cover it with a perforated cloth; and in that place are the head of the instrument; then you pour your fumigation, and the patient puts the head of the snake in his mouth, and closes the mouth so that the smoke does not escape, but comes up to the nostrils; and the nose will now be affected, and if it does not fall, repeat the fumigation many times; and let the patient endure thirst, and consume salty and alkaline food, and drink no water; and then it will be necessary for him to purge by this method.
The form of the instrument used to treat the nose, is such that when it can be seen, resembles curved pincers for entering into the throat; and resembles the nozzle of a syringe, and has an abrasive surface so that what it takes, it cannot lose; and here is its form:
The chapters on abscesses
Many resemble abscesses, according to what is recalled later in this book from one and another; and they are different in perforation and incision; and it is in .ij. ways that one is similar, and because it holds moisture. And the second way is for the joints that are in the body. For abscesses of the head are other than those of the base, and abscesses of the shoulder joint are other than those that come at jointures, and each should have its judgment in the work.
And if there are abscesses that one should not perforate until the bowel is ripe according to its completion; and for those that require perforation when they are hard, but do not die according to their completion, as abscesses which are near jointures. For when abscesses come near jointures, and it is left until it bursts, perhaps the ligament and nerve of the jointure are corrupted, causing contraction in that member. Or if the abscess is near the principal member, and you delay the perforation until it is ripe, it will harm the principal member; or it is near the base, if perforated before it is ripe, and it bursts and becomes elongated within, and a fistula forms; and it cannot heal in a long time.
And you should know the time of perforation for the abscess that is ripe according to its completion, and it is when the pain is alleviated, and the disappearance of fever, and reduction of pain and redness, and swelling and shrinkage of the abscess head, and other signs; and you should make the perforation site lower than the abscess, and where it has opened up; and let the perforation be long along the body, and if the abscess is at the hands or feet, in jointures, at nerves and arteries, and in all equal places where there is no ploughing.
1. In those that are swollen, act accordingly with the affected member. And when an abscess is in a hard place, it is better to leave the perforation until it is confirmed in complete digestion, as we have said. For if you pierce it before this happens, the body will exude blood from it, and it will be filled with much pus; and by chance it will make the lips hard and fill them with it. And for any abscess that are pierced according to the size of the body, according to what the limb needs.
If there is no head on the abscess, like a superficial one, it is necessary that you pierce it completely; and when the abscess is large and has swollen greatly, and you pierce it, do not draw out all the pus in that hour, but only a part of it; stop the abscess until the next day, then draw out nothing wrong; do this repeatedly day by day, until all the pus is out. This should be done especially for those who are weak or sick women, small children or old men decrepit. For sometimes the pus jumps out with the exit, which might accidentally kill the patient, and you would not be blamed. Therefore, take great care with this chapter, and when you have pierced your abscess, clean the wound, and see if the wound of the abscess is small; and if it is a large one, bring threads of linen or old cotton; and if it is a large abscess, and there is much pus, it is necessary that you put a thread in each place so that they meet; and if you have cauterized a part of the skin and shaved it, it is necessary to fill it with old cotton or linen wool without moisture, and bind it until the third day; then unbind, and heal it with ointment until it is healed.
And if bleeding occurs during your work, bring cold water and a cloth, wet it. Put it on the wound repeatedly. If the bleeding persists, provide treatment and care, and use the powders that I have mentioned in this book. If it is winter, and the limb or abscess is very nervous, you should put hot tents and wet cloths on it; if it is summer, and the limb is fleshy, you should put wet cloths on it, or cold cloths, or cold water and oil, for up to three days, as we have said. Then drain the abscess and lance it, providing care as needed, until it heals.
This must be known universally in the treatment of abscesses: now I have told you how to proceed with the treatment of abscesses, and here is the chapter.
of sores
1. For small abscesses that come on the head, there are methods known to us, similar to poultices, as the linseed bag and many resemble this. Some of them are fatty and have moisture like pustules; and those that are hard and stony at the base do not give rise to doubt that the arteries will not act against it. The procedure for the abscess in the neck is as follows: if it contains moisture, it should be opened above the long axis. And when the moisture is evacuated, scrape off the skin that contains it, because it returns immediately when left alone; then put cotton in Egyptian ointment, if present; if not, in water and linen, and apply it to the wound and leave it until the next day; those who remain should change the cotton as described above every day, until they are sure that it does not stay overnight; then treat the wound with ointment as appropriate until it heals. And if the abscess is fatty, press it along this length; remove your fingers, scrape it off from all sides, and apply your entire cure to draw out the pus where it lies; and if the arteries act against you, do what I told you before. And similarly, treat the abscess if it is hard, and the cutting and healing as I have told you.
And the cutting into a hard abscess and moist one is lighter, because they have little blood. And if any of these abscesses or head do not have moisture, and one of them was an abscess that I pressed on an old woman's head; and I found the abscess as hard as a quartz stone, rough and white, and could not be broken; and if a knife had been used on it, it would have made a wound like a stone. In other abscesses coming from or the head, open them every day for as long as possible to draw out the pus; and treat them as appropriate.
of scrofulas
Many times this abscess occurs at the neck, under the chin, and in the groin, and sometimes they occur elsewhere on the body, and they are swollen and inflamed, one scrofula adhering to another. And each scrofula is properly inside its cavity, as we have said of the abscess on the neck; and the resemblances of these scrofulas are many. Some contain moisture, and some are malignant and do not want to obey health. In that case where you see a good disposition to open, and it is like the color of the body, silent from all parts and neither affected by the vein of the neck nor the artery or duct, and not infected; then it is necessary that you cut it through the top, strip off each part, and place the two lips of the knife at the incisions, as we have said in abscesses on the neck; pull out gently, and be sure not to cut the nerve or vein, and the spatula should not be sharp nor cutting, so that the hand does not tremble, and do not look too far ahead, so that you do not cut what you should not.
And if you cut the vein or artery, and it does not let you finish, put vitriol powder in the wound, or some powders that stop blood, and hold the wound; leave it until the abscess is soothed and the wound becomes soft and begins to discharge. And when the pus is drained, return to your work as you complete it; then see if there are small scrofulas remaining at the root of the scrofula wound, cut them off and clean them up. If the root of the scrofula wound has a large vein, do not cut that scrofula at its root but tie it with a strong double thread, let it hang out, without harm; then use old cotton dipped in Egyptian ointment, then cure it.
And if you excise the entire scrofula (boil), it is necessary that you close the two edges of the wound, and sew them now as there is no room for excess due to the size of the scrofula. It is necessary that you understand to cover the root and draw pus, and sew as we have said. Those scrofulas that contain excess, pierce there where it has become open; and pierce in this manner as the one mentioned before, depending on it, then introduce tents with ointment and similar things, so that it corrupts what remains of corruption; and when the wound is well cleaned, apply a charring ointment until it heals.
Inflammation or swelling
The ancients spoke of the size of the throat but I never saw anyone do it in our land and this is their written word.
For those who have squinancy, it is required that the cleft in the throat, called "epiglottis", be opened; and no aid should be given by these (people), for all the veins and the pormon of the sickness are at those who have an abscess hot in the mouth, or in the throat or in two amandres (tonsils). When the disease is in the channel of the pormon (throat), it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to avoid the danger of strangulation that comes from the swelling.
Therefore, when we want to cut the epiglottis, it is necessary that we cut it below four circles or two small slits across, between the circles, or by the amount of the split of the saw, not in the cartilage.
And if the joint is contracted at the incision of the epiglottis where there is no cartilage, the vessels are long in length.
And if the master is afraid, it is necessary that he stretches the skin of the throat to its full length, then cuts the opening until he reaches the cartilage; and removes the vessels of blood, if you see anything, and then ties the wound as we have said.
And it is demonstrated by the incision of the trachea that jumps out from the broken joint, and by the lack of voice;
And leave the wound open for a piece [of time].
When the hour has passed in which there is doubt about strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound with care, and sew it up entirely through the cartilage; then administer medications that cause healing until it is healed.
Al-Zahrawi said that one should not do this until the throat is entirely stopped up, and the patient is pronounced dead, and his soul departs. Then clamp down the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe, and he breathes through the wound, and thus he is guarded from death.
And because the ancients commanded to keep the wound open until the malady has passed, and it has passed in 3 or 4 days. Then they command to stitch up the wound and heal, until it is healed;
and I will tell you what I saw. I saw a girl took one dagger and thrust it into her throat, cutting part of the windpipe;
And I was called to heal it, and found it as dead.
I discovered the wound and found blood coming from it, and knew that neither vein nor artery had burst, but the blood was flowing through the wound.
I hurried and closed the wound, and healed it until it was healed.
But it did not happen to the maiden that she was scalded by voice, and she returned to her condition afterwards.
Therefore, I say that in the throat region of the epiglottis, there should not be fear.
of the large throat
This abscess is called "hernia of the throat," and it is a large abscess with a bluish-green color, and it occurs mostly in women;
and it is according to two kinds: natural and accidental; or if it is natural, there is no remedy.
And the occurrence (accident) is in two ways, of which one resembles a fat boil, and the other way resembles an abscess that comes from us through arteries; and there is fear, and it should not be operated on with force except in the small one, and prove and examine thoroughly at the incision point: if you find it as one would a boil and it cannot be opened in any way, strike it as one strikes a boil, and pull out the entire head if there is a point: And take great care, and heal it as necessary, until it is perfectly healthy.
From us (meaning the medical practitioners)
Many ways there are from us (meaning the medical practitioners), which I will describe all their similarities.
And it is necessary for me to say all the differences between a notch and an incision.
I say that discharge is heat and fever persisting, until the eruptions have passed, and the boils have matured; then the fever and heat rest.
Without it (the boil), there is no heat, fever, or pain, and contains one pus sac, which is its own sac and is according to the color of the body, and starts like a blister and becomes large.
and are according to two kinds, greasy or moist, and many in color are as I said in the classification.
It is necessary, when you come to the treatment of the newt, that you examine and test first all the equipment called "entromissoire", according to its shape or chapter that follows.
And the method of inquiry for abscesses by us is that you take or more moist place in the abscess and turn your fingers little by little, until you feel that the instrument has penetrated the core, then according to the size of the abscess.
Then extract the instrument and be careful it does not fall out.
If moisture runs through a wound, they should color it as I have said for other abscesses;
and if after the incision no moisture comes out, since it is fat, you should then make a cross-shaped cut, take hold of it with tweezers, peel it lightly from both sides, and pull on the skin or coat that you are drawing out clean with the thread.
and if you cannot draw it out clean, then cut it up so that nothing remains.
For if something remains, the infection often returns.
And if it remains for a short while and does not heal on its own, apply some corrosive powder to the wound, hold the wound shut, place something soothing over the abscess hot, and treat it with other remedies until it heals.
And if the wound is large, cut two lips of the wound and treat it with flesh-healing substances.
And if the veins are bleeding or other similar cases, use crushed vitriol and let it lie for 2 to 4 days until the wound dries up, allowing the blood vessels to heal; then return to bandaging that which remains unhealed.
Here are the forms of intermediary instruments, and they are of three types: large, medium, and small; and among them there are four squares called "albarets", and one called "breb", and among them there are three types: large, medium, and small, to encircle abscesses with fistula.
and they are as the needles with which witches are sewn, and they are made of brass citron, or iron, or silver, and those that have yellow tips are more effective, and they are more experienced in black wood to encircle the boil with fistula.
and there are three types: large, medium, and small, according to the width of the wound.
The shapes of tumors are much alike, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and some tumors have two humps in four ways;
and some tumors have four humps in four ways, and some tumors have two humps and others have only one hump, and all of these are necessary in their place.
The head of these [tumors] that are cut is sharp, and those who do not cut it only from one side, from which we scrape the nails, because this way one does not cut the vein or the nerve.
And with these instruments are the poultices returned to bandages, so that the patient does not feel pain at the opening of abscesses;
And there are four ways: large, small, and medium, as you see;
And do not use them except in charned places, such as legs, arms, breasts, and wounds, and similar locations;
And sometimes they make another small instrument, similar to the pricking of bladders, in this shape, to draw blood:
And it is placed at the site where the vein or artery bleeds, and sometimes they return according to this large shape:
Sometimes the breasts of some men swell when they begin to rot, until they resemble the breasts of a woman:
And they remain ugly and swollen, and whoever treats them should be according to this shape of the line "b" until ".g": Then scrape the fat, apply medicine-soaked linen on the wound, then stitch the two lips of the wound together with sutures, and treat it until it heals.
and if the wound sinks downward due to its size, like it happens with women, then cut it into two halves horizontally, through two similar incisions. so that one remains attached to the other at the end of each half, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this shape, from this line b up to line g; Then scrape the skin that is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and bring what we have said about stitching and powders, and what is necessary in the cure, until it heals.
If it is not healed, or the incision is not completely made because the patient does not want to rest, or due to the discharge of blood, you must fill the wound with moistened corrosive-scented cotton. and leave it until it dissolves the remaining flesh and fat, then heal it until it is healed.
of the abscesses from the buttocks
these abscesses coming from the buttocks are handled as hard scrofulas, or they have coats containing moisture.
Therefore, those containing moisture should be cut according to this form, from line b to line g: And when the whole cavity in the abscess is emptied, fill the wound with old cotton, and leave it until the next day; then remove all the cotton, and treat it with an ointment until it heals.
And if the abscess resembles scrofulas, make them as we have said in cutting into scrofulas, and if it swells, apply fire cure as we have said before.
For the cutting of an artery...
When the artery is cut and the skin sealed above, there are often abscesses, and the same happens with an inflamed vein and abscess.
And if one recognizes it thus because of the artery, then the abscess is long in depth; And when you feel it with your fingers, it feels tightly constricted; and if it is in the vein, then it appears rounded on the surface;
It is foolish to cover this abscess, especially when it is under the bones and angles or near the neck and in many other places, and it is very large; Therefore, you should choose the cure of iron, and if it is near the head, you should do so as well; in one who has an inflammation of the artery, make a cut through the skin along its length;   Car il est mieux que cest mal qui est en ce lieu ne morisse.   Quant li apostemes sont de grant taylz et est grant lesion, si aiez un melleur cure qu’il ne meurt;
Therefore, you should choose the cure of iron, and if it is near the head, you should do so as well; in one who has an inflammation of the artery, make a cut through the skin along its length;   Car il est mieux que cest mal qui est en ce lieu ne morisse.   Quant li apostemes sont de grant taylz et est grant lesion, si aiez un melleur cure qu’il ne meurt; Then open the abdomen along the midline, and carefully expose the artery of the intestines, while it is uncovered.
Then insert a needle and make it pass through to the other side of the abdomen, and tie the artery with double thread in 2 fingers' length, as I have shown you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples.
Then pierce the space between the two ligatures with a probe until it goes through, and release the abscess.
Then administer the cure with a heated iron rod, until the ligament cries out. Then apply the ointment to the affected area, until it is healed.
And if the abscess is around the size of the vein, then you should paint your hand with it and apply it to all the skin around the abscess. Then insert the needle under the place you are holding with your hand, and make it pierce through, and have it take one double thread, so that you pull it from the other side. Then tie the abscess, as I have told you, or thread one of two parts to the other two shoulders with a cord;
and if you doubt that the cord will pass through, push another needle beneath all the thread of the first needle, and hold the threads together in four parts;
then cut the abscess until the excess is gone, then cut the excess of the flesh and leave what is stitched;
then put on one soft cloth dampened with wine and oil, then apply remedies of tents and unguents until it is healed.
of abscesses from nerves
As abscesses come in the artery and the vein, so they come to nerves when they are struck or from excessive labor, and similar things.
This happens more often in the shoulders and thighs, and in all joints where there are jointures, and this is very painful abscesses, and its color resembles the color of the body, and it is in various positions causing pain;
and when it is pressed firmly, the patient feels pain, but it is not entirely in the body, but rather beneath the skin;
And it should be held still from all sides, neither forward nor backward, neither above nor below, and the one who is in joints must not be covered by iron: perhaps contraction may happen.
And the one who is on the head or forehead, make the skin with the spatula. If the abscesses are small, hold it with tweezers and strike at its root.
And if it is large, suspend it at the oncine (the upper arm), and strip it, then expose the bone and sew up the wound until it heals.
hanging large lumps Never happens in ventres (stomachs) and nowhere else, but it is a disease called "fungus", which resembles ears of grain. It has subtle roots and large heads. There are small and very large ones.
And I saw one man who had two bellies that resembled mushrooms more than anything else and were not different from each other, and they were white, and had a small root, and were cut open, and moisture continuously flowed out of them.
I weighed them and found one weighing 16 ounces, and the other 5, and the operation in the incision is such that you look at the patient to see if they are moist, and the color of the artery is white and moist with a thin root;
if the artery is thick, take a large spatula and have the fire cautery in your presence. For at the amputation there often come too great evacuations of blood, and if the bleeding does not stop quickly, then cauterize it.
And if you see the patient frightened and afraid of the incision with iron, take one thread of flax well made, tie it around the limb as we have said, and leave it for two days;
Then hold it tight and do not stop tightening the flax thread until it stops the limb from throbbing and bleeding; if the roots are large, be careful to cover them as well because of the belly, but you can still cover half of it.
Then cauterize it so that it does not return; then treat the wound and make sure you do not cover the one who is blackish, poor-smelling, and has a milky eye.
For it is an abscess swollen, and I will come to the treatment of this scrofula later.
when the boil bursts
If the appearance of the boil comes from a cauterized wound or a cut from a scythe, and it is on the abdomen with some boils as happens in other routines, or from blood that flows from veins or arteries as described earlier, or from wind;
And if it is through the break of the bone and the outflow from the bowel, the color of the abscess resembles that of the body, and it causes little pain, and there are many openings from different places. And if it is from the outflow of the intestine, then it is more varied; and when pressed with the fingers, it sinks in, and then returns, and by chance if it is sutured, it increases greatly at the entrance of the bath and through hard work.
And if it is due to moisture, then it is light and easily opened when pressed with the hand, without being constrained; but if it is blood, then the abscesses are large and hard, and they are filled according to a certain quantity.
And if it is due to windiness, then it is soft and the work (surgery) should be that you look to see whether its appearance is due to blood from an artery or vein, or windiness. You must let the wound heal. For there is doubt and fear, as I told you in the chapter on abscesses, for the artery and for the vein.
And if its appearance is due to the intestines or the belly, then instruct the patient to strain his anus, and stretch himself out straight, then sign all around the abdomen. Then command him to rest quietly between your hands, then go around the place you have marked with a spatula. then stretch half of the abscess upwards with a large spoon.
Then open half of the abscess extended over the ligament, and place your finger as an indicator and seek the intestines. If you find it seized by the ligament, dislocate it, and push the intestine towards the abdomen exit.
And if you find the boil, take hold of it at its neck, and cut off the excess.
And if the artery or vein opposes you, go around it gently, then return to your work and take two needles, and place two threads on them, and insert the needles in a cross shape into what you have made so that they pierce through.
Then hold the abscess in four leagues above the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and leave the place open as much as possible, and let the dead flesh rot by itself. When it becomes soft and can be pierced, then treat it as necessary, and cut off the abscess as we have said.
When it becomes soft and can be pierced, then treat it as necessary, and cut off the abscess as we have said. Extract the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the wound as necessary, and stitch up the wound.
two boils
We have said in the division the similarities of boils, and how one should treat them with medicines, and how one should choose the cure of iron; and we shall say what a boil is like, and great caution in its care, and the ancients said that when boils are in a place where they can be shaved like boils that are on mamels, and in the thigh, and similar places, it should all be removed when it begins; and when it is large and old, it is not advisable to approach it, for I never knew anyone heal one; no one ever healed one before me.
And the operation, when it is in a place where it can be removed as we have said, is that you purge the patient once with black bile; then make him urinate if there is manifest retention, then cut open one boil to perform the operation; then pour your onions or boils, and shave the head of all parts, and remove everything without leaving anything; let the blood flow freely, and press well the place with your hand or something else, and if the flow of blood makes you against the incision of the artery or vein, cauterize it until the wound is cauterized; then cure it with another treatment until it heals.
From hydropisy We have said in the division the likeness of dropsy, and how it is made, and the signs of each likeness, and the cure which is done with medicines, and that which is cured by iron; this is only for eclites, and one should not use iron in these two likenesses: tympanites and yposarche, as it is a deadly thing. Therefore, when you treat this likeness of dropsy called 'eclites', with medicines, if the cure does not help, look to see whether the patient is weak or has another disease besides dropsy, such as bloating and similar things; do not use iron because there is doubt, and if you see the patient strong in spirit, and he has only dropsy, and he is neither too young nor too old, then act accordingly. Lay the patient right side up on your hands, and the minister presses the abdomen towards the bottom of the bladder. Then take the pointed spatula as shown in this form: It should be sharpened on two sides. Moreover, it should not be so sharp that it can reach the intestines when inserted, and it should not pierce it;
Then look if the edema is directed towards the intestines: if it is, you should make an incision below the belly button 3 fingers to the right of the navel; and if the edema is due to liver disease, the incision should be on the left side, 3 fingers; and if it is due to constipation, it should be on the right side, and the patient must not lie down on the incision so that the waste does not run to the weak place.
Then pierce the skin with an instrument and push it, put your hand in the spatula between the skin and the tissue as when peeling an apple to a quantity of one nail or so; then pierce the tissue until the spatula comes to the place of the water, and that is the location of the water, then pull it out, and put this instrument in the shape described below: And it resembles a thin silver chain, and is made of gold or light alloy, and has a small hole in its lower part; and on one side, three holes; and two on another side, and one on another; and the head is cut like a feather, and that is the shape of the incision that scribes carve the feather:
above is the anus, so that when the instrument comes to the water, then put your hand on the instrument now; empty it then either half or a third part, for if you empty too much at that time, it may happen that the patient dies from the resolution of his spirit due to the weapon, or he falls down, or approaches death.
But in an empty manner according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue mean for the patient and his pulse; then draw out the instrument and hold back the blood, and it is held back now by the cautery which stops the hole that is on the vein, of which I have spoken, so you pierce in this manner; then use the instrument again the next day, if you see the patient suffering from a small amount of blood;
Do this every day, and be careful not to let too much blood flow out. If you doubt about the patient, and leave a large amount of blood, cure it with burial or hot sand, and by much sweating or bathing and sun exposure, and anoint with vinegar; and cure it with drying medicines until it is healed, and cauterize on the stomach and the liver and the spleen after the extraction of the blood, as I have said before.
of the stopping of the penis At times, children are born who have no foreskin or the foreskin is small or not in its proper place. It is necessary to circumcise him immediately using this very subtle instrument called a spatula: then put the spatula over the foreskin, which is also very subtle, and hold it like that for two to four days until he wants to urinate. Once he wants to urinate, the spatula should be removed, and urination allowed. In such a case, there is no need to worry as the urine that comes out does not close it. If the foreskin is small, it should be treated with a plaster made of lamb's wool as we have said, and it will stretch out. Those born without a foreskin are castrated because no one is born with the foreskin at the head of the penis, which prevents them from urinating before they pull back their penis; and they cannot engage in sexual intercourse for this reason, as the matter cannot reach the opening, and it is a bad illness.
And the method of work is that the patient lies on his back, his penis and scrotum should be exposed as much as possible, so that the foreskin can be pulled out as much as necessary; and take care to avoid bleeding which often occurs, and if it happens, apply a bandage to stop the bleeding and cure the wound until it heals.
The boils of the penis Often this albath comes in the penis, and it is an appearance of ugly genitals; there are both malignant and non-malignant ones; you must take them once a week with a subtly thin instrument, scrape and clean them all, then put soft cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment on them; then cure them with diaphinicon ointment until they are healed. If the albath is malignant, with a pus-like color and discharge, then you must apply cautery to it. When you have scraped it, if the albath is within the penis and has both an internal part and an external part, then you must first remove the albath that is internal; when it is cauterized, you must take care of the outside. For if you treat it together, there is no guarantee that the parts of the penis will not be pierced, and blackness and corruption come into the penis and surrounding area; in such a case, you must shave all that is black and corrupted, then lie it on the ointment made from pomegranate bark and honey, then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
And when bleeding occurs, bring the lunar cautery according to this form: The cauteries aid in two ways together: concerning bleeding and decay; and if the head of the penis is decayed and pulled back, it is necessary that you bring or conduct a plank-like rod from the penis, and make the patient urinate; and when the hairs are exposed at the tip of the penis which occurs in those who have not been circumcised, or it occurs due to injury or abscess, then it is necessary to shave it with one instrument, until the ligaments are loosened, and the head of the penis is delivered from all sides.
If it is necessary to talk about this thing, then shave it with one spatula, a little bit from the tip of the penis and the skin; then squeeze gently between two fingers, and put a thin linen cloth soaked in cold water on it, so that it does not get infected.
circumcision
Circumcision is not the discontinuation of continuity like other wounds; however, when we perform this work according to our will and specifically on children, it is necessary that we perform the best and most delicate work for their salvation.
I say that the ancients did not circumcise their children, for they did not use it in their law, and we have it only because we acquired it through experience.
For I have wanted the greatest part of masters and healers who performed circumcision around one day, and for adults and novices; however, it is dangerous because there are two layers, and in case one above is cut and left the other below remains.
Now cover it with copper, and the pain is doubled; and at the amputation which is deep near the limb, the point of the knife may slip, spoiling the work, and many times it does not require amputation and I have seen this.
In the amputation which is performed I have found the advantage of using wire in that the wires cut equally well above as below.
For when you press your hand, if you cut equally all the time; but the wires should be tightly wound around the skin; and it is as in the first operation that you make the child think, if he understands, not to tie the wire only around the rod, but to make him comfortable in every way that you can. Then make it be between your hands straight, and apply forces to it between your hands or under your feet so that the infant does not see it, nor any tool; then push your hand against the vein and blow or squeeze, and draw it up until the head of the vein is exposed; then clean it well from the dirt that has accumulated there, then tie the site with a double thread, then tie another loop at one point to another link; hold it with two fingers at the second knot and push towards the pocket and index finger, and press between the loops, then lift the cork quickly and pull the head of the vein;
Then make it be between your hands straight, and apply forces to it between your hands or under your feet so that the infant does not see it, nor any tool; then push your hand against the vein and blow or squeeze, and draw it up until the head of the vein is exposed; then clean it well from the dirt that has accumulated there, then tie the site with a double thread, then tie another loop at one point to another link; hold it with two fingers at the second knot and push towards the pocket and index finger, and press between the loops, then lift the cork quickly and pull the head of the vein; Then let the blood come out drop by drop, for it is the worms; and sprinkle powder on it and on the powder a piece of cloth glued with a little bit of cooked egg white tempered with rosewater, mixed with fresh rose oil; and leave it on until tomorrow, and treat it with another treatment until it becomes healthy.
The form of the forces for cleansing is as follows: the two heads should be tender and sharp, and they should be as large as the thumb equally:
The error of the mundification is when the kidneys are incised within; therefore, you should stretch it with your fingernail, so that the incision becomes an abscess; and equalize it, and if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, take tweezers, and then equalize.
If they exceed three days, and that which is beneath the spermatic cord swells, let it be left until the abscesses calm down, and gently incise it; and equalize it as you can move it, and take care of the part of the spermatic cord, it will not harm it at all.
Then cure the limb of things submerged in a wound with powder, as we have said or treated powders, and if it is equalized too much, it will go upwards, but it will not harm; then cure it as we have said, until it heals.
Retention of urine
The retention of urine is due to a stone, or congealed blood, or pus, or mucus, or similar things, as we have said in the introduction.
and if the urine is not released, and you see that it is retained due to the stone in the bladder or neck of the bladder, then the patient should be tilted on their knees; feet placed on the back, stomach extended from above the lower back, and restrain the patient as much as possible; and then pressure is applied to the bladder neck to express the stone upwards, so that the urine is released.
If it does not come as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must administer extraction with all the instruments called "syringe," of which this is the form: It should be made of thin, light silver capillary, like a bird's feather; and the cannula should be one and a half palm lengths long, and it should be thin at the tip.
The manner of the discharge of urine is that you take one double thread, tie its end to a piece of wool or cotton, and insert the end of the thread into the syringe; then press down on the superfluous part of the wool and push it up to the tip of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and egg yolk, and make the patient sit on one seat, and you rub the bladder and penis with moist oil of olive and warm water;
Then insert the syringe gently into the penis, until it reaches the base of the penis, then bend the penis upward towards the anus; then insert the syringe forward up to the bladder, and have the patient feel it come up to the empty thing (the bladder), and this is not done according to this order for any other reason except that you guide where it goes is twisted; then the thread follows all the wool and the urine follows it, then pull it out and correct the urine;
And repeat the syringe until the bladder is emptied, and the patient is relieved.
Of diseases of the bladder
When sores or blood come in the bladder, or pus is accumulated there, and you see it distill liquids and medicines, do everything with the instrument called "clepsydra", and this is its form:
It is closed, and if it has three openings: two on one side, and one on the other, as you can see; and the holes are positioned so that the medicine comes out smoothly without adding anything, if possible, to draw off the moisture, and push when necessary;
And when you see to throw your medicines into the bladder, place the head of the catheter in the moisture, and draw it along with what is inside; if you pull out the moisture through the catheter, and then forcefully push the drawback within; it will enter the catheter, and come to the bladder now, so that the patient can feel it.
And this is the form of the subtle enema with which you enema the bladder: it is as follows:
And it is made of silver or brass, and the head is raised higher; beneath it, there is one handspan or more; then take a sheep's bladder and put the moisture that you intend to enema the bladder in it, then bind it between two hands with a good double thread, and heat one cupful of the moisture over the fire; then insert the head of the enema into the sheath, then hold your hand over the bladder with all the moisture coming towards it, so that the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder.
And if you don't have the bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make one circle, and pierce it roundly all around; then insert a strong thread into these holes, then assemble the circle like one would assemble a syringe, and put inside that what you see of oil and moisture and water, and tie it in the instrument; and do as you have done with the bladder, to press your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
From the stone
We have said in the division the methods of stone and its extraction with medicines; and I have said the difference between the stone implanted in the eye and all the signs, and in which stone one should operate according to size; and in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will tell you openly and briefly.
I say that the stone which is embedded in the bladder happens more often to children, and this is a sign that the stone leaps from the bladder like water in its subtlety; it opens holes, and burns the patient's urinary organ, pierces it many times, and then ties it up; and from these leaps the foundation weakens; and the healing of children is light until they are four years old, but it is very severe in the elderly, and it is between middle age and old age for those who are between youth and old age; and the cure is easier for those with large stones than for those with small ones.
And when we come to the cure, it is first necessary to purify the patient with an enema, to draw out all the phlegm that is in the intestines. For it sometimes obstructs seeking for the stone.
Then take the patient by the feet, bend and move them downwards, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and sometimes rises towards the top; then make him sit between your prepared hands, and his hands should be under his thighs, so that the bladder is completely declined downwards; then search for it with your hand and touch it.
If you feel the stone in the cavity, hurry to cut into it immediately. And if it does not fall out on its own, moisten your left thumb with oil, if the patient is old and weakened, or use your thumb, if the patient is a young adult who has completed growth; dip it into its foundation, pull the stone and when you feel it at your thumb, press it towards the bladder; then press down on it and push it out where you intend to cut.
Instruct the servant to press on the bladder with his hand, and command him to stretch out his right hand upward, and with his left hand remove the skin that is under the muscles in the area where the cutting is done; then insert the spatula covering it.
And place the spatula between what is between the muscles and the foundation, not in the middle but at the left side of the navel; it should be straight above the stone, and your fingers should be close to the foundation or the stone, and the incision should be wide at the back and narrow inside, according to the size of the stone, but not too large.
By chance, if the pressure is too strong that forms its foundation, it should jump without work; and know that there is a stone or an angle and margins: it grieves to come out; and if it is soft, similar to a plum, round, from whose issue is light.
Then, if there is an angle and margin, make a larger cut; and if it does not jump, then you must draw it out using tongs that are like a limed at the tip to press the stone and prevent it from escaping; or you push a subtle curved instrument under it at the tip; and if you cannot manipulate it in this way, enlarge .i. pore slightly with a burr, and if it is not cut open, draw it out with vitriol.
And if there are more than one stone, push the largest one at the neck of the bladder first, then hit it, pull it out, and the smaller ones afterwards. If they are very large, it must be done, and a larger incision should be made. For two things happen to the patient: either he dies, or urine comes immediately from the place where the lees cannot join; however, try to draw it out, or cut it with tongs, until you draw it out in pieces;
And when you have completed your work, apply the wound with incense, aloe, and dragon's blood, and bind it up, then place a damp cloth soaked in oil and wine, or oil and cold water and rose water, to cool the abscess; afterwards comfort the patient on his neck, and do not undo the bandage until the third day.
When you undo it, immerse the place well in oil and water, then treat it with healing ointment of diaphanicum and basilicon until it is healed.
And if pus and erosion comes in the wound and blood congeals in the bladder, and thus the urine is retained, which is known to be done without leaking with urine: then press your finger in the wound, and draw out that blood, for if it remains, the bladder will rot and burst.
Then clean the wound of water, oil and linen, and help it in all ways you know, until it heals; and it is necessary that every herb that you cure it with, you bind it to the two thighs, and apply the medicine on the affected area.
If the stone is small and it is conducted by the vein, and pierces through and the urine cannot pass; you shall treat it as I say hereafter, that you cut it many times, except in case of cutting off the passageway due to this treatment. I have already proven it thus.
Take one iron foret in the form of this figure and pointed at four angles into one taper:
Then take a thread and tie it around the shaft of the stone inside the bladder, so that it does not return to the bladder; then push the awl gently into the shaft, until it reaches the stone; and turn the awl little by little in the stone with your hand, until you can pierce the stone from the other side; soon the urine will come out, then press your hand on that which is left behind of the stone inside the shaft. It will soon be broken, and will escape with the urine, and the patient will be healed.
and if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, tie a thread around the stone and another above, then direct the shaft towards the stone between the two threads, pull it out, and untie the thread, and clean the congealed blood in the wound; and heal it until it is healed.
from the female's stone (meaning ovarian cyst)
It happens rarely that a stone should be in a woman's womb, and if it ever happens, the cure is difficult, and it is forbidden for four reasons: the first is that by chance the woman may be a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a woman who knows well how to reveal herself to mirrors, especially when she is chaste.
And the third reason is that by chance one cannot find a woman skilled in this art of hands; and the fourth reason is that the stone from the woman is more deeply embedded than the stone from a man, for which it requires a deeper incision, causing great fear.
And if you need to proceed with this, then you must take a woman skilled in the art, and if one is not found easily, do not hesitate to use a chaste maiden submissive to your will; and present a wise matron in women's matters or a woman who knows some part of the art, and command her to perform what you command regarding the incision of the stone.
And look very carefully if the woman is a virgin: then you must insert your finger or base and search for the stone; and if you find it, you should press it down under your finger, and instruct her to push with her hand against the patient, pressing and applying pressure on the bladder.
If you find it, you should make her move it slowly from the entrance of the bladder towards the root of the thigh until it reaches the root, then strike on the stone at the root of the thigh against the back of the hand, where the handle is held, and feel the stone in that area; do not move your finger above or below the stone, and be careful to cut it into small pieces.
Then push the stone towards the lower part of the back, if you feel the stone, make a wound large enough for the stone to come out, and know that there are many types of stones: small or large, smooth or rough, long or round, and those with ridges. Recognize their appearances to know the outcome.
And if the wound bursts open, apply powdered vitriol and keep it closed for an hour until it stops bleeding; then return to your work, and have tools that I told you about for extracting the stone from men to help you in your task.
and if the wound bursts open, it is an artery that has been cut, place the powder on the wound and bind it tightly with bandages, and do not start again; leave the arrowhead and do not draw it out lest the patient dies accidentally; then treat the wound.
And when the heat of the blood is abated and the wound heals, return to your work, and extract the stone when it protrudes.
Of a carnous hernia [or: of a carnous nature hernia]
Aquouse is nothing other than an assembly of moisture or white chyle, which is beneath the curd of the kidneys, containing the egg; and it is called "chyle", and sometimes it is properly in the egg's membrane, if one thinks that it is another egg; and it is the skin of the kidney between the white chyle that we have said; and this does not happen often.
And the generation of this aquouse is due to weakness that comes from the kidneys, and this matter is spread.
And sometimes it comes from percussion on the kidneys, and this moisture can have many colors: either it turns to jaundice, or it is without redness, or black, or white, and this happens more often.
And these are the signs to recognize this assembly; for if it is as white as we have said, it is an abscess, i.e., long like the figure of an egg, and does not open the eyes, because it has moisture all around.
If there is moisture in the very cloth, it is an abscess with a part of the egg-like shape, and therefore one thinks that it is another egg;
If the moisture is between the skin of the eyes and the white part, it is felt very well; therefore, when you want to know the color of the moisture, probe it thoroughly with a probe, so that the form can be as previously described. According to what comes after the intrusion, judge of what is within.
According to what comes after the intrusion, judge of what is within. And when we cure it with iron, the patient should be anesthetized to our ability and the fullness of his body; then lay him on his back, on a thing slightly raised, and put many towels under him.
then lie on his left side, and command the assistant to lie on his right, and extend the rod to one of the two costels of the chest.
Then take the spatula blade, press the skin of the cheeks together in the middle until the tip reaches, and your incision should be straight when cutting the skin of the cheeks up to the white, and carefully scrape the thin layer underneath, according to your ability.
Then make a hole in the fat about an inch deep and wide, pull out all the fat, then insert your fingers, stretch the fat upward; do not touch the corners of the cheeks but only the fat; strike the entire area carefully or else the fat will return.
And if the egg jumps out of your work (meaning: when you are done with fat), reset it in its place; then join the two sides of the corners with a stitch, and treat the area like other wounds until it heals completely.
And if you find the egg corrupted by another disease, it is necessary to break the vessels that are susceptible to bleeding, doubting the flow of blood; then strike the coccyx at the entire suspension and extract the egg, and heal as we have said.
And if the yolk is divided into two parts together, know that these are two branches; then strike the other part as you did the first equally, then squeeze out the blood, and put in the wound moistened linen soaked in rose oil.
and put more linen moistened in wine and oil on the other side, and put over the two coccyxes, and put blankets double on top, and bind above all the ligament that is according to this form:
Then take two bandages, and use linen cloth of this kind and sew them together in the girdle of the breeches, and one of the heads should be placed on the foundation to the back, and the other at the end of the handle; and the remaining two heads should be placed on the two angles, and all should be assembled tightly in the buckle of the belt.
And sometimes this ramice of cautery is used in the place of iron surgery, and you should take a subtle cautery scalpel, and cut the skin of the boil, and it should be heated as we have said, so that the white pus containing the water is exposed.
if you take the cautery in this form, pierce it through the boil and scrape off the pus with this subtle heated cautery:
And the cup in all ways that you can, until everything is heated; and be careful that the fire does not touch the egg; and know that this work is more saving; and pay attention to the lack of bleeding, and make sure that the procedures of cutting.
And if anything happens contrary to it, or abscess bursts or bleeding or something else, if you heal what is causing the contrary, according to what has been said before.
And if the patient is afraid and does not want to wait for this work because of its terrifying nature, then perform perforation as I told you before, and it is that when you are absolutely sure through the signs we have said that the water has returned.
Make the sick person sit on a chair or raised seat. Then pierce the abscess in the lower part of the breast with the spatula as wide as possible, and place the perforation along the length of the body; let the openings be large enough to allow all the pus to flow out.
Then put cotton on it and tie it, allowing the remaining pus to drain out. Let it heal until the wound is healed.
and if the white cloth does not allow the pus to flow out of the wound, you must insert a pen or the instrument used to drain the pus from edema patients (as described before); then widen a small part of the wound, check that the pus returns, and wait 6-8 months for it to assemble. Once it has assembled as described above, the patient will recover.
Of an abscess in the head
Know that in the section of this branch there is fear in many positions, which is why it seems to me that it is more appropriate to leave it;
and I will tell you the work and the resemblance of an abscess.
Therefore, many abscesses come from the body, and especially in the head; and this is often the case.
It is to know through excess of sour and hot, which spreads to the kidneys, or from blows;
and it is the color of the abscess according to the body's color; it does not show pain, but the abscess is severe.
And by chance there is an abscess that is black and hard, of such color, and sometimes it comes from the artery or swelling of the vein.
When it is from an artery, it is known by the hot position of the abscess when you press on it with your fingers; And it is not necessary to touch it.
A swelling of the vein is known by its appearance from the touch of the fingers.
And it can well make an incision on this appearance, and on other charms. And it is that you cut the core of the cyst, then the egg is above, and the thread is out of the white skin, and release the suspension from all parts of the egg.
If the egg is already hardened with these hatchlings born, then you must pull out the egg and break it.
If it is ripe on the outside or within the vessels (i.e., inside the body), you must deliver and break open all of it.
If the birth of the hatchling is on its left side, you must break it completely and pull out the egg as we have said.
And when your work is completed, apply the wound with damp wool in oil and wine, then heal it with other treatments until it is healed.
of the abscess on the cheek
This is an abscess enclosed in a swelling resembling a boil, with the softening of the cheeks, And when the patient with a dislocated joint speaks hoarsely as he goes.
and the treatment of this illness is equally cautious and fearful as described above,
and yet we will tell you the method for it, as the ancients have done.
You must make the patient sit on a raised seat and then put the suspension from the knees up to your shoulders, To all the wounds near to the penis, stretch them out properly and mark them, masters.
then strike with a sharp pointed stick wide through the penis, exposing the wounds, as far as they are revealed.
and then flay from both sides, as we have said in the extraction of the arteries that are in the temple;
Then, insert an awl with a double thread and tie it to the first place where the wound has occurred, then tie it again to the other end. Then grind the bones in middle correctly, according to the length of the body, and remove the corrupt moisture.
Then heal the wound as you would do with other types of wounds so that no vassels should burst out that nourish one of the corners.
for by doing this, there will be no ill and if all the vassels swell, then it is necessary to drain all of them. so that the eyes do not lose their nourishment due to the incisions of the vassels, and dry up and cannot be helped.
Of the rupture of the sifac The event in this case is due to the incision or sifac extension on the abdomen in the region of the intestines, which causes them to descend from that rupture towards one of the openings.
and this rupture is either due to the sifac or the extension of it, and these are two types of modes of causes: by impact, jump, fall, or lifting of heavy objects, or similar things.
and the signs when it is due to the extension of the sifac, are that it happens little by little over a long time, and does not come suddenly; And the abscesses are even until they reach the full extent, because the pus follows the intestines.
And the signs are when it is of the section of the intestines, which brings on sudden pain at the beginning, and the abscesses appear differently, under the skin close by, and this is due to the discharge of the intestines and the body expelling the contents of the intestine.
And sometimes the intestines are expelled through the anus, and they are retained inside, causing great pain to the patient, especially when pressed.
And in these iron treatments, there is fear, for which it is necessary to escape.
And the method of the work is that you instruct the patient to pull the intestines out with his hand inside the wound if he can reach it. then hold it by its neck between your hands and lift the thighs.
Then cut above, and sever completely the skin of the hinges with length. Then enter into the groin area, cut incisions according to what is necessary for opening the wound, and make them such that the bones can come out.
Then scrape the muscle that is beneath the skin of the hinges, exposing the white muscle all around.
Then put your index finger into the area where the hip bone is, between the white muscle that is beneath the skin of the thigh and the second muscle.
And pull out the one that is behind the eye and insert the second suture; then move your right hand within the cavity of the cheekbones, and place the white suture upwards towards your left hand, and lift the eye towards the whole length of the suture towards the abdomen. And instruct the assistant to stretch the eye upward, and untie the one that is in front of the suture.
And if you find that the intestine is wrapped around the white hard suture or cord, pull it towards the abdomen.
Then take a needle with one thick thread made of ten strands, and stick it in the back part of the shoulder, which is after the skin of the neck; after the spinal cord, then sew the head that appears with threads, until there are four strands; Assemble them one on top of the other in a cross shape, and tie the shoulder blade, as we have said which is under the skin of the neck, with a strong cord of two parts; then wind the threads around the head and tie it with a cord of two parts so that none of the nurses can enter unless the abscess is open; And straighten the ligament according to the first long ligament of two fingers from it, and after these two ligaments leave a space that is under the knee joint, about the thickness of a thumb.
Then according to the roundness that the egg carries; then strike in the part that is under the skin of the joints, as far as they bend and break, as we have said before.
Then apply wet wool in oil, put it on the wounds, and bring the ligament that we have mentioned. And sometimes white boils are cauterized as we have said, after incision, due to fear of bleeding.
When it happens many times, leave the ligament until it falls off by itself; and if it does not fall off quickly, it should be roasted with hot water, and apply what has been said to it until it falls off.
Then treat the wound with another remedy, until it is completely healed.
of a soft hernia
In this remedy, I have never seen anyone who dared to make a cure with iron.
And the ancients said that it is made like a remedy which is tied together with yew, in this manner you tie the vessels after cutting them lightly beneath.
Then press it in the middle, and treat the abscess of those who open, until the vessels bleed; and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
At times gangrene comes in the belly, as we have said, and opens the abdomen; no intestines should be removed from the belly, and if some are removed, it is little, and repair them hourly.
And if it remains for too long at this point, the wound or abscess grows, until the intestines rupture.
And this happens by the spreading of the abscess that is in the belly, as we have said, because it is extended, then it becomes softened and swollen and opened.
And if the cure is by cautery, as we have said before; and sometimes it is healed by iron in this manner:
the patient lies supine on his back between your hands, then strike the wound swollen with the flat side of a three-finger-width iron;
and pull out the pus that is beneath the skin, then take the hot iron and place it on the apparent part of the wound;
and press it with the belly, then cut the two visible parts of the pus sac on top of the hot iron, one by one;
Then straighten the head of the shoulder, and do not cover it with anything nor extend the egg (yolk) or any other thing, as I have told you in the treatment of the ramie (arrow) of the intestines.
Then treat it with the treatment of wounds. And when you cover the threads (sutures), if they burst and heal the wound, let it remain as long as it is healed.
The sutures are confined and have no appearance in the wound, and cauterizations are more appropriate here and closer to salvation.
of the softening of the skin around the eyes
Often the skin around the eyes is softened in some men, because the charms inside are softened and there is a discharge to be seen; and it is necessary, when it is seen that it needs to be cured, to make the patient lie on his back, and to strike the softened skin on the natural skin; then to bring together the two lips at a stitch, and if you see, sew first the excess of the softened skin with 3 or 4 stitches firmly; then to strike between the stitches, and let the cure as for other wounds, until it is healed, and bind the thread.
of the pounding
1. Know that castration is mentioned in our law, and for this reason I would not like to speak of it in this book; and it is necessary only for two reasons: the first is that the eyes respond when asked about castration and its cure; the second, because we often need castration of certain animals to help us, such as a bull and a sheep and a goat and other animals. I say therefore that castration is done in two ways: by attraction or by cutting. In the one we do, we seat the animal in hot water until the testicles are softened; then we grab them with our hand until they are back in place and you no longer feel them.
Hermaphrodite
Hermaphrodite is of two types in humans: one where there are openings between the two testicles as in the figure of a woman's nature, having hair and sometimes having urine in court. And the other type is in women, who have something above the penis like a rod and two testicles. The treatment for men and women is to cut the surrounding hairs and cure them as with other wounds; the treatment for men whose urine flows through the skin of the testicles has no cure.
Of the tentergen (or tending)
The tentergen is a swelling on the natural part, as long as it is too ugly to see; and some women have it as big as a hand, which is a cure. It is necessary that you color the excess of the tentergen with your hand or with ink, and lightly rub it; and do not go in too deep, for the flow of blood may come out, then cure it with another cure until it is healed; and at another place where there grows from the mouth of the sore, apply it, and by chance fall out, and it resembles a cow, which is why it was called by the ancients "kowe disease". It is necessary that you rub it as we said for the tentergen, and heal it until it is healed.
Of the hernia (or protrusion)
1. If the nature of a woman is not perceived or it is small; and it is natural by birth, or accidental due to disease that comes about; or it is by false conception, or due to subtle or thick sperm, and it is fully formed in the womb, or in the side, or under the ribs, or wherever it may be; and they cannot conceive, give birth, or bring forth flowers; and knowledge of this is by the observation of the belly. If the efflux of blood is nearby, whether at your hand or at your right side. If it is subtle sperm, and it is nearby the two leeks (testicles), hurry and proceed thus: put your two hands together, and the woman should be on her back, with her legs spread; then form the two leeks, until the subtle sperm is ripe, and the efflux of blood stops. Then take wool, wet it in oil, and place it over the area. Let the woman lie down on her back each day so that it cannot heal. And if the sperm is hard and thick, it should be cut with a spatula shaped like the leaf of myrtle. If the efflux is of false conception, let it stop at the cervix and cut it; and have medicines to stop bleeding, such as acacia, dragon's blood, incense, together with much egg white. Then prepare a large reed-like straw, so that the wound cannot heal; and in this way it should be kept long, and prepare a tent of dry linen; then cure as necessary until it is healed. And when false conception comes in marriage, it should be covered in this manner, unless the abscess has become hardened. For an abscessed area that has become hardened in marriage, one should not try to heal it.
If the nature of a woman is not perceived or it is small; and it is natural by birth, or accidental due to disease that comes about; or it is by false conception, or due to subtle or thick sperm, and it is fully formed in the anus, or in the side, or under the ribs, or wherever it may be; and they cannot conceive, give birth, or bring forth flowers; and knowledge of this is by the observation of the belly. If the efflux of blood is nearby, whether at your hand or at your right side. If it is subtle sperm, and it is nearby the two leeks (testicles), hurry and proceed thus: put your two hands together, and the woman should be on her back, with her legs spread; then form the two leeks, until the subtle sperm is ripe, and the efflux of blood stops. Then take wool, wet it in oil, and place it over the area. Let the woman lie down on her back each day so that it cannot heal. And if the sperm is hard and thick, it should be cut with a spatula shaped like the leaf of myrtle. If the efflux is of false conception, let it stop at the cervix and cut it; and have medicines to stop bleeding, such as acacia, dragon's blood, incense, together with much egg white. Then prepare a large reed-like straw, so that the wound cannot heal; and in this way it should be kept long, and prepare a tent of dry linen; then cure as necessary until it is healed. And when false conception comes in marriage, it should be covered in this manner, unless the abscess has become hardened. For an abscessed area that has become hardened in marriage, one should not try to heal it.
1. Emorroydes are openings of veins that usually do not require cautery, and when emorroidal tumors become old they turn into thelul; and as we have said in the division, the similarities of these, their signs, and I will say here those which receive treatment. I say that emorroides and thelul, when they are completely inside the anus, cannot be felt, unless they are treated with iron. Those which are at the mouth of the anus can be felt, and these can be treated.
3. When abscesses in the anus are treated...
In various ways of abscess in the anus come in the rectum, such as carbuncle and other pustular abscesses, herpes, fistulas, fissures, emorroids, hot abscess, and many other diseases that I have said in the division. Therefore, I will say here about the hot abscess in the rectum, which is not one of those that are covered with a scab; and if you want to know how to treat it, see if the abscess is hard at the beginning of its development, full of heat and fever, and becomes red when you can see it. Then do not rush to pierce, but let it mature until the pain subsides; and then make the patient sit on one seat, or two small seats where he leans, and support his back and spread his legs apart from each other; and let his thighs be extended, and put his arms under his knees, and tie them well with a good rope; then squeeze the abscess towards the right side of the body, and bring in the instrument used to open the mouth of the anus, as follows; and when you bring the instrument, make sure that it does not go further than necessary, and does not hurt the patient; if the instrument is larger, cover the depth of the rectum with cloths so that the instrument does not irritate it; and make sure that the tube of the instrument is at the top, and mark the instrument. And when the abscess opens, and you soften it by hand, cover it with a linen cloth or a woolen cloth; and when the pus is emptied, cover the opening in the rectum with absorbent material, such as oiled tents or dry sec oil-soaked tents; put the absorptive material deep inside the rectum and over the abscess and over the handle linen cloth that is clean and damp with warm or malves water; then cure it for two days after this with ointment, until it heals; and at times lift the rectum and the wound by enema of water and honey, and then with water or long root of Aristolochia soaked; then return to the ointment. If the wound is healed in the rectum, you should be careful not to burn with fire, but treat it as we have said in the division.
of childbirth
It is necessary for the midwife to first recognize the figure of natural childbirth and its signs when she sees the woman pushing downward and wanting to smell the air; then hasten the birth of the child; afterwards, know that this childbirth is according to the natural figure, and it issues from its head and follows it; and when you see these signs, it is necessary to press gently on her stomach so that the child comes out quickly; for when it descends towards her head, it follows it, and the husband discharges his excesses in a good manner through the natural act of defecation; and this which comes otherwise does not come naturally. For sometimes it comes by its feet, or the body or the hips, or the hands, or it comes on the stomach, or by the backside, and is turned accidentally onto her neck, and by other malicious figures; it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and astute in these matters, and to avoid error and deception, and I will show you all the figures as to how one should help.
If the child comes out naturally from its head and the woman gives birth loudly, and her strength is weak, make her sit on a saddle or have other women hold her; anoint her nature with oil or fenugreek that has been cooked, and then insert the baile between her fingers using the little spatula as shown below: 1. And cut the second twin, and strike its nail as far as the moisture that is within goes; and press the woman's belly until the twins descend, and if they do not descend, then you must anoint the woman with musk of fenugreek oil; then make her take and vomit with emetics, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: this will now cause the twins to be born.
3. The birth of the child out of its feet. When the child comes out of its feet, you must push it upwards; And then turn the thumb back and forth, until it is even.
Then take one piece [of something] and stretch out the thumb back and forth.
Can it jump up to the knees, if commanded to take hold of it, and make it vomit with condys? If it leaps forward, may God will it.
And if it is not as we have said, then turn it slowly, until it is according to the natural shape. And then turn it gently.
If it does not come as we have said, then take musk-root of height, oil of sage, and softened pitch, and grind everything in one mortar. and place this ointment on the nature of a woman inside it, Then make him sit in sharp agony until below his ribs;
and when it is softened beneath (it), make one myrrh collar and put it under (it) and leave it for an hour; Then make him sit on a chair, then make him vomit and hold his mouth and nose, and press gently on the abdomen, for the child is about to be born now. Of the birth of the child on its thighs When the baby comes in this shape, put the balm on its hands palm to palm;
the child coming out with a wide hand stretch. it is necessary to trick (or find a way) to pull back the hand: If it cannot be returned [to its place], then raise the woman [patient] up and walk away.
If she cannot walk, then make her lie down on a bed and spread out her legs.
Bring forth the muskrat which I have mentioned;
If it does not give birth (i.e., the dislocation does not correct itself), make her sit on a chair or seat, then study how to reposition the hand. Let her push the baby according to its natural shape, make her vomit (i.e., induce emesis), and command her to hold it until it passes out.
Hold the baby by its neck, spread your hands wide, and turn your face toward the mother's back. You should grasp the baby's hand, then carefully rotate it and pull gently.
And when it is equalized, place above it the natural muscular salve of elevation and oil, as we have said, then instruct him to move slightly;
And when you have done this, make her sit on a chair and instruct her to take hold of herself; then make her vomit. In the same way, treat the second one as well.
In the same way, treat the second one as well. When it comes to swell in this manner completely, strike the swelling with your nail until the moisture is voided.
and if the swelling rises up on its face and on its neck, strike it with a blunt instrument so that it is not held back and the swelling dies.
Then insert the child, ensuring that it is in the proper position, and command the woman to take herself once.
From the birth of twins,   (Note: In medieval medicine, "twins" was used to refer to any kind of duality or pairing, not necessarily two human babies.) Know that twins are born frequently, and sometimes three or four; and this is not strange, and it often happens.   (Note: This text uses the medieval counting system where Roman numerals are used for numbers greater than one.) Two are strange things, and do not live if they can be named;   (Note: Here "dui" refers to the number of twins that were stillborn or did not survive long after birth.)
I know this, that they should be multiplied, and are desirable by the leech who invents them, which is bound to the worm.
And sometimes they come forth in such a natural way as a tooth under the gums, as we have said.
And if they come out forcefully, then treat it as we have said, and let the bile be subtle, and do quickly and easily what it does. And do so as is appropriate to save life. Of many children
Of many children Sometimes are formed in marriage, one or two or three or four or five or six or seven, or more up to fifteen, and they are all shaped like a child by the measurement of the sagacious glory.
and it is necessary that the bailiff knows this, because sometimes similar things happen; Then do as is necessary.
Of a dead child
When treating a woman with a dead fetus or an empty womb, as I have said in the division, and it does not come forth by itself, and you are forced to manual work; then you must know if the woman is of good virtue, and she has no accident or fear of death;
It is necessary for the woman to lie on her back, with her head inclined downwards, and her legs raised.
And the minister should shave her [the woman's] head in two parts, or tie her down to the bed so she is not treated for delivery of the child.
Then rub the mouth of the wife with moist oils mixed with musk and fennel seed and flax seed, then anoint her hands with those oils and those mixtures. Then insert the child lightly, then find one space where you can easily insert the fingers.
And take care if the infant is presented with its head extended upward; If the incisors are inserted into the eyes, nose, neck, mouth, palate, beneath the beard, in the forehead or near the sides,    ;
and if the dislocation is on the feet, pierce and press it in the middle of the bones;   ;\]
and it is necessary that you hold the incisor with your right hand, and put the handle between your left hand's fingers, and push gently with all your hand, and pierce the incisor into one of these places we have mentioned, until it comes to an empty space;
then place it against one another scallops, or the thickness should be equal if you need to extract them.
and then make them equal by moving from one side to the other, so that they can move out, and the scallops should be pointed for holding onto each other, as shown here:
And if any part remains, press one of your oil-soaked fingers on it, and push into that part, then pull out the other part.
And if there is no movement [of the dislocated joint], place this [bone] back or higher in its place, and do this until it goes completely out.
And if one limb comes before the other, and cannot be returned by pulling, You must roll it [the dislocated joint] on a cloth until it comes back in place.
Then you should put it [the dislocated limb] back into the joint of the foot or the ankle, and this must be done in both hands and with both feet.
And if the child's head is large and narrow at the exit, or has a narrow neck assembled, you must push the pointed spatula between your fingers, and make the head and stretch the neck. or you turn it to the instrument that is called "almidach", from which the shape comes with the instruments or chapter that follows.
And do the same with newborn infants naturally. Then remove the bones with forceps.
If the joint jumps out and is held with forceps, it should be cut open, as wide as the moisture that comes out or more.
If it cannot be removed, break it into pieces at the joint you can reach.
And if it swells in the belly or beneath the ribs, you must pierce it until the moisture flows.
And if the swelling is on its feet, the drawing out is light, and the correction towards the mouth of the bladder is light.
And if it is thick in the belly or in the thigh, you must draw it out with a single gauze wrapped around your hand. And when the belly or thigh, let the moisture that is inside flow out.
And if another member is dislocated, and the head remains. If the ball throws its hand fully into the mare's mouth and pulls it out to the mare's mouth. Then, he pushes one or two times, and pulls it further.
and if the mouth of the mare is constricted by hot pus that has come to it, there is no need to work on it. It is necessary to administer moist and fat things; and he applies plasters, and softens and moistens them in warm water.
If the wound is on the chest and you can level it, you apply what we have said in the living creature;
If one cannot level it, then cut the wound into pieces and leave nothing of the cartilage behind;
And when you have done this, apply to it what we have said in the treatment of abscesses that come in marriage (i.e., boils);
And if bleeding comes out, it should be stopped with a tight bandage, and apply other treatments.
I saw a woman in whom an infant had died in the womb, then consulted another on this matter, and brought it back to life. After a long time an abscess came in the armpit, and swelled so much that it burst, and began to putrefy.
I was called to the treatment, and I thought for a long time, but could not stop the wound from bleeding.
I applied a strong dressing, and out came a bone, then after some days another one. I marveled greatly, because the belly has no bones.
I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
I make the wound, and press bones until the woman is in a better position. and keep the woman long time in this manner, and then a little more of the bone at the joint.
and I have not found this chapter except that, when the master finds an unusual thing, he knows what to do about it.
to bring back the wife to her place.
Here comes the translation for the next sentence: "Furthermore, the horns should be more delicate than the restrictor, and made from ebony or boxwood;"
"and the mouth of the tube should be one finger wide, and the trees (?) one finger thick, and half a palm in length;" "and between the two links should be two joints of this same tube, which are closed at both ends, half a palm in length or slightly more;"
And this second alignment is placed in the mouth of the patient to open when turning the two horns.
Another form, more delicate and lighter in appearance, should be made of ebony or boxwood, resembling pliers. And have two alignments for each joint, as you see, one palm in length and two fingers wide;
And when you see opening the anus with all the instruments, make her sit on a chair, feet apart and legs open, Then place the two instruments side by side in the anus, and hold the handle of the instrument under her thighs; Then work your hand with all the instruments, as you have done with the scissors equally, according to the size that you see opening the mouth of the anus, so that the ball makes what it wants.
This instrument is all covered and multiplied in their likenesses; and when the masters have arranged them, the work is more urgent, and higher for humans due to their quantity.
Do not uncover the instrument unless you have arranged it, as their necessity is not excusable.
When the afterbirth is retained during childbirth, you must instruct the patient to hold her breath, and then make her vomit with a mustard poultice, and hold your hands at her mouth and nose. If it jumps (dislocates) there, it is good.
If not (the dislocation does not occur), then take one pot and make a plaster or cup and put in it herbs that can open the mouth of the sore, such as wormwood, rue, anise, chamomile, cascara sagrada and centaury.
All these herbs, or some of them, should be boiled in water over the fire; then put one end or the cup from the pot into the sore.
And the pustule until the vapors come within the sore; then make it vomit, as we have said. The second sentence to translate: And if it remains after this treatment and does not heal as expected, command the bailiff to moist his left hand in oil of sulphur or musk oil of altar, and then apply it to nature.
And seek the second incision; and when you have found it, take it and stretch it gently straight, so that the sore does not shrink during extraction. But it must be moved gently from right to left, then pull; if you do this, it will come out and dislocate.
If the mouth of the bladder is stretched, we have said the cure for emptying and the fumigation of herbs.
And if it does not have all of what we have said, make sure you do not pull on it.
But it is necessary that the one who is at the mouth of the dead woman, you tie him to the wife's leg, then you clisterize with an ointment four-formula.
If it will come back and he [the one tied to the wife's leg] will push [the dead woman], but in any case, when she [the dead woman] could come, if it comes badly, it will give off a bad smell at the stomach and head, and sting the patient.
Therefore it is necessary that appropriate fumigations are provided for this case: no ancient has proven the fumigation of parsley and dried figs.
The shape of the instrument with which one fumigates the woman to retain the flowers and seconding (afterbirth) is as follows:
And has the appearance of glass resembling a canal, and the narrow part is placed in the nature, and the large ends are over the fire;
And let the fumigation be on the coals, and the time until it is spoiled, and begin another.
To pierce the foundation
Many children are born who do not have their foundations pierced, instead it has been stopped by some subtle means. Therefore, it is necessary to pierce that substance in its proper place, and do not pierce it with a sharp stylus, and be careful that it does not touch the ligament.
Then put soft linen soaked in wine and oil on it, then treat with ointment until it heals.
And if you doubt that it will stay reset, put or insert a splint of wood, and leave it for several days, and let it be removed when the bones appear to have moved in rooms.
And sometimes comes this sudden swelling of wound or abscess; it is necessary to cover the sore: if healed, as we have said with a splint of wood.
of the fistula at its foundation   (In this context, a fistula is an abnormal passageway or channel between two organs or parts of the body.) Fistulas that come from under the foundation are nodulous, and those that come out of it decay faster, or within the space of two parts,
if there is a fistula or more; and when the nodulous part becomes old, it heals by itself, and in case of moisture wakes up pus or thin boils,
and sometimes these fistulas are persistent; and they are recognized by those who notice either an excretion or wind when the patient defecates, or in case of accidental passage of gas.
And if there are fistulas that penetrate to the bladder, and halfway down the penis; they reach up to the knee joint, and up to the calf of the leg.
And thus one recognizes the persistent fistula at its root, but not the non-persistent one: and you press your finger or root on its indication or origin, and insert a fine awl of copper or iron into the fistula when there is no twistedness in it.
if it has twistedness, then insert a tent or thin strip of linen, or horsehair, until you feel the tent or hair on your finger:
and if you do not feel it, and there is no purulent discharge, pusor or worms, as we have said: Know that it does not pierce [the skin]; hasten to cure [it].
And when the fistula is open to the bladder or conducts urine, if it leaks urine and cannot be sealed by medicines.
If it is pierced at the joint of the leg, then the tendon comes to the surface; If there is no curvature or the location of the pain, it is already bent and does not require medication or salve.
And in these Persian blisters, there is no cure but work, and the vain efforts of foolish doctors who interfere with them.
In that which is not Persian and not old, for the hope of healing by iron, as I have experienced,
And let the patient lie between your hands on his back; lift his legs until his thighs are raised to his abdomen, and incline his thighs towards his stomach. Then push a tent of reed, or a plank if there is curvature, until you know where the dislocation comes from.
If the patient feels it around the foundation, then you must push your finger as an indicator there.
If you feel then that the tent has pierced it; and if it is discovered where you feel between your finger and the skin or flesh, then you know that it is perforated. If one does not work on it, it cannot be healed.
Everyone says that some things can be well healed, but this happens rarely;
and the aid that one gives it, is to warm the cautery thinly according to the width of the wound, as previously said; and put the hot cautery all in the wound, until it comes out of the base; and do this two or three times, as you know that these small charred things should be burned, which resemble a bird's feather;
And then cure the swollen tents with butter, until the inflammation subsides, and then apply a healing ointment, soothing and binding.
If it heals in this manner, that is good. But if it cannot be healed otherwise;
and if it is swollen, do not pierce to the point of the foundation, but between your finger and the swelling, cover with a thick layer of fat or soap, and you will see the fistula beneath the covering. If the end of the fistula begins to swell, push it immediately towards the tent and then apply the fire cautery until it reaches the top of the tent.
The tent will be released and shrink; then burn the charred areas that seem like a feather of a bird, leaving nothing behind.
And if the flesh is soft and cuts between you and the abscess, cauterize it with fire or medicine.
For fire cauterization has two good effects: the burning of the charred areas adjacent to it and the stopping of bleeding and drying of moisture.
Then treat wounds that are swollen with boiled tentes (a type of cloth) or in a paste made from crushed oats, until the swelling subsides and the charms are burned within the swelling.
Then treat the wound with hard charcoal ointments and dry medicines.
For when it is restored, it will be healed and will not return.
If a fistula arises until it reaches the full depth and is located outside of the body, you should press on the affected area or foundation, and examine it.
If you feel the swelling and it is between two layers or fabrics or leather near the point of piercing, there should be no way out except for a path of faith and hope through the administration of one of the three methods:
or you can cauterize it as we have said, or you can pierce it all the way to the bottom, or if it is pus-filled, you can open and cure it as first mentioned.
and do not go too deep that you cover the substance holding the foundation, and let the purge come out by its own will. Then heal as we have said;
Then heal as we have said; If it will be healed, remove that covering and clean it when it is cut off at the base, either by using a probe or another instrument pointed. Then remove that charred flesh in the wound as much as you can.
Then study to heal the wound and keep the fistula in the part away from the base, as it will be easier for the patient.
And sometimes fistulas are formed in this way: and it is when you push the tent from the fistula, and it is where it adjoins the foundation beneath the skin above, Take a lance pierced at the head according to this form: Then push one threaded needle into two, and push the tent all along the thread into the fistula up to the head.
If it is pierced in the margin of the foundation within, then draw out the thread of that one, so that you push your thumb or foundation.
And draw the head with thread, and bring together the two shoulders together, and hold one to another, and leave it for one day or two;
And do not move it at any time, until the threads tie these characters that are between them have shrunk and closed;
Then heal the wound until it is healed and healthy.
If the fistula does not open, make it open in all ways that you can, unless it is too deep.
It is not advisable to cover a dislocated joint with a plaster, and then cure it while it is still swollen, as we have said, until it heals.
The shape of the spinous spur used to make a fistula is very sharp at one end and sharpened. and blunt on the other side, because you should not cover what you should not cover, as you see here:
Emorydes (blisters) are of two types: either they are within the foundation, like a kernel of resin, and there are small and large ones, and in the skin directly blood, and there are one or more, and they are swollen away from the foundation and at the head of the foundation; but those which are swollen have less moisture,
and in the skin or a little citron juice or a little blood, and they have the color of the body;
and the care of those who have it within their foundation, since you instruct the patient to stretch themselves to lie down in chambers, until the foundations heal, and children appear. hasten, and it should be with the pliers, or hold it with your nail, then strike at its roots;
and if the pliers cannot hold it because of moisture, take a small cloth or fabric, or a piece of leather; And hold it to your elbows, then strike, and sprinkle powder on top of some hot powders that are in place of fire. And you cauterize it as said in the chapter on cautery, then treat other treatments until it is healed.
If the foundation cannot emerge, then clisterize the patient with biting and sharp clisterium to clean the affected area so that it can come out easily.
If the patient can prevent himself, and if his veins are too deeply pierced, it is a light cure. And it is that you grab them with your nail or tweezers and crush them, then heal as we have said, until they are healed and fear the incision by iron.
It is necessary that you make the stitch in this way: take one twisted thread, and put it in a needle, then pull the thread above and pierce the needle from the other side, and turn the two ends of the thread under the needle. and if it is wide; draw the thread tightly, then knot the thread, pull out the needle, and do the same with all the others, and leave one for bleeding excess blood.
Then place a soft cloth soaked in rose oil or pitch on the foundation, and place it on the patient, and instruct him to rest.
Then let it drain until it stops, and when it has stopped draining, treat the wound with an ointment and other treatments, until it heals.
The drying of wounds or foundations. Often, the drying out of wounds occurs in the intestines due to natural constraints and when the disease is old and medicine is of no use.
It is necessary that you cut at the tip of a splint or your nail through the skin above, so as not to let it moisten. then heal it until it is dry as necessary;
and if it cannot dry, renew the shaving more forcefully than before, until it heals well, and blisters. then let it heal completely.
The trembling (or shivering) A lump (or swelling) is a small protrusion from the body and spreads out greatly.
And sometimes the throat is frozen (or constricted), and it feels like death by trembling, spreading throughout the entire body, but more so in the hands than other parts.
And the remedy is to take a cane of an ostrich feather or strong goose quill and place it on the trembling, until the purple circles around the trembling completely. Then turn your hand along the entire chain until you grasp it all around the swelling, and immerse it completely, and tighten the swelling from its roots.
And if you see it (like a chain of iron or steel), do this according to the following form, and be subtle inside and pull it out from above.
Do not pierce (the swelling), but hold it tightly and press it; and if you see it (the swelling), cauterize it as described in the chapter on cautery.
of the form of a plaster   \* The text describes how to make a plaster for treating wounds or swellings.\* This sentence is describing the shape that the plaster should have, specifically "the form of a plaster."\* In medieval medical texts, the term "clistere" often refers to a type of ointment or salve used in wound treatment. At times they make a silver or arsenic enema, or molten lead or mercury; and at times they make of these instruments small and large, according to those for whom they are prepared.
Therefore, when administering the treatment for children and the weak and sickly, the instruments are small.
The shape of the enema is large or small; it is tied in this manner above, according to this method:
And there shall be an opening where the belly is joined, as you see, and the head pierced through it; and at one side there should be two holes, and in the other one.
And place the medicines of a beast's bladder or parchment into the opening, and pierce it all around with small holes.
And have one space between each hole, then put in these holes one strong thread of twisted thread of ten or so, and sew up the belly like a goatskin. And when the medicine is inside (inside the body), if it is attached to the instrument in front of a strong thread, then plasterize (apply plaster); and this is the shape of a circle.
And let the medicine not be too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the plaster with oil or egg yolk, or similar thing, then press it gently.
Then the ministers press the plaster with their two hands together until it is completely flat, then remove the plaster, and make the patient spread his legs apart.
And if you want the medicine to work, stretch it as much as possible; and if it swells up for an entire night, it will be of greater help.
And if you want to treat a disease of abdominal distention, and the medicine works quickly, repeat it until it becomes healthy.
And if the hemorrhoids are foundation or abscess, the clyster should be as subtle as for a child;
And this is the form of the subtle cluster on top of which the skin is stretched:
wounds
We have said in the previous section the treatment of wounds; now we will tell you about the care for hands and medicines, according to completion.
I say that wounds are diverse according to what they are made, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and of how they are made.
The things by which wounds are made are by piercing with a spear, cutting with a sword and knife, or of a lance or fist or arrow, or similar things;
or according to the parts of the body, such as wounds that fall on the neck, head, chest, abdomen, liver and similar members;
And I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and I will begin with wounds on the head, for it will come in its chapter.
If a simple wound comes on the head and the bone is not broken, then take care if it is due to an arrow or similar things, and the skin is completely torn and the wound is large. And if you doubt the rise of an abscess hot: let it heal itself from the head itself immediately, even if a little blood comes from the wound, and it should heal in the opposite direction of the infected part.
And the patient should empty himself of wine and thick foods.
If he does not want to urinate, let his food be reduced, and he should not drink wine, nor eat meat;
And put on the wound, if an abscess comes, only soft wool soaked in rose oil or in stiptic wine.
And if there is no abscess hot, put it on the wound, if it is fresh with all its blood, and it is not moving due to air or powder, I will say a little more about this later.
And if the wound has moved [infected], put some medicinal herbs on it until it is healed.
And if the wound is large like the size of a sword and of similar appearance, and the lips cannot be brought together by pressing, then join them with stitches, as I will explain for abdominal wounds, through stitching.
If the wound is exposed of the bone and gaping, and does not hold but only a little, close it; then treat the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of skin. Instruct the patient to eat thick foods such as cooked heads and wheat, also pulses, and similar things.
And if you find or suspect putrid flesh not on the bone, close it all and throw it away, then treat it.
And if there is an artery in the wound or vein that cannot be stopped without cutting it off, and it does not stop bleeding with medicine, then cut the artery, and if you find it dislocated, tie it with a thread. If it does not help, cauterize (it).
And if the wounds are small and simple, it is an easy cure: and it is that you put this powder which cements them once the herb has moved (it).
And the method of the powder is as follows: take incense one part, dragon's blood 2 parts, quicklime 4 parts, and grind it finely. And apply the wound, pressing it until it exudes well and merges with all its blood.
And then tie it well and leave it to heal if it does not swell; because the medicine is not removed until it has healed.
Sometimes this is done only with chalk, when no incense or dragon's blood is available, but the wound has not moved.
If the wound has moved, it should not be used in this case, do not apply this powder.
But apply some digestive herbs, or barley flour boiled in water and honey until it thickens. Then heal the other treatments until it is healed.
If a bone breakage comes with the wound and it is small, extract it with subtle tweezers;
And I will tell you after the fractures of the head.
Of the wound of the neck
If a wound comes in or on the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between that and one on the head, but if the nerve of the neck or the artery is cut.
If it is the nerve, there is no other remedy than to leave it to heal and not put anything binding, for it harms the nerve and causes it to retreat; and not to put anything cold on the wound, for the substance of nerves is cold, and their continuation is with the brain, which is the highest member.
but the medicine should be like salt washed in soft water and mixed with rose oil, and boiled also in soft water. and other stones of a similar kind, moistened.
And if the wound is large, wrap it with bandages, then treat it until it is healed.
And if the wounds are deep and swollen with pus, pierce it or lower down.
And if the arteries are cut and bleeding occurs, tie it off, ligate it, and cauterize as needed.
And if the spine of the throat is cut or the windpipe is damaged, keep the airway protected, so that food goes. If the swelling is on the neck above the throat, do not touch the throat but reset it according to its natural shape. And then allow it to come down and wait for some days, then treat with burning ointments until it is healed.
If the wound presses into the bone, cut it open. If there are bone fragments, remove them all if you can, and leave those that cannot be removed until the wound heals. And let the dislocation be separated and aligned.
If the wound is fresh, sprinkle the powder that I have said on it. And if there is bone in the wound and it has a fistula, treat it as I have said in its chapter.
of the wound caused by lance or knife.   --> of the lance or knife wound
If it's a wound from a lance or knife, and the wound is deep, look if vapors rise from the wound as the patient breathes; therefore know that the wound is fatal.
and if it is not deep, and it is fresh with all its blood, do not apply powder at first hour nor tie it for the blood that dissolves it. return to the patient's heart, and cut off the wound. But you apply an attractive ointment, and let it rest twice a day;
And if you do not have ointment, put old cotton on the wound to draw out moisture.
and make the patient sleep on the wound for three days, or four, or more. if no spasm, nor bad tremors of the heart, or training of a dog does not occur. And when you see good positions, know that the wound is healed. Then from cuts and other remedies, as long as he is healthy;
If it cannot heal and open, then know that there is a fistula; treat it as necessary.
And if the wound is from a sword cut or a knife, and it is simple, or deeper, or on the back, treat that which is in front of it;
If it is large, stitch it up; if it is small, apply powder to it; if it has pierced the bone and broken into fragments, whichever the wound, and the veins are exposed, pull them back if they are protruding. and if they are not exposed, let the wound drain, align the extraction;
And for other wounds on other limbs, the judgement is as we have said.
the dislocation of the belly
The dislocation of the belly can be great and medium-sized or small.
From a large wound, at times the intestines themselves may protrude, or the nerves of the intestines, by which they cannot be inserted.
and the stitching is more difficult, and sometimes a small wound is worth more than a large one,
because when replacing the intestines, more points are needed if they are not placed one by one; because the intestines swell quickly and feel the cold, so they enter with more points,
and because the middle wound is more important, for this reason, stitch the intestines back in their place instead of using two (points) like others.
And know that the ruptures of the belly are according to four ways:
the two common types occur in the abdominal hernia,
And the hernias of other body parts and two other specific hernias occur in other wounds;
And all of them are more suitable with the stitching of the stomach, and I will say each one and explain it.
When the wound is small, and nothing from the intestines protrudes out, and there are two ways to set it (the bone), here is the first one: for the smallness of the wound, as we have said, for because the intestines are swollen due to the cold.
And when it is cold, warm it in this manner: soak a sponge or one piece of linen cloth only in hot water, Or you cook in sharp quince and cypress and spike, and open the intestines as long as the inflammation is removed;
and sometimes make this wine restraining, and it is said to be effective for reducing swelling.
And when you see the inflammation disappearing, if the intestines are cooked in water that is too hot or spoiled, For this purpose, the entry is closed tightly.
And if it cannot enter, then make a small opening in the wound with an instrument used to treat hemorrhoids.
and the first treatment is made from crushed boiled peas. We should not cut it without great necessity.
And this is the instrument for cutting:
Cut into the hollow part but not through, and observe the shape.
And when the wound is enlarged, and the internal parts protrude outward, Put it back in its natural form in its proper place, If you have the power to do so, for it is necessary.
When the wound is wide and located in the area beneath the belly, you must make the patient lie down on their back, and raise their legs higher than their head; And if it is in the part beneath the belly,
and also if the rupture of the belly is in one of the two parts hold your intention that the injured part should be higher than the other;
And thus the treatment should be administered as I say for large and small wounds.
In small wounds apply what is appropriate.
Then have a compassionate minister between your hands who anoints the entire wound with his hand. and press the lips together. And this is the common method of suturing,
And this is the common method of suturing, and you take one needle or more, according to the width of the wound, Then leave from the head of the wound two fingers' width, and sew with a needle that has one strong thread. And pierce the two skin layers with the two knives (or small blades).
then bind with a double thread around the needle of two parts, then assemble the two heads of the wound facing each other,
And then leave one hole's space, and insert another needle; and tie the thread as you did with the first needle. and continue doing so according to what you need for the needles, until the whole wound is bound up;
And let the needles be medium sized, neither too thin nor thick. For the fine needles pierce through the whole skin, and the thick ones cannot enter well: because they should be medium sized.
and it is not good to insert needles too deeply into the flesh and skin,
so that they do not split and open the wound before the bond.
and then put the points of the needles in, so that they do not prick the patient while sleeping, and put cloth or bandages on the tips of the needles to keep them in place, And leave [the wound] until it heals.
and this stitching method with needles is more suitable for small wounds. because it pierces an awl or two.
The second stitching is common, And it is that you gather together the two shoulders of skin and the two shoulders of flesh together with a needle where there is one strong, medium thread. and when you have pierced these four together,
and when you have pierced these four together, if you remove the needle from the part where you began, in the manner that one sews garments;
And place a space between each stitch the size of a small egg.
This stitching shall be for the man.
and I sew a wound on one side or abdomen of a person,
who was wounded by a knife. And the wound was more than one palm wide, And the intestines were about two palms wide.
The wound was in the abdomen. I returned the intestine after it had been out for twenty-four hours,
And the wound was sewn up for fifteen days, it healed, and became healthy.
And they had judged that he would die, but it was a miracle.
and I did not cure him with ointment, for I was in one place where there was none to be found, nor any medicine. and I put old cotton over the wound twice a day, and washed it with honey water until it healed.
And I will tell you the two proper ways of stitching:
Take the needle, and poke it from the outside part through to within that.
when it has pierced the core straight through straight, lay the skin or fabric over where you inserted the needle,
and make it pierce from the inside part to the outside.
And the understanding of this stitch is that you sew it as a pelter makes fur. and that you leave a space once on one side, and return it from the other, until the stitch is completely finished.
The second manner of stitching, which Galen himself calls,
is so that anyone who assembles the two parts together naturally, And press one of the shoulders against the other shoulder, in this manner:
thrust an awl or the shoulder of the mirror-side into that spot only, leave the two shoulders of the face; then turn the awl, and pierce it from the outside part to that inside. 2 shoulder bones
then make a hole in one and the other from the outer part until within, in 2 other shoulder bones that are on the opposite side;
and this is the manner of stitching and the most common one.
Galen said this word, and no one denies it.
One must sew the belly with two needles, where there is thread in each.
and one must thrust one needle from one side, and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew leather.
And know that when the incision is inside the belly, The stitching is more painful than other parts of the stomach.
The judgments of the wound are like the judgments of other wounds:
and it is that when you probe the fresh wound with all its blood, as soon as the arrow has moved it, if you replace the intestines and tie it up; then place powdered scented char on top of it.
if you replace the intestines and tie it up; then place powdered scented char on top of it. And if the elbow has moved, put any available ointment on it until the wound heals; And tie up the thread, and bind the suture, and apply the mire. Then heal the wound as with others, until it is healed.
And if you don't have medicine, put old cotton on it as soon as it starts to heal; And move it two times a day as long as it heals.
For you have no need for other medicines in many cases where the wounds are simple.
and if you doubt whether the wound causes communion with the main parts, It is necessary that you moisten linen lightly with heated oil, or rose oil. and place it around the sores, and under the saddle(like a bandage);
and if there is pain or putrefaction in the belly, and this occurs repeatedly, If the black vinegar enemas become cold, and especially if putrefaction reaches the intestines;
And pierce within, know that when it is the large intestines, it is easier to heal than the small ones.
The "jeun" intestine cannot heal when perforated. and it is due to the pus in the veins that are there, and the subtlety of the whole body, and the proximity of its nature to the nerves.
And if the worm jumps from the wound, put it back as the intestine, while it is still fresh.
And if it is old and turned black, then you should cut the black part, so that blood does not flow from there. for there are veins and arteries;
then cut what is between the ligament; and hang the two heads suspended from the part below the wound so as to align the extraction when the bladder falls out, and the wound opens.
Of the rupture of the eyeball
When the intestines are torn, and the wound is small, it can be restored in some people,
because I saw a man pierced or stabbed in the stomach;
The wound was on the right side of the stomach, and became abscessed and turned into a fistula, with discharge and flatulence.
I treated it according to what I knew, and continued to cauterize until it healed, and the flesh closed over.
And when I saw the flesh heal, I feared that the patient might have an illness in his abdomen; And it had no ill, but improved in better conditions, and ate and drank.
and said some experienced people that when it has a small wound in the intestine, it should be tied in this manner: take large thread, then gather the lips of the wound. and when the thread has gone through the mouth, place it on the two lips.
then place another blow in this manner until the wound is completely seized;
and cauterize the wound. The first sentence translates to: If the head is swollen in the intestines, it causes no harm to the patient.
and a thin thread can be tied around the intestine that is cut from an animal's intestine.
in this way: take the head (of the thread) made from intestine, which should be very sharp. And then tie this thread to the head of the linen cord (or very thin linen thread). Then thread the needle and sew the intestine, and pull it through the opening.
And this method of stitching the wound is not beyond the way of faith and hope;
And if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the great intestines, there is no remedy or health, except for subtlety.
from fistula or that it is Know that every wound or abscess, when it grows old, is universally called "fistula". and especially when it becomes large and swollen.
And a fistula is according to the truth a hard and white nodulation where there is no pain. and is as hollow as the feather of a bird;
sometimes it clears up quickly, and other times it remains thick. sometimes small, and other times quite;
And I have spoken of it in the section on wounds, that every wound that is not healed, and there is no flesh, this is not further than by one of the eight causes:
it means, through the littleness of the blood or body: or by its malice; And because there is hard flesh within, and above the lips, do not let it produce any more flesh. And there is too much pus. The limb is rotten, and the matter is of bad quality. The medicine is not good in the treatment. For because corruption is a kind of pestilence; for in the property of the region, digestion is slow and health sluggish, and it tends to run down by nature; there are veins or bones;
and I have already shown all these causes, the signs, and the treatments of medicines in the section on diseases.
Now I will tell you how to treat a fistula that is made by handwork.
Know that a fistula occurs in all members of the body; for there are fistulas that come from large veins, arteries, and nerves, or to the small intestine, or to the bladder, or to one of the ribs, or to the spine of the back, or to any joint of the hands or feet;
And all the fistulas that are of this kind are difficult to heal, except with labor, and ignorance.
but if there is any fistula that does not come up to the level I have said, and you have faith in its cure, and you observe it, if it is straight, take a tent of beeswax or iron, if the fistula is straight, insert it.
and if the fistula is twisted, look for a thin reed tent, For the plough bends towards tortuosity.
and if the fistula is severely damaged and you cannot find it by probing, If you cleanse one of the wounds,
Because moisture spreads from one wound to another, and it cleanses.
then pierce it cauterously in your power, knowing if there is bone or nerve, and if it is completely healed.
and ask the patient carefully about the pain they feel when you press your hand, and where they feel it.
And when you truly know the place where it is, and if it is far from a joint, or a nerve, or an artery or a vein, or in any of the places I have told you, if the head follows according to what I have said,
or in any of the places I have told you, if the head follows according to what I have said, and remove the falsehood and rotten matter that is within it; and then heal it until it is healed,
And if the fistula is well penetrated straight through, it is necessary that you cauterize thoroughly, as much as you can. then apply dampened plugs soaked in hot medicine to the base of the fistula.
then apply dampened plugs soaked in hot medicine to the base of the fistula. until the medicine dissolves the excess matter that remains at the bottom.
and then apply clean oil to it, as long as it is pure.
And if it is not healthy by this means, then cauterize as we have said,
And if the bone is corrupted due to the fistula, cut (it). If a vein or nerve does not obstruct or affect major limbs as we have said;
And if the bone is exposed and there is corruption and blackness, scrape off all the corruption as much as possible. Then treat the harmful things while he is healthy;
and if he is not healthy, bend it as before, know that you are not going until the font;
dig deep and seek as far as you are able, And remove all corruption, then reset the place;
If it is thus healed, that is well. If not, know that the corruption is too deep, that you cannot reach it; If there is no other instrument but the ligature from nature;
and if there is a small bone corrupted, and you can draw it with the pliers, if it should be pulled out with one instrument,
and if there are many bones, pull them all out, leave none.
And if moisture opposes it and there is no error or fear, And if the flesh covers and holds together the bones,
And if you cannot remove them within an hour, put something healing and purifying on the wound. and let it heal until the flesh grows around the bones,
And then if they have the bones more lightly;
If it is a large bone, like in the leg or thigh, if only remove the corruption until the blackness is completely removed, Then restore the wound;
And if there is great corruption in it, reaching down to the bone; it must be cut off and covered all the way up to the corruption, and then it should be cured until it heals.
I will tell you about a fistula that happened to a man in his leg. If you take an example and help in your work.
There was once a young man of about thirty years old who had pain in his leg due to something coming from within the body.
The matter came to the leg, and a large abscess formed which could not be opened by any other means;
but the masters, out of their folly, opened the abscess too much, And it becomes extremely rotten with matter, and a fistula forms, and much pus comes out that all are going with moisture from the body.
and they put many remedies in it for two years, and no wise man had knowledge of cures by hand.
until I was summoned there, and saw the leg and the medicines they were using to treat it. and he who runs through the wounds with great speed; and the heart of the young man turns red, and has a yellow complexion.
I pitched a tent at one of the wounds, then searched for all the wounds,
and I found that one wound came from all parts of the leg.
I therefore hastened and made an incision in one of the sores until I discovered a part of the bone. and found it corrupted and pierced through, and the corruption went to the bone inside;
I was of the opinion that there was no other corruption in the bone, except what I left behind.
and I began to treat the wound with salves for a long time, but could not heal it;
And then examine, uncover the bone as before,
and find the continuous corruption in the bone, cut it out, then leave it open and I will try to heal the place.
but I was not able to cut more than a palm of the bone around it, and let it hang by the muscle all over. then I restored it with medicine; and it healed and grew strong quickly.
And it is not necessary to start work again except due to the weakness of the patient, who cannot endure. and due to the fear of death that I had for him. For it frequently evacuated blood, but he was healed entirely,
For it frequently evacuated blood, but he was healed entirely, And a hard cartilage was born in its place instead of the bone, and it had a good arrangement and no harm or contrary effects at all, neither to the air nor to the future.
And stretch out the head, so that you pull out the corrupt flesh below. And uncover the flesh at the joint where you see it should be, so that the skin does not prick the flesh. Put a splint or a board under the bone to cover the corrupt flesh and move it. It should be as much as you can see and feel the corruption, and be careful to do it again.
And if the bone is corrupted and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part of it, Cover the entire flesh with a hot iron; then place one hot iron on top of it,
and if the corruption is spread from one part to another, and the iron is longer than the length of the corruption as we have said,
And if the corruption is at the joint, strike the corrupt joint and break the bone on the other side;
And if the corruption is in the continuity of two joints, there is no remedy but to crush it;
And if the corruption is at the knuckle of the hand or foot, that is a very difficult matter; However, you must investigate this corruption, how it opened up; And clean it in all ways as you can, but let the vein or nerve not oppose you.
And know that the cutting instrument and the saws for covering these bones are many, according to the position of the bone and the appearance of it. And their hardness and subtlety, their thickness and thinness, their largeness and smallness, and their roughness. And for each similar work, one must prepare their instrument accordingly.
Know that the operation will show you the tool that you will need, according to the knowledge of this craft. and the testimony of the methods of diseases; if you think about the tool that you need according to what is required.
Hot iron (or cautery) The head of the shoulder may dislocate from within or from outside.
and when you have attempted to treat this with the corrosive medicine (cautery), but it does not help at all, if it is necessary to cover that limb until the level of the cautery has healed, If the patient is scorched by this [cautery], it may cause death or greater harm to the member due to its fault.
If the patient is scorched by this [cautery], it may cause death or greater harm to the member due to its fault. and the signs are that the limb turns black, as if it were burned by fire, and after the blackness, it goes to the corruption of member by member, And takes hold of the whole body; if you hasten to cover it.
and if it is by the bite of some poisonous animals like sea scorpions, weasels and similar creatures,
If the corruption is at the head of the toe, strike it, and give it no opportunity to come up as far as the hand.
And if it comes up as far as the hand, strike at the joint, so that the corruption does not come up to the arm.
And if it comes to the arm, strike at the bone; and if it passes the bone, it is death, and no remedy foreign works except for the quantity of its virtue;
and thus do as when corruption comes or putrefaction: if it comes at the first joint, strike after the other joint;
and if it comes to putrefaction, strike the whole area of putrefaction; And if it rises in the leg, strike at the knee joint;
And if it comes above the knee, there is no other remedy for the sick man but to kill him;
The method of healing or treating a limb is that you bind it above and below, And stretch one minister (bandage) downwards, and another minister (bandage) upwards, And you desire the cartilage that is between the two joints at one space of about half an inch wide, until the bone is exposed;
then take a copper or silk, and place one linen cloth on each side, so that the silk does not touch the healthy area; and bring other wounds and abscesses closed for the patient;
And when bleeding occurs during your work, cauterize the area immediately. and place some powders that restrain [the flow of blood]; then return to your medicine until it is completed.
then bind the limb with a sturdy rope and heal it until it is healthy.
and I will tell you what happened to one man in a dream:
It came upon him a blackness that seemed burnt by fire
and this corrosion first appeared in his tooth root, consuming the entire tooth;
and when the man saw the corrosion, he gnawed at the tooth, and it became healthy;
and long afterwards the corrosion returned to his hand, and it came to me,
And I place it on reflective things after the purification of the body, and the corrosion cannot cease.
It also requires that I cut off the hand, and I do not wish to, unless I have hope of reflecting the matter. Also doubted whether if I cut off his hand, he would not die, The strength of man was weak; he lost hope and returned to his land. and struck himself with a sword in the hand, and was healed.
And I have never heard of this story except as something that others do when it is needed.
An abscess may occur in a charnut (charcoal or coals) and remain for so long that it creates a large swelling. And then they run and pierce, leap through (it), and hold still the place, just like a squire. The skin that is on top is as thin as a linen cloth cut open. They will not go to the bone or to the nerve, and such an illness is called "sain."
But if it is so long that it reaches the bone entirely, it is called "fistula".
and you should cook that skin all around, and likewise when it is thin, as a bandage. and not by its corruption.
And if you have reason to believe that the skin is rotting, but the rot is not complete, And the skin is thick with fat, if you cure it with a clistere like this:
look to see if the breasts are large and the boil that is in them smells bad, then clisterize with Egyptian medicine made like this: take asafetida, oil, and litharge, equally, and cook in one pot on fire, While the medicine is red and becomes as thick as honey;
then take from this according to your need, and make it into vinegar and honey, and anoint the breast and constrict the wound; And let the medicine sit for two hours, then remove it by pulling.
Do this often, until the breast is unblocked and the pus is removed;
And sometimes it is cleansed with ashes water, When this medicine is absent, and it is that you take vine ash [powder], and pour water over it.
Then cook [heat] it and apply as a poultice, until you know that the breast is well healed;
and if the patient cannot tolerate it, or Egyptian medicine or water of ashes are not available. and if the poultice contains a little lupine flour, ground. or you bind it with honey and sweetened wine, that the honey has properties of purifying and washing, and the wine makes the blood thin;
and when you have done this, and you have confidence that the breasts are well purified, if the poultice that causes the pus to form in it,
And you shall take a plaster made definite, and make it with rose oil and wine; and you shall anoint it with certain medicines and unguents, whose properties I have said or treating the unguents;
if the wound of the breast is small, and the plaster cannot enter, if the size of an iron is about a thumb, and you put inside it the Egyptian unguent in a tent; And the ointment of basilicon, when it is diluted.
and if the wound is too wide, then cut [the edges] so that there remains only one league or the plaster can enter.
and if the ulcerated boil is above, strike it or lower its level. When the bow is fully drawn, do not let it release its string; and if you cannot cover the chest underneath as you see; adjust in such a way that the bow aims to the lowest point possible.
And if you cannot cover the breast under as you see, and the bow is to be arranged in this manner: that the bowstring slides easily downwards, and not leave anything of the bow. and take consolidating medicines to put on the breast,
and lay a linen cloth over it that covers the entire breast; Then apply force to the wound of the chest. That is, a little larger than the first one, Next, apply anointing oil or other cloth according to the size of the wound, and place it over the wound on the chest to align the bone, but do not remove the large cloth until after many days once.
And he who is on the breastbone, often broken to remove the breastbone, and know what happens when the breastbone is cut, whether it's poisoned or injured, or digestible, or undigested.
and take care if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not,
and when your medicine has been spread in this manner, and you see the bone protruding from the breastbone, If you know that breasts shrink (or atrophy), approach them.
and then undress him in the morning or the third hour, and when you undress the wound, change one other bandage and renew the ointment.
And if the breast becomes swollen indigest after many days, know that breasts do not shrink (atrophy). And if subtle poisons court after a long time, do not despair of health.
for the healing approaches. For there are men whose wounds delay in healing and those who act against it.
if the stomach swells undigested after many days, know that the breast does not heal easily.
if the breast delays in swelling and is protruding, apply dry yet moist medicines in substance and dry in virtue. As with an eggshell, because it contains much glass, which is its last remedy.
take the eggshell as defined, and make it with rose oil, and stir equal parts of old wine in substance;
then cook and use it; and similarly, this done more cooked and swollen, when eggshells defined are not present,
Take myrrh and aloe and incense, grind them together, then sprinkle the powder on honey when it is over the fire; and then place one cloth on it and set it over the breast, and sometimes an astrologer is administered long oil; and the roots of celestial lilies, which are like flour and coriander.
and the roots of celestial lilies, which are like flour and coriander. and use simple or compound remedies: grind them, make powder, and put it on the honey I mentioned, and use. And if the wound is long and not treated by this treatment,
And if the wound is long and not treated by this treatment, then know that corruption has entered completely, and causes pressure on the bone or hard parts, or the ligaments; if the treatment for fistula is applied, as we have said before.
from the abscess of the nailbed
Pancreatis is an abscess that arises under the nail of the finger. and sometimes it arises in other toes;
and when it is neglected and no care is taken, one abscess follows another. and they will run and empty the boil until it reaches the root of the nail, and by chance, they may burst it completely.
And comes the corruption up to the bone, until it brings foul pain, and the head is wide, and the color turns red.
When you treat it as we have said in the division, but the treatment does not help at all. If it doesn't help, then you must cut into it. Remove all the superfluidity that remains from the nail. Then cauterize the wound after. The cauteries are very great aid if the bone is healthy, and the nail is intact;
and if the nail penetrates the flesh afterward and begins to swell and bruise, You must place the salve under the nail so as not to touch the flesh; And push upward, and strike the flesh gently and lightly. And place on top of the remaining flesh the remnant of the hot and corrosive medical charcoal to burn everything;
And if the corrosion is in the bone, strike it and draw it, for as much as the bone is corrupted there, it cannot heal.
and if you see the tooth corrupted, strike it in one of the nails as stated before, then heal it until it is healed;
and if it is wounded, pierced, and causes great pain, you must first heal the wound. Then cut the spur with a sharp spatula from above, crossing it.
and be careful that the cutting does not reach the flesh beneath the spur, for the patient would feel too great pain.
if it happens, place something on top to soothe it.
The patient must adjust the one who is born in the hand of some men by chance, which is entirely fleshy. and by chance it has bone or nail, and sometimes it has a claw.
and one of these is born in the root of the joint, or its growth is in some of our fingers. The one that is born in any knuckle of the finger does not move. And the one born at the joint of the thumb, by chance may remain silent;
the length of the one who is fat is light, in this way: the length from its root to a broad spatula.
The one born at the root of the joint is difficult to cure: hold it with a cover;
In one who is born or will soon die, it is necessary that you cut open the round flesh up to the bone. Then cut the bone with an appropriate saw, then heal it until it heals.
The same sores that come to the joints come together due to birth, or due to injury from a wound, or by burning with fire, or similar things.
It is necessary that you cut the sores in such a way that they heal according to their natural forms; Then place between two tents or dampened cloths soaked in rose oil, so that they do not stick; or you place between two thin boards until the wound is sutured, as necessary.
Also, if any of its two sides comes with the palm, strike that suture as needed.
Of simple men
The veins are large, swollen, filled with melancholic fluids that come in many members of the body.
And it happens more in the legs of those who walk and work and carry, rather than others.
Therefore, you must administer purges of gall and then cleanse the basilica.
The treatment of iron is in two ways: one way is to strike it, and blood black fluid will be drawn out. And another way is to open a vein and pull it all out.
The procedure is as follows: make an incision in the leg with strong hot water, until the flesh becomes tender. Then restrain the leg of the patient from above the knee to the part below the thigh; Then open the vein in one, two or three places, of a large size,
Then slice and draw out the black blood from your hand, from one end to the other, until as much blood flows out as the sickness can tolerate.
And then tie it and command that he bind himself with foods strengthening black bile.
and repeat the evacuation and healing when the veins are full, and this benefits the sick person.
The swellings of it (the affected part) are to be handled in this manner: raise the leg of the patient, if there is much hair, then immerse it (the affected part) in water and apply warm, moist compresses to the swelling until it turns red and swells up.
if you don't have any water, heat it (the affected part) over the fire and then apply long compresses to the swelling at the knee or in the area below the ankle.
then grind the hide into paste and scrape off the swelling from both sides until it appears when you feel it.
And one sees it red and black, and when it enters the skin, it appears as a white cord;
Then push the rod underneath, while it is raised on the skin, and then break it at the slight bend.
Then strike in another place three finger-widths away; then flay the skin above the vein as far as it appears. Then tie the cord as you have done, and break it at another bend, as you did before.
Then cut another size, or more if needed, then heat it, and apply it to the base of the foot.
Then draw and heat it up to the second size; then cut it from size to size, until it becomes hot all the way through, then apply it.
and if you cannot draw and heat it, put a thick, double-threaded needle into it. pull it and heat it, and put a rope underneath, and turn your hand from one side to the other until it comes out. And keep it from healing over, for if it heals over, it cannot be drawn or lifted, and harm comes to the patient.
And when you have treated it all, lay on the wound linen wet with vinegar and oil of roses; and let it heal until it is sound.
If the eyes are constricted, twisted, and swollen together and they are not straight, as we have said, If it is necessary to cut it forcefully, but do not cover it; draw it as we have said before.
If it is necessary to cut it forcefully, but do not cover it; draw it as we have said before. The shape of iron used to pierce the vein is curved and does not cut, it should not pierce the vein.
and is of large curvature, because if it is subtle, it would pierce the vein, but be thick as we have said, and here is its shape:
From the civil vein
This vein is incised in the legs, in warm parts where no grass or trees grow, and on land with no moisture.
And by chance it arises elsewhere than in the legs, and this happens due to corruption that comes beneath the skin.
As a serpent within the body twists and turns, cut between skin and flesh.
And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are that there is a very large inflammation in the leg, Then the limb changes, and the vein begins to emerge, as the root of a plant does.
When the shoulder opens up, it is necessary that you wrap around a piece of wood from 6 to 12 inches long and tie it.
and leave the wood on the leg, and every time it moves away from its place, you wrap around the wood again and tie it. and if it is too long, cut a part of it and wrap the rest, but do not cover its root until it has all come out. because if you cut it, it will return into the flesh, causing an abscess or pus and a bad disease.
For that thing it is necessary that it be treated little by little up to the head, and not remain anything in the body.
And sometimes this vein, when it is treated from 5 to 10 fingers long, and one man came to me, from whom it issued from 10 fingers long, and when you cut it, if you press it with a knife or lancet, and pierce it until bottom,
so that everything goes out; and empty the matter that is inside, and bring medicine for it to the place, in the form of a plaster or poultice within a day, then cure it like an abscess.
And sometimes at this vein, many hands are placed, and especially when it opens in the joint of the foot or ankle, and much blood flows out, and it jumps around; heal it then as we have said before.
Worms that are born between skin and flesh
This disease is called "cattle disease" in our land because it often occurs in cattle,
And it is a small worm that grows between skin and flesh, which travels throughout the body swelling and shrinking. It causes pain in one member after another as it moves under the skin where it goes, and it jumps out of place.
It is caused by corruption of certain humors such as worms, snakes, lice, and roundworms or stomach parasites.
One doubts its malignancy as when it travels through the body, it moves towards the head and reaches the eyes. By chance, it enters (the body) and destroys oil; and this happens many times.
When you see him to cure and draw, one can force it only when he goes (moves):
Then it is necessary that you tie the limb above and below with a strong cord tightly:
then strike above (the wound) and draw out forcefully, and if the blood flows in full into the flesh, you do not pull it: If you apply fire cautery until it dies;
and the greater damage it causes, that is when it burns oil, as we have said;
and if you see it approaching or close to the oil, hold a cork beneath it in shape, then strike above, and pull it out.
and it is necessary for the patient to use body cleansing with dissolving medicines to remove bad humors.
And it swells with meat pork putrefaction.
Of the pain that comes from windiness This disease is called "vakirir" on our land, and is a pain that comes in some limbs, and moves from one limb to another; and I saw what I am telling you.
I was summoned to a sick woman, and she showed me her arm, and saw a small swelling in the armpit of the arm.
and later, it appeared to rise like a worm towards the shoulder, more quickly than anything else, like living silver when it is cut from one piece.
the pain separated from that place and pierced into the shoulder,
And shortly after, it ran through the entire body, until it came to the other arm;
Then I found that it was turning around the body, as I saw.
I marveled greatly how it moved from member to member, because I had never seen this disease in such a manner. However, I had often seen pain move from one place to another, but I did not want it at all, as I saw it in the woman;
and I thought that was because the woman had a dry body, and her veins exposed. and for this reason, such constrained wind appears;
and it does not apply to those who are voluptuous and have moist bodies and covered veins.
And when you see to cure this disease, and the patient feels that pain, if it opens as we have said, then press above and below firmly, and then press downwards until the windiness is confined to its place. cauterize the area; and if you do not see it in your eyes,
if you cure the one who suffers from windiness, as with foul-smelling pills and pills of snake-root, and similar things.
Of arrows
The arrows are of various kinds, according to their shapes and the places in the body where they pierce.
The diversity is that there are those with large points, and small, curved, and hafted. and of those that have two points, and of those that have tongues, and of those where there are splinters. and dislocation occurs in any member falls in two ways: either in a principal member,
or in a secondary member, such as the brain, heart, liver, spleen, lungs, intestines, bladder and similar members. When dislocation occurs in any of these members, the signs of death which I will tell you later will reveal themselves: If you are dealing with the extraction of this arrow, you should be aware that death can come in many positions; And when this bad sign does not appear and the arrow is not fully out, pull it and heal the wound.
And when the head of the skull is struck by the arrow and pierces the bone, the person who is on top of the head should push it outward. This is for the removal of a cataract and suturing, eye drops and redness reduction, throat inflammation and redness, spasm and confusion of thought, and vomiting of bile. And by chance it happens without force from the nostrils, or from the ears; and by chance, it loses speech and voice. And leaps out of the wound white moisture resembling pus, and leaps likewise like bubbles of boiling oil.
And if this sign appears, refrain from treatment, and draw the arrow if it is not in (the wound).
The sign of the arrow when it falls or pierces through is that it is near the left breast and feels like it has been inserted into something hard, not empty. And sometimes the patient becomes silent like a corpse, and there is black blood in the urine, and coldness and cold sweat, and faintness. Then it is clear that death is at hand.
The sign of an arrow that has not penetrated the flesh is when there is no scum coming from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient changes color, breathes heavily and seeks cold air.
If the arrow falls on the bed cover, it has missed the ribs; and it causes great pain and sighing, and all the limbs of the shoulders move.
And if an arrowhead or stomach falls out of the wound by chance, any undigested meat may jump from the wound.
And if an arrowhead or stomach falls out by chance and anything from the intestines escapes through the wound, there is no hope for recovery nor in the extraction of the arrow.
And if an arrowhead falls into the bladder and urine escapes and leaks out, causing the patient great pain: know that the wound is fatal.
The other member, such as the arm and neck, shoulder and joints of the shoulder, spine of the back, rib cage and thighs, legs, and limbs resembling them, are safe according to various conditions. When the arrow is in the nerve or artery and it's not poisoned, as I will tell you what happened to me, you should do this:
There was a man who had an arrow lodged or embedded in the root of his neck: I pulled it out from another side below the ear fat, and it came out without any damage to the senses.
And draw out an arrow which falls in the oil fat below the paper beneath, and the arrow was reversed, and could not be reached except by the tip towards the flesh, and the arrow was large like a Turkish bow, all of one piece with no feathers; the game was safe, and no adverse incident happened.
And remove an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and it was an Arabic arrow with ears:
I was the beards (barbions), and softened it as much as I could before removing it, and the Christian recovered.
And removed an arrow from a man who was either head or belly (cheued or ventred), and I thought he would die;
and after he had passed thirty days, his condition did not improve; I cut above the arrowhead, and bent it, and drew it out without any adverse consequences.
And if you want to treat a man who has an arrow lodged or stuck in his flesh, and the wound is healed over it;
and the arrow remained inside him, and did not destroy his natural positioning, It finds no harm in any of its natural works.
And it is for another man who has an arrow lodged in his flesh and the wound has healed over.
And he endured thus without suffering great pain, and many similar things.
And it drew an arrow from one of the prince's men, who had fallen in enemy territory, And it was slightly inclined to the right side; and the arrow was completely embedded
I was summoned for treatment after she fell for three days. I found the wound narrow.
I drew it out with a very fine wire, but felt no sensation. And he felt sharp pain and discomfort beneath his right ear. I think this is of the point of the arrowhead
I place the plaster on the ulcerative, absorptive, and digestive area, because they do not swell. and appeared the arrow wound.
and appeared the arrow wound. I applied the plaster for several days, and healed the wound directly, and kept the patient for a long time,
As long as he feels the arrow within his body for a day, he tells it to you. I apply medicinal ointment containing corrosive agents on the wound for several days until it is healed.
and I probe it, and feel the head of the arrow that protrudes from its place; Then I placed the arrowhead in the wound opening with that corrosive ointment until the head of the arrow became visible.
And he passed beyond the limits within 4 months.
Then open the wound that I pierced with the tweezers, and stretch it from one side to another, and it could not come out.
Then I did not stop experimenting and inventing methods with various instruments until I had made the tweezers well after 1 hour. According to what his form comes at the end of this chapter, as long as I stay and return the wound.
And the physicians judge that the nasal cartilage cannot be restored: Then I will restore it, and the wound will heal, and the patient will be entirely healed.
And I have told you the quality of arrow extraction, so that you apply your knowledge to this matter, for books cannot cover everything.
But surgeons, skilled in little, compare well with what is present and failing. They understand nine works and nine tools for the treatment of foreign things happening in this art.
I say that arrows do not enter the limbs they are inserted into except by two ways: either through the side or from another direction.
and the one which jumps out through the hole where it enters, is an arrow entering flesh, and jumps out sometimes now.
And if it does not jump out, let it be until the flesh is opened around, and the wound closed;
And in the same way, if it is fixed in the bone and cannot be pulled out, leave it for several days, and turn it every day.
And then it jumps, and if it does not jump, pierce all around with a sharp instrument, until the surrounding areas are enlarged, and then pull it.
And if the arrow is returned to its place within the body which cannot be seen, pull it with all your strength. and if you feel it, draw it out with any suitable instrument.
and if due to the narrowness of the wound or the deep penetration of the arrow, and if there is no bone, tendon, or vein, make an incision large enough for the wound to be wide open. And pull out the arrow if you can, and if it has ears like it clings to something in the arrow.
And pull out the arrow if you can, and if it has ears like it clings to something in the arrow. and drill a hole through the bone that is pierced by two parts, as far as you can. and then break or bend the ears of the arrow, until you can pull it out.
and then break or bend the ears of the arrow, until you can pull it out. be careful not to break the arrow when trying to remove it.
And if you cannot do it at once, then lay the body down towards its joints, then pull, because the extraction will be easier. And if the bleeding causes problems, bring to mind what we have said about its treatment in this chapter.
and beware of cutting the nerve and vein, and use devices as you can pull out the arrow safely,
quickly or slowly, firmly or gently; place the patient according to the shape he was in when the arrow struck him, For it is the greatest aid that there can be, and if you cannot do it, follow what the signs show you.
Arrows that come from another place, or it opens something of them, or the skin is swollen in that area as we can see or feel it.
Make an incision there, as long as the pincers can grasp it, and then pull it out if it is still there.
If the arrowhead is lodged in the bone, turn your hand round, so it enters into the bone and expand the bone, then pull it out.
And if it cannot come out, leave it still, and then continue the extraction until it comes forth;
and if it be of the arrowhead, push it all the way through;
if it be fallen and you wish to administer a potion, administer one hair-length of the potion. The point of the arrow enters into the hair of the instrument; then push forcefully.
and if the arrow is embedded, apply the instrument point entering in, to facilitate extraction.
And if the arrow is touched, then you must cut all the flesh around where the poison is, if possible. Then heal the wound as appropriate.
And if an arrow falls or pierces the belly or bladder or side, and it is close by and you can cover it, then cover it.
And be careful to not cover the vein and nerve, then pull it out, and then sew up the wound if necessary. and let it heal completely.
The shape of the pliers used to extract arrows is similar to an owl's beak, as shown here:
And there are many ways of doing it: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrowhead.
Of the common veins (of the body) The number of veins one drains is thirty-one, and from that one takes off sixteen as head (or principal ones).
That is to say: two veins located behind the ears, called the "double herb" (or double venae comitantes); and the two arteries in each temple that are visible; And two veins which are in each of the two eyes, called "aspirates". And the vein that is on the forehead; and the vein that is at the head of the nose. And the two glands that are in the neck. And the two veins that are above the lips on the mouth, and these veins are called "augeherich". These are the veins located beneath the tongue.
The veins that are commonly known to be five in each arm:
The one is called the cephalic, and it is on the left side of the chest, and the common people call it "vein of the head". And the middle [part] is called "fast", consisting of the cephalic and basilic. And laymen call it "vein of the heart"; and the basilic is on the right side. And laymen call it "vein of the abdomen", and it is above the liver, And this is the one that is healed, which opens clearly over the pocket.
The salve is the vein which is between the ring finger and little finger, and has two ribs;
And in the leg and foot there are four veins: one is beneath the hollow of the pocket on the left side, And the second saphenous vein, which is at the wrist on the right side; and the vein called "nase", which is in the wrist of the left side;
And in the other leg there are three veins beneath them.
The vein after the ears helps with old catarrhs and migraines; and the qualities of the vein, as I tell you, and it is that you raise the head of the patient,
and the qualities of the vein, as I tell you, and it is that you raise the head of the patient, And rub the joint or veins with a rough cloth; then hold the patient's neck with a screw. until the two veins appear behind the ears in two places depending on the head. then press there, and where you feel the pulse below your neck, press firmly.
then take the lance, and thrust it through the vein to the bone, then withdraw your hand from the entire vein upward. And pierce the skin and the vein well with two incisions of thumb breadth, and let the blood issue as much as you see.
then strain and tie it, until it is healed;
and I have already said the incision and cautery in the first book.
The healing of the two arteries that are in the two temples, is worth migraines in the old way, And [the patient should] soothe, and treat eye ailments, and dry the tears of eyes that itch.
And the qualities of the healer are as I say: and it is necessary for the patient to stretch out their neck so that the two veins appear openly. And the foot is swollen under your throat, then squeeze it.
Then lift the cure on top of the vein at your thumb, and thrust the lancet beneath it. lift the vein upwards, then cut it, just as you have done in two other veins, and make a hole for the blood according to your need.
Then release the patient, place your thumb on the vein for an hour, then place cotton over it.
And then form the ligature and leave it until it heals; and we have spoken about its dressing and extraction, or the beginning of the book.
The healing of the vein in the forehead is worth as much as the healing of the skull for the ancient diseases of the face, and it has migrated, turned red.
And the quality is that the patient stretches his neck in twisting, until the vein appears; Then take the instrument called "fosseur", which is shaped as follows:
And place the tip on the vein, hold above your hand or something else, and let the blood flow according to the quantity you see. Then cut the neck of the patient and tie the vein until it is healthy and not open at any time with a wide flame.
However, the flames should not be too sharp; and the vein should be pierced transversely, as the bone is near, and in case the flames are too thin, they might break when they are too fine.
The salve of the two veins that are in the armpits helps the eyes, and the tinge, and the swelling, and the ulcer in the oil, and the diseases of the face;
and the qualities of their salve are such that the patient stretches his neck by twisting with some chain, as before;
then the salve, and the salve of the iron rod, a little bit long, a little bit wide, because it has no heat.
And if the flames are subtle, they may break; then make the wound bleed, as much as needed, and then cover it with linen, and hold it in place.
The vein from the neck is useful for ague (intermittent fever), scurvy, and facial diseases. as well as headache and redness that comes in the face, especially when it is old.
And the qualities of the blood are such that the patient squeezes their neck, then squeezes their nose with your left hand. and take the subtle flame long, and thrust it in through the opening between the two nostrils, because the veins do not open easily, and the wounds will not start to heal now.
do not go too deep, and make the wound bleed according to your need, then let it heal for a night, because it is very quickly restored.
The salve of two gums helps in the stretching of the anus, and at the beginning of inflammation, and in many diseases, and in stopping itching, and in corroding, and in sores, and in abscesses;
And the qualities of the salve are that the patient pulls out his neck from under one and the other, as we have said. And let the master stand over the head of the patient, and the patient sit on one seat.
Then open the vein longwise a little widely, then draw out the blood moderately, as much as necessary;
Then do the same on the other side, then release the ligament, and tie both veins moderately, and let it be until the morning, so that the wound is healed.
Of the liver purge For the purging of the veins in the lips above, it helps for coughing in the mouth, and for the corruption of the gums, and for cracks in the lips, and for the toothache and around.
And the quality of the purging is to make the patient sit before you, and to hold his neck as I said; Then turn the lip and look at the two veins, one on the right side of the upper lip and the other on the left side, And they are recognized by the fact that they are black, and by the fact that around them there are small black veins: Then press them gently, and if you do not recognize them, and you doubt,
Then press them gently, and if you do not recognize them, and you doubt, press the larger of each pair, and likewise do the two veins above and below, for it is the same way.
The purging under the tongue The soreness of veins located under the tongue helps after the head injury, and it is at the constriction of the throat, and with diseases of the eye, and with diseases of the mouth;
and the qualities of soothing are that the patient should be seated between his hands facing the sun, and he lifts the tongue, and looks under each side at a black vein:
therefore, both should be done, but do not go too deep, for below are the arteries.
The veins of the cost, which are commonly healed, are healed according to two methods:
Or when pricking with all sorts of fire, either coarse myrtle or subtle olive oil as you cut through, and it is called "anesil"; and are wide and thin according to the width and narrowness of the veins. The form of the flame mirtin is very famous, and is wide as you see.
And it must be necessary to open the veins with thick blood appearing, and those containing thick blood and disorder. and this is the form of olive oil flame:
and it is more pointed and subtle, for cleansing thin veins with subtle blood or yellowish blood.
The vein of the basilica, which is one of these vessels, helps with diseases that are below the throat, neck and abdomen.
And it is necessary for the patient to bleed profusely, and to empty the artery that is below. And if it touches the artery, and bleeding occurs, it should be stopped, as I have said; And the flame should not be pointed at, but cut with a knife instead.
And if the basilica does not open clearly, you must force it open and replace another one. or you want no pain from it, or you heal in its place the vein by cutting into the arm: it opens clearly. and apply the copper cup to the fire as we have said.
And if you want to find the vein's place, then you must first stretch out the arm and touch it until you feel the pulse. Then mark the place with a cross, then bind the arm, and burn the vein with the flame cauter.
And be careful not to cut into the artery when you see the place swell, because that is the artery; then avoid it.
If you see it swell up high like the urine of a child, and if it is red and thin, know that it is not an artery: Hurry up then, and place your hand on it for a long time, then remove your hand from it without stopping, as this happens repeatedly;
Bind the arm and let it be in that position, do not move it by the patient; and be afraid and do not move it until it is healed.
And if the wound does not stop bleeding and the medicine is not present, stop the artery if it is open, for the head of the limb will retract; stop the bleeding from the wound.
Take a strip of the plaster-of-Paris, cut it and take one half and bind it above the other for a day;
If it (the wound) does not stop bleeding, that's good; if it doesn't, treat it as we have said, with powders that stop blood flow.
And the application (of the powder) should not be too strong in many positions due to the small size of the wound and the weakness of the ligament in the arm.
The vein wounding in the middle helps to treat blood in the head above and in the body below, because it is composed of the basilica and the cephalic, as we have said.
And it is necessary for the lord [physician] to probe with a finger for the nerve that is underneath, and if it pricks too deep, and he touches the nerve, and it swells and the patient feels pain, and perhaps it cannot heal;
and this nerve opens frequently, and if it does not open in any man due to his subtlety, you must cauterize it with the instrument; and cut off the nerve with your power.
And if there is a vein between the two nerves, make it long.
The sanitation of the skull helps, since it draws blood from the head, assists the eyes.
It is necessary to sanitize when pricking with olive oil or myrtle fire, for it is the safest of all veins, since there is neither nerve nor artery underneath it.
Furthermore, it is necessary to seek out the easier joint, and not to be distressed if it needs to be done the first time, and then we repeat. And by chance, the joints swell in some men, when it needs to be done the first time, but do not be distressed. The quality of the wound, according to your judgment.
The first thing you should know about dressing a wound is that it is brought only for the sake of preserving health.
and to prevent future illnesses; And let the incision be made in one of the three veins that are called: cephalic, femoral, and basilic; And it should be incised at the beginning of spring, and in autumn and winter after eating, when the signs of fullness appear.
And it should be incised on the first or third day, after two or four hours.
The incision administered for diseases does not have a specific time duration, but when it is needed at day or night, in all hours and at any time;
It is not advisable to cleanse children until they are 14 years old, nor should a woman carry fire except during the fourth month up to the seventh. It is not necessary to cleanse those who have passed 60 years.
And when anyone wishes to be cleansed, in whatever way that may be, it is necessary that they purge the intestines with a light enema. if there is much bad air retained, so that the veins do not carry away the superfluous waste from the principal members;
He who is excessively salted with foods, drunk, or watery-dropped, cannot heal.
and if he is washed to heal after colic affliction, vomiting, diarrhea of the belly, multiplying of abstinence from women, labor, watching, and praying, and those who exhaust their strength or by something of the weapon or the body.
then refine the humors, if he is fat, with foods and drinks and medications, if you have the power.
Then immerse where bath, if nothing prevents it, to refine the blood.
and clean the vein with the tip of the third finger, as we have said;
and keep that day from work, from pain, and from lust, and similar things.
and bind and cleanse, and let the bandages be higher than those who are being cleansed, and wipe the arm twice or thrice.
Then gently pull the ligament above, for if it is too tight or weak, it cannot be corrected without.
And then rub the joint with hands until the veins swell and feel them.
Then wet the bandages with a little bit of old oil, then put your thumb of your left hand on that vein under the joint where you want to bind it. so that the vein does not break when cutting. For there are veins that run like cords on a sieve, and some of them are filled with windiness, when fire is applied, it pulls back from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus is one of those.
and if it opens the vein, the wound is too narrow, which means the sieve must be careful in such matters.
And if the vein opens for the first time, that is good; but if not, continue again under that place or near immediately, unless the wound is inflamed.
And if the joint is swollen, and the patient fears, he should rest for one day or two, and never tie the arm. Perhaps it will come abscesses covered with cloths; do not enter or bathe, then resume the healing if he wishes.
And if the opening is small or without court (cort), carefully probe it and you doubt that blood flows as much as you see, trust in the opening itself directly with all flame.
and open it slightly hastily, so that the joint is not swollen; for this happens often when the wound is small.
If you see the joint swollen, do not start the bleeding, and put some oil of lilies on it, for it will cool the body's blood and make the liquid in this joint similar to oil.
and in the same manner administer the oil of lilies during each bleeding process, to stop the flow of blood.
and this same substance is filtered through a strainer and boiled when it is put onto the joint; if it becomes too thick, filter it until it becomes thin.
And if there comes a large abscess, which often happens, especially when the opening of the vein is small, then press it with a damp sponge in vinegar and hot oil for an hour;
and you must do this after the blood has left the vein, and if it remains in place after some days without any black or greenness, that is not harmful; and if you see it, put something of aloe or myrrh preserved in oil of roses, camphor, or similar things on top of it.
And often abscess and appearance occur at the opening of the basilica: place your hand on it then, if you find the area soft under the pressure of your hand, this is a bad sign. But do not apply any of the things we have said, because possibly it is an artery; but place one dry bandage to stiffen it, then treat with another cure until it heals.
Draw blood from each (wound) according to the quantity of its virtue and the color of the blood.
If the wound is black, let it drain until it turns red; if you see it swollen, let it drain until it becomes thin; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
And for those who are cut and open, and need bloodletting, make the incision wider, and let the veins be wide.
and for those who are weak, do the opposite, and it must be bled little by little, and it should be bled by cutting across, not by pricking.
And this method of incision is safe from the disorder of bleeding and damage to nerves, and it should be done in length rather than width.
To the body that needs to be incised, it is necessary to give soft bread below grape-like pomegranates; if it is scalded, let it bleed four or five times.
And if it is of cold constitution, eat soft bread moistened in sweet syrup or honey-scented syrup with spices like pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and sugar, and fragrant syrup before the incision.
And if it swells at the wound, after the evacuation of much blood, it is required that you apply a poultice of charcoal and a fragrant subtle syrup.
and use other things as we have said in the section or chapter on fainting, for the evacuation of blood.
If you want to burst open the arm or heal it again at another time, when it is weakened by much bloodletting, it is required that it be bled little by little according to its continuous strength.
If you want to burst open the arm after the first bloodletting and one has a strong chest, it should be bled 6 hours after the first bloodletting or the ninth hour.
And whoever wishes to heal from another part, must heal by the second or third day.
For there is much blood within the body which is already overheated, and causes fever; therefore a large quantity must be drawn out, and the opening widened until it breaks. Then, when you have treated all the conditions of healing, place your hand on top of the wound so that death does not come to the opening. And this often happens when surgeons are negligent.
Do not remove the arm from its sling, make an incision again and let the wound bleed a second time, and if the flesh is closed, you must press firmly. If it's curved, do not stretch the arm forcefully, as it would be harmful.
But leave it until it heals the second time. Or you can apply heat to the wound with a pointed flame, until the frozen blood comes out from the vein. And place on it (the wound) about one piece of wool soaked in vinegar, and press gently on top.
If the vein is burst, leave it be and do not squeeze it until the abscess has been calmed.
If there is a need to draw blood again, then take it from the same place, or another vein, or the other arm.
The veins in the arm are composed of many small veins.
And the method of the sanity is that the patient dips his hand in hot water until the flesh becomes red;
then tie it moderately, so that the vein appears clearly, and then pierce with a crosswise stroke, neither too wide nor too long;
and make the holes large, and pierce the vein close to the wrist joint, and if it does not bleed, put the hand back in hot water, and let the blood run into the water until you have enough;
and if it is summer, do not immerse the hand in hot water again, because it is colder in summer than in winter.
And the vein of this vessel is safer than all other vessels, as there are neither artery nor nerve.
The vein of the left arm is worth for all liver diseases, and this is the method:
Hold the hand and push into hot water until the vein is emptied, if you can see it. And if the vein is crossed over, and you cut it completely through all, it causes no harm.
Do not go too deep because nerves are underneath all bare.
Then put the hand in hot water, if the wound is not frozen, and it cannot be drained out.
And when you have drained the blood as needed, place oil and wax on top of the vein to seal it quickly, and do the same for each wound.
The poultice on the left hand is good for the disease of the mouse, and do as I told you with the right one.
The poultice made from soap is good for all diseases that are below the body, and for diseases of the uterus, and retention of menses, and diseases of the kidneys and legs, and similar diseases.
And the qualities of his health are such that the patient should put his foot in hot water and rub over the vein until it perishes. and on the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and from below the foot there are many rain-like things.
Therefore take the larger rain, or at the ankle, which is more useful.
If you cleanse above the foot, guard against the nerves that are below, and cleanse through it as well, in the same way as when cutting; and let the fire be extinguished.
And if the limb cannot come out, put it into water and let the vein drain well.
If the lancing is necessary for the first time, then repeat it slightly above, because the wound is salted; Do not be afraid of the nerve, as we have said, and similarly treat the other limb equally with soap.
The thigh of the sciatic nerve is at the knee joint, and its pain resembles that of the hamstring when it is due to hot blood.
And the qualities of its pain are such that the patient immerses themselves in water and squeezes above the knee joint four fingers twisting it.
because otherwise the vein will not open; and if it opens, you should drain it in all possible ways and across. and it moves that you cut it, because the thigh is hollow, and it is very responsive to human hands.
and it moves that you cut it, because the thigh is hollow, and it is very responsive to human hands. And if you don't pull it out, no cure will open or close the small of the foot, and beware of nerves;
then let the blood coagulate as you see fit, and then untie the ligature, place cotton on it and compress; it is now healed.
Blisters of the bladder
Ventouses are made of horns, or of iron, or of glass; and ventosing is done in two ways: either by wounding and drawing blood, or without wounding.
And this ventosing which is done without wounding, is in two ways: either it is at all fire, or without fire;
and two more on each side of the neck; and the wounds under the chin; and wounds on both shoulders; and wounds on the knees; and wounds on both arms; and wounds on both legs; And the boils of the two shins; and the boils do not bleed, unless from small veins scattered in the flesh.
and because of this, you should not drain them at all, as one does with bleeding from a vein. and it should not be administered, neither with fire nor hot water, in any disease that comes from swelling, until the entire body is purged.
If it is necessary for the treatment of diseases to bleed, or according to custom, we will administer it every hour at the beginning or end of the month, or in between, and at any other time.
For there are some who, when they need to vomit, have a heavy head;
and those who find themselves with fullness and redness in their body, and in their head, and at the neck, and blindness in their eyes;
and those who find a drop of blood in their mouth, with swollen tongue, and ooze blood; and if there are some who are delirious, see things through blurry blood, have nosebleeds, vomiting, and similar things;
And when we see these signs, especially if it is at the end of the month, we order to bleed them after 3 hours from dawn.
The purgation of the bladder helps alleviate headaches ... that come to the eyes, and it is not advisable that this be done after the evacuation of the entire body.
and this bleeding is in place of bladder purgation,
And it is not suitable for one of cold constitution to use [this treatment], or who has scurvy, for it does them great harm.
For this reason, the elderly should not use it, nor those with cold diseases.
And those who heal themselves often become negligent, and for this reason, the bellows should be placed a little lower due to the fear of neglect.
The bellows at the neck is in the position for healing the head and the basilica, and therefore it is beneficial for treating fractures. and to cut open the channel of the femur, and in all, and in fullness;
it should be pushed gently, for if it holds too tightly, it may cause obstruction or intestinal or heart problems.
Windbladder in the two ribs of the neck is worth the headache, and otalgia and migraine, and strangulation, and pain in the roots of the teeth.
And it is in the place of the basilica's saint; you must instruct the lord to extend his hand to place it, not to touch the artery, and no bleeding should occur.
Ventilations under the chin are beneficial for mouth diseases, tooth decay, and similar mouth illnesses; they are located at the saint sites of the two lips.
Ventilations on the shoulders are beneficial for illness resulting from heat and swelling.
The ventosations of the sides are worth as much as three veins from the arm. for it draws blood from these large veins;
and commands the lord not to let him plunge too deep, for the limb is naked of flesh, and knows beneath black and arteries.
The ventosation that is on the rump is worth as much as emorroids from the foundation and diseases below, and it must be large, and made of iron, for it needs to draw well; and if it were too thin, it would break, causing large wounds.
The swellings of the legs open widely because they draw blood from the entire body; they cause ancient pains of the kidneys, bladder, and urinary tract, and reduce the flowers [in the body]; they are in the places of the knees and ankles, and everywhere else they weaken the body after long use, and bring pus to many conditions.
The way to apply the swelling is that you first empty it, suck immediately and press hastily, move equally, and do not stop doing this until you see the place red and inflated, and open the red color of the blood; then fart, and return the swellings, and take care in the disposition of the body, for there are some who have hard flesh and clear pores: it is necessary to pierce only once, and it is necessary to make wide wounds, and a little deep; and suck lightly.
And if the flesh is thick, it is necessary to pierce twice: the first time to refine the way of the thick blood.
And if the bone is very thick, it should be struck three times; and when we wish to draw blood drop by drop, we must pierce only once.
If we want a large amount of blood, we must repeatedly strike it; and if the bone is thick, we should strike through to its end, and make sure that the veins are pierced suddenly,
and it is necessary for those with thick and hard skin, and narrow pores, to anoint the joints of the shoulders with sharp and dissolving oil: If it is oil of violets, olive oil, or sweet almond oil, or oil from seeds of cucumber;
and if it is vinegar, oil of parsley, lilies, chamomile, or similar;
and if the superfluidity is thick and cold, take bitter almond oil, or balm oil, or anise oil, and similar.
If the person you are treating has thin and narrow pores, no oil should be applied.
But it is necessary to wash after the dislocation with rose water, or cold water, or water of morello cherries, or water of curcubit, or water of porcelain, or any other similar.
And one who has much moisture, if he rises from ashes or from myrtle water and sumac and similar things.
And those who have great surplus rise from old wine or sour water, or a decoction of fennel or chamomile, or similar.
And it is not appropriate to use cupping before bathing nor in bath, but after the bath for an hour or two; and do not sleep after cupping.
And it is necessary that he urinate, when he should be cupped and after being cupped. Watch the one who is bloodletting is coleric, and if he is not, he is too sharp and inflamed. It is necessary that he takes cold things, such as pomegranates and endive and lettuce leaves and similar things.
And cooked peas, meat pudding, and moist meats.
And he who has a cold constitution should take honey syrup and moderately aged fragrant wine, and eat cooked peas and cooked beans and small birds and young birds;
and on the day he vomits, he should drink more than eat;
And it is necessary to give certain men sometimes triticale or muscatel before the fainting, or after, to strengthen the main limbs; And the voids should be plugged, but it is not good that those who are hot drink them.
The voids that are placed near injury are those placed on the liver, spleen, gout, stomach, belly and back, because these members cannot bear injury above them;
And it should not be done except to draw blood from one member to another, As we do with the testicles when the man suffers from congestion in a member; to remove the thick fluid that is present in the member, as we use leeches on the belly and on the buttocks to reduce the member.
and relieve the pain when there is obstruction or a stone; it removes the obstruction by its attractive virtue, or expels the stone from its place.
and in this way it is done when it is placed on the liver and the spleen when there is retained wind,
And these blisters are treated empty by sucking only; sometimes they are treated with fire, and sometimes filled with cold water.
as in diseases of the lungs, and in this way, the blister is filled with hot water or water in which cooked herbs have been infused.
The form of the blister treated with fire is as follows:
And it should have two holes of about one and a half palm-widths in length and width, and have one small hole pierced around the navel, just like pushing a needle.
and be made of ivory, soft in front so that it does not prick the patient when placed on the limb.
and have in the middle a bar of ivory or iron, to insert a candle holder.
and they should be large and small according to the diseases and the age of those who take them.
For the umbilical cords of children are different than those of adults, and thin ones from fat ones.
And one should place this umbilical cord over the member in this manner:
Take a beeswax suppository or linen thread and insert it through the umbilical cord across the rod that is inside the umbilical cord, The light should be deep within the bladder so as not to burn the patient.
And place it on the member (in this case referring to the affected area), and your fingers should be above the bladder opening as we have said, so that when you look at it, if you see steam coming out, then remove the bladder.
Take linen as previously described, and repeat this process as needed if required.
In the bladder administered in pleurisy, there should be no vein or opening, and it is only to be used when full of fluid. It is placed on the affected area only.
And this is the shape:
Sutures are not brought in except for members where no bladders can be placed due to their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar places; and in bare skin areas like the palm of the hand or soles of the feet, and other similar places;
And the qualities of the user are such that when you find sores in clear, sweet waters without purulent matter, you should take them.
and put them in clean water, while they are still familiar and have nothing inside of them. Then purge it with wine and vinegar, then rub the member until it is red, and place the sores on top.
And when they are full and hot, if it is possible to apply vinegar, do so, because it is very beneficial.
If it is not so, raise the limb upwards, then downwards gently, and afterwards press it.
And if the limb is not healthy enough after the body, moisten one linen cloth in cold water and place it on top, until the wound is dried.
And if the wound is multiplying, put broken glass or salve, and similar things on top until it is dried.
Or place half-peeled beans on the limb and leave them until they harden onto the limb, which will dry it now.
And if you need more, take other snares (or traps)
If the snares do not want to catch, then apply fresh blood to the wound and insert a needle until it bleeds. Then place them on top, and as soon as they feel the blood, they harden (or congeal).
And when you see that they weep, sprinkle a little of aloe powder and crushed sea shell or ash on them, now they will stop weeping.
Here begins the book of fractures
This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine and is about the restoration of fractures and dislocations.
Know, dear child, that the foolish fools of this chapter will never see any old books or read a single letter from them;
And for this reason, the science is imported into our land, for I never found any good in it.
And I know nothing about it except from the knowledge of ancient books, where I have studied the science extensively and treated it by experience, and through the custom of my life.
I have described in this chapter what is contained within it, and have summarized it at the end, and have made clear the forms of instruments that are brought forth, just as I did in these two chapters beforehand.
Therefore we shall now say the prologue of this book, the sums of the words and the chapters where the wise man puts his understanding, and dwell on truth so that those who are experienced know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when fracture or dislocation or twisting or sprain comes to anyone, it is necessary that you straighten the patient from both sides, unless anything prevents you, such as weakness of body, or infants, or elderly people.
Or if the time is not very hot or too cold; and drink cold broth, that is to say cold broths, and meat of eye and shin, and does not drink wine, nor eat any fatty meats, and does not fill himself too much with foods that fill the veins with blood, until you have doubt about abscessing heat or spreading matter in the member; then the patient returns to his first care as he has used it.
And when the broken bones start to heal, it is necessary that you nourish the patient with foods that make good nourishment, or he has viscosity, such as cooked wheat in water, and meat of veal, beef, head, feet, pancreas, fish, and strong wine, and similar things. For by great nursing, the wounds are made worse and break more quickly.
And know that the bones of the old and the weak cannot be well healed nor sutured according to their nature due to the lack of strength in the limbs, neither those who are too tender, like those of small children.
but there is no cure for it, bind above the broken bone with large splints that support and join the limb together as before; and do not let it move at all, and for this reason you must feed it with large meats, as we have said.
And know that the fractures are diverse in many ways.
For the break of the neck is other than the break of the foot or of the leg; and I will tell you in this chapter all ways of break. There are breaks that heal on their own without setting, and others that need to be set in the manner of cutting the feather for writing.
There are breaks that heal on their own without setting, and others that need to be set in the manner of cutting the feather for writing. And if it is a fracture with an open wound, or a fracture with just a small crack.
And each method shall have its tool, and its appropriate instrument in the restoration, according to what memory comes into its place;
And it is known that bone fractures occur when the bones are twisted and opened widely by bending, and it should be pressed with the hand.
and when there is no twisting or touching, and the patient feels no great pain, there is no fracture.
but it may have twisting, or splitting, or small fracture. It is not right that you move [the dislocation] with your hand, but put on medicines that come afterwards, and then hold it gently now.
And know that the break which goes into the joint, and are the two parts dislocated, you must now set them equally, so that abscesses grow not there.
and if abscesses swell up, let it lie for some time until the abscess is calmed down. Then adjust it to the direction in which it can move easily and skillfully, and know that the restoration of this [dislocation] is easier than the restoration where there are bones broken; then set it as required after that.
And if the bone is broken into pieces and broken in two parts, whether it is a hand or foot, or at your hand if it is one of the small members, or at the wrist or ankle, or at the arm;
align the limb according to its natural shape, so that when the parts of the broken member are dislocated, you reset them with every means possible and ensure that your work causes no further injury or pain to the patient.
align well the two ends of the bone according to the best forms.
And feel it well with the hand if it seems to you that it is not good: straighten it carefully, and do not strain it too much, nor press as those who bring it by their work abscess hot and contraction to the limb, as we have seen many times.
And when the limb is healed, punish the patient well so that he does not move it, neither in watching nor sleeping, nor turning, nor in any other way. and ensure that the limb is so secure that it feels no pain at all. When it feels no pain, it is not broken, and it should be placed in such a position that it feels no pain.
When it feels no pain, it is not broken, and it should be placed in such a position that it feels no pain. and keep that it is straightened, so twist does not come when it is restored;
and the qualities of the broken limb are as I tell you.
Know that broken limbs can be various in smallness, size, and shape.
For there are small members, such as arms and fingers etc.; it is necessary to wrap linen cloths soft and thin around them;
and those that are thick, such as thighs and legs: it is necessary to wrap with a broad and hard rope, for the large ropes bind the whole large member tightly and equally from all sides, so there is no gap.
then tie around light bandages, three or four turns according to the member, and tighten your hand a little on the rope, then go above the break and tighten less than the break, then move away a little from the break;
And soften the ligament little by little, until you take a large part of the healthy bone, then take another ligament and turn around completely reversed over the broken bone.
Then return to the part below the break, and tighten moderately, neither too strongly nor too loosely, as we said in the first lesson above.
Then put dampened linen or cloth strips between the ligaments until they are all even, then tie everything with one bandage, and then place your well-made splints on top, if there is no abscess or swelling.
And if there is swelling or an abscess, place warm compresses on it and let the swelling subside for some days.
Then bind with strips of half a thick cane, or with cleft wood, or with palm fronds, and they should be in this manner:
but the bandage that you place over the break should be a little larger and thicker than the others.
And let it be as long as is required for a small or large limb.
then hold it between the stirrups in the same way you did at the first joint, then bind it with thread coming forward, as you did on the break.
it is narrower now, yet wider; and it must be of moderate thickness, neither too thick nor too thin, and made of flax thread.
because if the thread is thick, as I have seen in the works of foolish people who make their bindings with twisted flax thread, and that is great error, for the binding cannot be even if it is too thin, and it should not have less than two fingers' space between each stirrup.
And if the patient is gored by the heads of arrows after being stretched out in healthy places, place linen or woollen cloth over them to prevent bleeding.
When the wound is broken and the vessels ruptured, I will tell the cure after this.
And know that it is not necessary to set arrows in all broken limbs immediately on the first day. For when the limbs are large, it is not necessary to put arrows in them immediately, but rather after 5 or 7 days or more, according to your confidence in the abscess healing process.
And here is the manner of ancient plasters for restoring fractures, dislocations, and torsions: you should take flour that is held on the mill walls, and mix it with a lot of egg, and apply this mixture, neither too thick nor too thin, and use it; this is the common method for restoring the fracture in various positions, and especially for women and small children, for it is not too hot or too cold.
Another manner of plaster for restoring fractures and dislocations and torsions: take barley and linseed and elder and wormwood and Arabic gum and mastic, in the quantity of ten; myrrh and aloes, in the quantity of five; elshorn flowers eight; grind them into powder and mix with a lot of egg; if the man's complexion is hot, use this plaster, for it has good composition, and restores broken bones quickly, and it is useful to many men.
Another plaster for torsion: take mastic and wormwood, in the quantity of ten; myrrh and aloes, eight; acacia leaves six; Armenian balm ten; grind it well, and mix with vinegar or a lot of egg, and administer it.
Another method of plaster for joints and dislocated bones, soothes the pain arising, and heals with the bone, and breaks: take new linen, moisten it in water and cooked oil, and apply it to the place. This plaster does not restore [the limb], but it is good for soothing the pain of an abscess and a proper wound.
Another method of plaster that sets broken bones: take dried fig leaves and earth sorrel leaves, grind together, and make plaster.
Another method of plaster for the restoration of broken bones and to hasten the healing of an abscess: take the root of comfrey, chamomile, violet flowers, bran, of each one part; grind together, mix with wine, and apply to the affected member when it is hot. Or, if the member is cold, use warm coriander water instead.
Another method of plastering stronger than the first, when an abscess hardens in the restoration of the limb. Take root of comfrey, flax seed, balm of Gilead, clover, and wild marjoram, violet flowers and chamomile flowers, all together in equal parts; grind, and cook with salt water, sweet water, or wine according to the heat of the member and its rest.
Hippocrates states in his book that no other substance should be applied on a broken member for restoration except a plaster made of wax and oil, and nothing else, and that it should be neither too soft nor too hard.
It seems Galen suggests that dry and slightly warm substances should be applied to a broken member for restoration such as myrrh, aloes, incense and similar things as we have said.
Another method of plaster that is good for injuries and pain: take ground up mugath (possibly a type of root) and crushed human hairs or feathers of birds, and add resin, and mix them equally, and grind them into a plaster and apply it.
Then, remove the plaster a little afterward, and take care that the patient does not feel any pain, nor has the bone moved from its place; do not remove it for many days.
If pain or itching comes to the place, or discomfort, without rest or swelling, hasten and remove the plaster immediately; take light cloth and sea sponge wet with seawater, and immerse the affected area until the itching stops and the pain is relieved. Then let the member rest for an hour, then put dry linen on it, dampen it in vinegar or rose oil, and tie it up with a nut, until you are sure of the abscess heating.
and let the inflammation of the member rest, and relieve the pain, then resume the binding gently, add a little plaster, and do not strain it too much as before; and bind it until it heals.
And if you see that the abscess has cooled and turned red, pain and swelling have subsided, and you need plaster and linen, resume the binding as you did before equally.
And if no swelling comes to the limb from what has been said, do not dislocate it before 3 or 4 or 5 or 7 days; and sometimes leave it for 20 days, as one sees fit, until the break heals, and the joint approaches the flesh above;
then hold it longer than before, and the flesh swells more as I have said before; and if you see the joint drying out too much, know that nutrients cannot enter. apply warm moist heat to the joint every time you dislocate it, and do this thrice a day, and slightly stretch the bandage;
Therefore, cut the nerve endings in the limb and correct immediately whatever the foolish person does, who distorts the member: it is bad, and this work is dangerous; I do not see anything else but to weaken and work correctly.
of various ways of breaking There are many ways of breaking [bones], and various shapes, and the causes are intended.
For there are breakages that are made by sword impact, and the collar bone breaks the entire bone up to the shaft which is underneath the bone, as does a hack or cleave; and for this reason, this method of breaking is called "hackure".
For the sword strikes the bone from above causing it to pierce, and this method of breaking is called "absolute"; and these are the large or small wounds caused by these two breaks.
And if there is piercing indentation, or cleaving or fall from stone, or falling on stone, or similar things.
And if it has a persistent break, which reaches up to the fabric beneath the bone or on top of the bone, and this is the wound, whether large or small.
And if it has a wound that is healed so close to the bone, as thin as hair, and this is the small fracture, which is called "capillary" fracture.
and if the wound is caused by hitting with stone or falling or any such thing, and it pushes the bone piece inside, and the fracture is closed tightly like a potter when he fires on top of pots; then the stone enters.
And this happens more often in those who have or a moist bone head, such as a child's head;
And this happens in all these ways of fracture where small pieces are dislocated, as in the case of a collarbone; and I will speak about it in its place.
And let us know all the ways of fractures by the distraction above them, and the examination with tension, and by the corrupt flesh that is on top of it.
The hairy bump is recognized when, when one exposes the bone and scrubs above it, the fracture appears black.
In the treatment of a fracture, beware of the patient's conditions, and if you see any harmful symptoms like vomiting of blood, loss of consciousness, swelling, pain in the feet, high fever, hairs growing and reddening, and similar signs in various situations, it cannot heal without doubt.
And if you do not see any harmful symptoms, and expect healing, then begin the treatment.
And when the fracture first comes to you in winter, it is necessary to remove the bone before the fourteenth day of the month when possible.
And if it is a fracture, hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the tissue beneath the bone is not corrupted, and the accidents mentioned come about.
If the fracture of the bone reaches the layer that covers the brain, then you must cut the fractured part in this manner: and it is that you grasp the head of the patient firmly, and uncover above the bone in all ways possible, and over the figure of the wound as much as you can.
and if the discharge of blood comes when uncovering the bone or an abscess opens up, then help with what is necessary, and it is that you fill the place with damp linen soaked in rose oil. And make the wound rest until the abscess subsides and you are sure of stopping the flow of blood; then begin to remove the bone around it, and this is done according to two methods of treatment: one method, where you make a narrow incision in front, and this is called the "chisel" form.
And then insert another incision larger than the first.
And the second method is that you have various incisions, some narrow and others wide, sharp and pointed, made of iron indeterminate; and work lightly, so as not to pierce the bone.
And if the bone is dislocated and hard, you must pierce it around so as to provide relief with drills, but not to such an extent that they pass through the bone to the other side, and there should be a margin or circle on top of the point that does not allow the point to pass through the bone; and you should have more than one, each arriving at its place on the edge of the bone, so you have drills for all sides; and this is the shape of the four types of drills:
The quality for piercing around the broken bone is to place one drill on the bone and turn it with your hands until you feel that the bone is pierced; then remove the drill slightly, and do this all around, then chop out the space of the bone between the fractures as delicately and lightly as possible, as we have said, until you draw out the bone to your hand or any other tool you have such as pliers or tweezers; and be careful not to touch the brain or spinal cord.
and when you have pierced the bone and treated it, it is necessary that you reset the tightness which has remained on the bone with another tool resembling a chisel, but it must be thinner and more delicate than the other chisels.
And if any small bones or scales remain, gently remove them with an instrument; then treat the wound with bandages and ointments as we have said.
And another method of treatment is that which the Greeks say, which is more secure; and they praise it highly, and this is their word. First, you should cut open part of the bone where the fracture is visible, so that when you have exposed that part, place the blunt-edged leech-shaped instrument on top.
And it should not be cut from one side, and the part is sharp in two edges, so that the cut is towards the bone; then hit with a small hammer on top, so that you lightly break the bone all around, and be careful of the cloth that is underneath.
If it is attached to the bone, break it lightly, for one breaks it badly and with fear.
If the bone does not break through to the cloth, and the bone is only broken from above, there will be small pieces; in such a case, you must smooth it out, and remove the scales with a fine rasp, having various quantities, to provide the most suitable one for each place, according to the work and the figure of the break.
If the king shaves before with great razors, and afterward with more subtle ones, and does not stop doing so until it is well done.
In each other haircut and subtle break, it is necessary that you bring the cause according to its direction; and this is not something that can be answered by one who has devoted his study to this art.
And if the sore is uncovered, you must take one linen cloth, according to the size of the wound, and wet it in rose oil, and place it on the wound; Then take another linen cloth doubled into 1 or 3 layers, wet it with vinegar and olive oil, place it on the first cloth; and do this gently so as not to soak it too much, then administer another thread over it, but do not tighten more than necessary to just cover the wound.
and leave it for 1 or 2 days until the abscess has subsided, then unbind it, and administer medications like marshmallow root, wheat flour, incense powder, and aristolochia, and similar things; and make a powder from these things and apply it to the wound, and immediately administer reliable medicines without bitterness.
and ensure that the wound remains clean at all times, do not leave any ointment or bandage on it, as when pus accumulates on the cloth of wool, it will rot and cause great pain for the patient; for when something bitter is placed on the wound, it causes inflammation from below.
Take care then, if any bad accidents happen to the patient, as we have said, it is doubtful in sense.
And if it comes from anything other than the medicine that has been placed there, which may have such a virtue, you should take a part of honey and 3 parts of rose oil and in glue one bandage, and lay it on the wound. Then heal it with the methods of healing that are necessary, until it is healed.
It is known that sometimes the two parts of the neck above are broken, or only one of them, because there are two bones; and the one below is cartilaginous, and does not break, unless it twists or bends, and then heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, you must insert your little finger or thumb into the nostril, and push the break equally to your index finger, and towards the cheek, until the nose returns to its natural shape. and do it gently, and watch that the patient does not feel pain due to your work.
And if the break is in the upper part of the nose, and the finger cannot reach it, then you must equalize it to the tip of a thumb, a little bigger.
And if the fracture is in two parts, you should mend it similarly, and hasten to restore it within the first day, if you can;
If not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscess has calmed down, then apply to the head of the neck cloths of linen, if the fracture is in one part.
Or you apply one cloth to one side, if the fracture is there; and let the cloths be as thick as they fill the hollow of the neck.
And they said that some remedy should moist the cloths with butter and change them every day. I do not think it is good, but it is necessary that they be moistened in a mixture of egg yolk and flour; then leave the cloth until the bone is hard and the cartilages are hardened.
And sometimes feathers of an owl are inserted instead of tents, and if it is wrapped with a thin fabric, and held together, and the patient blows through it; then do what you see fit.
And if an abscess is opened while you are working on it, put rose oil or cotton soaked in alum in it, or a drop of vinegar.
If an abscess does not open, apply plaster outside of it, made from the flour of sizament and incense powder mixed with egg yolk, then place light stoppers on top, but do not tie them shut.
And if the break in the neck is small and it breaks into small pieces, remove them with suitable tools, then make the cut, and treat the things with healing substances such as char, solder (metal fusion), like plasters and ointments suitable for that purpose.
And if there is no wound within the neck, treat it with bandages, and put linen strips on it until it heals.
About the fracture of the jawbone
When the lower jaw is dislocated and there is no wound outside, and the break is only outside but not broken within, if one knows it easily, then it is recognized as a fracture of the corbel inside.
If the fracture is on the right side of the lower jaw, place your index finger in the patient's mouth; if the fracture is on the left lower jaw, place your index finger of the right hand inside and push gently, then adjust it with the other hand from outside, and make it even.
If the fracture of the lower jaw is displaced by 2 fingers, then you must provide an extension of 2 parts to make it even.
And if there is movement of the teeth, or fracture, hold them with a filament of gold, silver or silk, then place a broken mandible in cotton and place one double cloth; and place on top of it a large and well-made cradle, or an equal piece of leather long and wide according to the jaw, and secure it at the mouth that you can, and command the patient to rest, and give light food.
If you see that the figure changes (dislocation), release it on the third day, then reset it to its original position; and place a plaster over it with milled powder with egg or flour of wheat, after removing the cotton; and put light linen plaster over it, and if the plaster sticks, remove it, and leave the patient until he is well; many times, it becomes well within four weeks.
And if an abscess comes out (ruptures), bring what we have often said before.
And if there is a fracture and wound together, be careful not to remove any piece of the bone when extracting it; use instruments suitable for this purpose.
And if the wound is narrow, expand it according to your need.
And when you have removed all these pieces and there is no more, stitch the wound if it is wide, and apply one dressing suitable for this purpose to promote healing until it is healed.
of the forceps The force breaks multiple times towards the shoulder, and the fracture occurs in three ways: either it is broken and dislocated in two places, with fragments, and is the easiest to restore; or there is a fracture accompanied by a wound.
And the procedure is when the fracture is accompanied by a wound, that you have two assistants, one should hold the shoulder where the force break is felt; and the other extends the neck towards the affected area; then align the fracture to your hands so that the form is as it should be, without any appearance or protrusion.
If you need to extend further, place a round cushion of fabric or linen under the shoulder of the patient, and let it be thick according to your needs; spread and lift the force break, then hold the cushion with your hand so that you align the fracture as it should be.
And if you cannot draw the head of the shoulder out by force because it comes in firmly, then the patient must lie on their affected side, and put an elbow pillow under the shoulder, and push the ministers down on the shoulder from below until the bone of the shoulder is lifted.
Then direct the fracture to your fingers, and if you see debris, then it is necessary that you cut above; pull out the pieces gently, and if the bone cannot join due to any obstruction, hit it in one of the incisions you made; but place this instrument under the shoulder blade to prevent it from spreading:
And it should look like a spoon, not pointed, and be as wide as necessary, according to the size of the bone and the power of the work; and have two handles, as you see, and one wide and the other narrow, as the routure (incision) of the wound that you made when treating the bones.
and when you are certain of abscess heating, if it is small, or you doubt abscess heating, then use linen and bandages, according to its quantity.
And if abscesses are present, wet one linen cloth in rose oil and asafetida and wine, and place it on top.
The binding of the bone, when it is painful and swollen, is to place the plaster of milled powder and egg yolk on top of the bone, and lay light bandages over it, and put a spear underneath if necessary. Then take a very wide bandage of a palm's width, then place one double cloth layer over the bandages and the plaster; then take a subtle stick that is three feet long and wrap it around the bandage, so that the end of the bandage hangs down. and place the stick on the fracture, turn the bandage around the neck, and under the healthy and injured buttocks; and tighten it from each side, and when you see that the joint holds the bandage properly and you can clearly see that the stick does not move above the broken bone, then reinforce it every day, and when the linen loosens, tie it again.
And make the patient lie on his back, and set him with a small pillow under the neck to raise the shoulder; if the break in the collarbone aligns due to the alignment of the shoulder, or you tie the arm to the neck, and do not untie it unless a bad accident occurs, until twenty days.
Then continue the splint, if you see that it is necessary, and tighten it and leave it in this state until it is restored; and it is restored at most within 28 days, and less for some men.
of the shoulder break
It is rare that the shoulder breaks or dislocates widely and cannot be moved except by touching it; if it appears in accordance with the shape of the break, reset it according to its natural form in all possible ways; then put powder from the mill with plenty of egg and light feathers on it. Then place a double cloth over it; then place a large and subtle awl, slightly larger than the shoulder, and if there are any cavities in the shoulder under the awl, fill them with linen bandages so that the awl fits evenly. Then tighten it firmly with a great bind, so that the awl does not move from its place, and watch the ligament every day; whenever it softens, tighten it, and make the awl equal if it is out of its place, and let the patient lie on his side; and the shoulder will be reset within 20 or 25 days. And when this number is completed, release it, and be careful, for it is not easy for bone to move lightly.
If a part of the bone protrudes before and not beneath the skin, raise it up, pull out the bone, and perform as we have said in the treatment of an abscess to cool down the inflammation.
of the fracture with pus
The pieces are sometimes broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; however, it often breaks at the joint. And when it is broken in two, it sinks downwards, causing the patient great pain, and without help, immediately, and sometimes vomits blood, and the fracture opens the cavities in the broken bones, and he feels everything badly.
The restoration is that the patient lies flat on his back, and a cushion is placed between the shoulders, then presses the shoulders and brings together the ribs of the two sides to your hands, and carefully adjusts it in every way possible, until the figure of the bone is as it should be; then places plasters and bandages over the thin plate of salt or of another light substance, and wraps it in one cloth, and ties it to the broken bone, so that it does not move; and turns the splint round at the back, and tightens it gradually, and every hour checks the splint, and if it becomes soft, tightens it again; and if it needs to be loosened, due to corrosion or inflammation that comes to the place, or pain or abscess, then hurry, and loosen it, and remove the plaster, and treat the one who has come there in methods of cure; then remove the plaster, and tighten it until it is healed.
of the fracture of the ribs
Know that the fracture of the ribs comes only in large bones near the back and at the chest, and they bend only because they are slippery; and this is clear to all at the investigation in the joints.
And the restoration is that you place the fracture evenly, as it should be. Then put the splint and tighten it with a stick, if you need one.
And if the rib fracture is sinking downwards, the patient feels great pain and shortness of breath, as with pleurisy, for the bone pierces it; and the pain shoots to the point, and immediately vomits a large amount of blood, which is serious illness, and the ancients put much effort into it.
And for those who say that it is necessary to administer foods which swell the belly, to drive away the rupture (or break).
We should not let hot abscesses come, if they have not come. And if it has come, let it be healed (or cured).
And they say that blisters should be put on the wound to drain pus, and it seems reasonable; however, there is doubt whether the blisters will draw out the excess to the wound due to its weak condition.
And they said to someone that the joint should be covered with damp linen in hot oil, and then a splint should be placed between the ribs to make it even on all sides, afterwards it should be cured with pleurisy cure, meat and medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot endure from the bone piercing the fabric, and the patient is afraid, then it is necessary to break through the joint of the rib, and a device should be placed beneath it for support; and afterwards you must cut the bone, extract gently, and sew the two edges of the wound, if it is large, and treat with plasters until it heals. And if an abscess arises, then place moistened linen soaked in rose oil on it, and place it there; and cure the joint as necessary for the abscess, and lie it on its side where it should be, until it is healed.
of the break in the neck
Sometimes the bones of the neck break and do not bend; similarly with the spine in the back. And when it happens with some (fracture), and you want to know if it will heal or not, take note if you see his hands swollen, soft and dead, and he cannot move or stretch them, and when you prick them with a needle, he feels nothing. Know that in many positions, they are mortal; if you mute them and they feel when you press and prick, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient will be cured, if care is taken for it.
And if something similar happens in the spine of the back, and you want to know if it is healthy or not, take care if the feet are swollen, and if there are accidents that are in hands, and on the back there is sudden movement without voluntary control; and when it has been moved onto the stomach, it moves involuntarily. And when it is moved back onto the back and wants to rest, it cannot. Know that it is mortal: do not labor at all in its treatment.
If this does not happen, then it is a lighter matter.
And the treatment is to reward it if there is an abscess that is hot, place rose oil or egg yolk oil on the spine until it is soothed; then put one of the comforting and drying plasters on top, tie it with a string, and command the patient to rest; and do not let him sleep on the part where he feels pain until it is healthy. And if any bone is dislocated, it must be covered with oil; then remove the bone, close the wound with stitches if it is large, or suture it; afterwards, apply a soothing ointment until it heals; and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "head of the cow", put your left thumb on it and align it with the other hand as you can, then place the plaster and the splint, if necessary; then tighten it, and if there is more dislocation of the bone, lift it up, remove it, and treat the wound until it heals.
The fracture of the shinbone (lower leg)
It is seldom that the shinbone (lower leg) is fractured, and if it happens, there will be a slight reduction of swelling at the site; then make a long cut, lower the limb, and bring pain to the place, and puncture and inflate what was broken.
And the restoration is that you extend your hand above, while you are on the break; and recognize what the break is and its shape; and if the break is only in the head, then make the break equal to its natural shape.
And if the break is long or it declines within, make the patient lie on his stomach so that the restoration of the break may be prepared for you. And when you have made it equal, put a plaster on top of it, then place a stick of wood or horn over the break and hold the break so that it does not move; and apply the ligature under the ribs until the ligatures are even.
And instruct the patient to sleep on a healthy side (or on the back).
If an abscess arises, do not touch it until the abscess subsides, and put what we have previously mentioned on it; then return to treatment, tighten as necessary, if there is no bad incident; and this is the method.
of the shoulder breakage
The shoulder (adjutoires) is between the neck and the arm of the shoulder, and if it is broken, it should be restored according to one of the two methods. One method is that you take a rod filled with thickened honey in this shape:
And let the two shoulders be bound with two straps, and place them above; then raise the patient on one seat; then throw his broken arm over the post, until it comes to rest, and have a brace of wood in place; then put the braces on opposite sides of his hands together, until the broken arm returns as it should.
And another way is to lay the patient on his bed, tie his hand to his neck, and command two assistants that one holds the brace above his hands and the other holds both straps, each pulling towards their respective sides.
If the extraction is difficult, tie one strap below the brace and above it, and each assistant pulls in their respective directions. And if the broken arm is close to the shoulder's tip, put one strap below the neck, and another towards the side of the arm; and similarly, if the broken arm is towards the side, tie a lighter strap gently without effort, so that the broken arm lies flat on the level, and against the chest; then adjust it as necessary, and hold it steady until the abscess heals.
And when an abscess swells up, do not tighten it at all for the first seven days; put soft linen cloth and rose oil on it to soothe the abscess; then tighten it. The method of tightening is that you place the cup over the fracture, then raise the arm towards the shoulder, and place your hand on the shoulder or chest; place a bandage, and tighten towards the shoulder and towards the arm, so that the arm is in its socket, if nothing prevents it, or if the bone is not moving.
If you doubt that the bone does not move, use splints and place a wider and stronger splint over the fracture, leaving one inch of space between each splint, and make each splint large enough to pass around the fracture two inches on either side; then tighten the splints towards the fracture, as I said at the beginning of the chapter about the fracture, more tightly but not pulling them apart.
And if you see the position of the splints and tightening as we have said when restoring the broken limb, and you doubt the abscess has healed, leave it to bind for seven days as we have said; then examine every three days the binding, check that no pus swells up or comes to the limb because it is too tight. If necessary, follow our advice.
And if no such accidents occur, do not loosen it before four days or more; let the patient lie down on his back and place his hands on his stomach; and put an evenly-stuffed wool bandage under the shoulder, and watch every hour of the day or night that the shape of the broken limb does not move or are the ligaments not softened; if it adheres by the power of medicine, give the food as previously prescribed, so that the food is first finely ground; and when it begins to recover, it should be thick. And it is customary for the shoulder and the arm to be reset within 40 days altogether; then loosen it and administer baths and ointments for healing. If the injury is ugly and swollen, wait one day or two months to loosen it.
of the fracture of the arm
The arm consists of two bones, which are called the "ulna" and the "radius". Sometimes only the larger one (the ulna) is broken, or sometimes both together.
When the little phalanges (small bones in the fingers) are broken, restoration and healing are easy; but when the large ones are broken, healing is poor, and more painful than when they are broken together. If it is only the little phalanges that are broken, it should be slightly extended and set straight.
If it is the large phalanges that are broken, it should be tightly held; extend it one cussin (approximately 2.75 inches), and lift the thumb of the hand higher than the others, and the other fingers lower than the others, and cross the patient's arm over itself, and place a cussin above it so that the patient does not suffer any pain; then the attendants should extend their arms to the lower part beneath the patient's hand or at the elbow, and one attendant at another's side above. Then the bones should be set straight, according to their best form.
And if the bones are broken into pieces, place each one in its place, and if there is any dislocation that pricks the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, then cut off the bone, as we have said before.
And if it (the dislocation) is caused by a break (fracture), I have spoken of it in the specific chapter; take the treatment for it.
And if fractures with abscesses occur at the beginning of setting (the bone), apply (use) one cloth made of rose oil and white beeswax that is neither too hard nor too soft; and place one cloth gently, so that the abscesses are appeased. Then remove the beeswax, and put the plaster made from flour of mill with egg, then set the splints, and the splint at the fracture should be more prominent, and a little larger than the others; and know that it should have 7 splints or more in various positions: whether the fracture is in one bone, or two; and tighten more on the fracture than elsewhere, and always less in aligning, as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and may the cloths that are above the fracture be soft and moist, and not too hard nor too rough; and let the threads, with which it is tied, be of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said. And check the member and the ligament after some days. And if any bad accidents occur to the member, such as prurit that occurs in the member, you must irrigate the member with hot water until the prurit is appeased; and let the member not rest. Then repeat the binding, and if the ligaments are worn out and the bones dislocated, and similar things, address it.
And if the urine cannot reach the member because it is too narrow, then you must soften it slightly and leave it for some days until the urine passes, and then hold it in place.
And if none of the things we have said occur in the patient, do not remove the splint for up to twenty days, or in the meantime, press his hands to his neck, and ensure that his neck is even, and keep it still and straight, and sleep on his back; know that this break will be restored within thirty or forty days, or perhaps within twenty days, depending on the compositions and complexions of the remedies.
fracture of the hand
Know that there are few breaks at the back of the hand and the fingers, but it only happens multiple times.
And when the sole of the hand is broken or bent, it is necessary that the patient cross his hands equally in front of him; then he places his hand on an extended cloth, and extends the broken bones, aligns them to each other as much as possible, and binds them with splints until they are well joined; then applies plaster and padding, unless an abscess comes, then puts a needle according to the size of the wound; and is wrapped in one linen cloth.
And if the break is around the sides of the sole of the foot, make a bandage from cloths, and instruct the patient to tighten it on his broken sole; then tighten a long cloth around it, and the needle of caution should be as large as the sole of the hand, and tighten it as needed.
And if the break is on the outer side (of the bone), then you must place a splint above and another one below in the sole, so that the hand remains open and straight, then bind it all around the hand tightly, and press down on the joint between the fingers.
If the break occurs in any of the fingers, if it is the pulp, you should align it as necessary; and hold with the sole and if you see that you put a straight small splint to lift the break and not move; and if the break is at other fingers such as the index or one of the others, you should align it and bind with the healthy finger that follows; or bind all together in one bandage, which is better, or put a splint on top as with a pulp; and pay attention to the restoration and the position of the abscess, and care for those who come, as I said.
broken ankle
The bones of the shin are often broken, and it can be seen when it turns in front or behind; and restoration is as follows: one ligament above the fracture, and another below. And the patient lies on their face, then each minister extends his ligament evenly to its part; and this is when the fracture is within the bone.
And if the fracture is near the shin root, then one ligament should be towards the ankle and the other ligaments below the fracture. Similarly, if it is near the knee, then the ligaments should be around the knee, and the extension should be downwards; then place the patient's bones equal to its two hands, as naturally, and then apply the splint and bind it, unless an abscess comes.
And if there is an abscess that is heated (boiled), let it cool down first, then return to your work and your care; the lancing is done in this manner. You must wind the bandage (bandage) tight around the broken limb, double it twice or thrice, and leave any excess outside, then bend the leg so that the heels are near the root of the thigh, and insert a long thread between the thigh and the leg, through the groin, and bring the ends of the thread up on top; then bend the leg and the thigh above the bandage, then place the breaker and four more pins on the bone of the leg; then use soft wool fabric to equalize the tension between the limb and the thigh, then begin to tie four or five turns around the breaker; as you go higher up the breaker and loosen the tension, bring the two ends of the thread that you inserted between the limb and the thigh together, and bind them along with the four pins above, then return below the thread to the foot, tightening it so that it does not move from its place; leave it like this until no abscess or inflammation or any similar thing appears.
If a piece of the bone protrudes (pokes out), you should dislocate it and direct it where it comes from, as we have said many times; if it cannot be cut with an instrument, then you must break the limb and pull out the marrow; and treat it as we have said until it is healed.
And sometimes the thigh is broken in such a way that splints are set, as in the shoulder or arm; however, the restoration does not cause discomfort to the patient.
Know that the thigh is restored within one or two days, or slightly more or less, according to the individual's complexion.
of the street of the kneecap
Know that in the street of the kneecap, there are few breaks but it bends frequently. And if it breaks, it is not a complete break, only a crack or a fracture, causing pain to the entire leg and knee, which is felt by everyone.
And the restoration is this: one puts equal heat to the joint which is cold at its ends, as long as it can be assembled; then place the plaster, and put a round stick if needed, and hold it as necessary, then check all the positions that we have said in other dislocations, such as an abscess or any similar thing; for each accident, one puts whatever is needed until it heals.
of the fracture of the leg
Know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is called "shinbone" (tibia) and the other is called "shankbone" (fibula); and it happens just like a fracture comes to the arm, and for this reason, the restoration is the same as for the arm, and the procedure is identical.
And if the two bones are broken together, the leg turns from all sides.
And if the fine bone is broken, it turns forward.
And if the large bone is broken, there is great pain and it can be seen clearly; and it turns under. Then apply compression, make it even, and align the fragments equally; but always, if the break is misaligned, and there are many pieces, the compression should be less and lighter; and adjust it according to your skill.
And when you have completed your work, take two fists of straw that compress the leg from one side and the other, and be as long as the length of the leg from the knee to under; then wrap in two layers of linen, both inside and outside, and tie it in the middle so that the leg will not decline to right or left, and this is good; and no one should apply one splint the length of the leg, and if it is made of straw, and place the leg for immobilization, and properly make it at the break where there is a wound; and move the leg every day to see if there is any abscess or other accident; cure it until it is healed.
of the fracture of the bones from the foot
At the ankle there is no fracture, but at times the bones of the foot suffer fractures and the toes also, and there is no cure except for surety in many positions.
And if there is a fracture in the bones of the foot, and you see these bones moving against each other, place the patient on his feet on the ground, just as if he wants to walk, then put your foot on his, where the bones have been raised, and press them until they return to their place; then apply a splint and padding, and place a small table under the foot with two flat pieces, then bind it around the foot in the correct position, after you have covered it with bandages and other things that are needed.
And when three or four days have passed, remove the bandages, because you will find the bones even, whether broken or dislocated.
And if any of the two [bones] are broken, restore them as we have said for the bones in the hand; then place a splint on the broken bone according to the length of the bone, and it should be a bit larger, then place beneath it the flat piece that I mentioned, and hold it in position; and if there are two or more, or more, break each bone, place a splint on each bone covered with one linen cloth, and hold the flat piece beneath the bone; and let it remain above the head of the flat piece facing the abdomen of the bone, so that it covers it well.
And you must not forget the other things that I said about other fractures, when we have spoken of them; and treat each case according to its necessity.
of the fracture of the bone in the thumb
When the bone of the womb is broken, make her sit with her legs apart, then tilt her to the backside and hold her from behind; fill the cavity of nature with cotton and put as much as a stone in it; then turn the woman, lift up her buttocks little by little, and let the cotton leap out until it reaches the entrance of the cavity, and the bone comes back with the stone; and when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has urinated, put it back, and do this for 7 days or more: the fracture will be restored. If you see, take a bladder of nettles, tie one end of a rope to it, and push the entire bladder into the cavity; then blow hard into the rope so that the bladder inflates inside: the fracture will return to its place; then fill with cotton and leave it for some days until it is healed.
And when the bone of the elbow in a man or woman is broken, restore it as we have said in the humerus; and these fractures should not be hidden from him who studies them and uses them, and read my book. For fractures indicate in many positions the right way of restoration: then follow it accordingly.
In the penis, when it is broken, put a goose's gullet around it, then wrap cloths around it and leave for 3 days or more, and it will be healed quickly.
With break with wound
It is necessary for him who has a break with wound, especially if it is large such as the bones of the leg or shoulder or similar, that it be cauterized now, so that the cauteries which we have said bear witness to its healing.
And if the wound is healed, anoint it with vinegar, if you have none, then begin to restore the break in the same hour, or the next day, if abscess pus does not come.
And if abscess pus comes, wait until the ninth day, until the pus is calmed, and do not touch it for three or four days, because you will cause bad accidents.
And if the bone breaks and appears exposed at the edge of the wound, you should set it gently with your hands to a slight extension.
And if the fracture is not aligned for you to set it evenly with your hands, you should align it with this instrument made of iron, which has 7 or 8 inches in length, and the width according to the size of the wound; and it is necessary for the mirror that he takes hold of 3 or 4, according to what is required in each treatment of fracture; and it should be round and slightly larger than needed, so it does not fold under pressure on the member in your work, and sharp before, and large from the middle forward, like this:
And it is called "palainche", so the dislocated bone should be placed on top of the visible part of the bone; and push it once until it returns to its place, and ensure that one side is aligned with the other. If the fracture is subtle, and the instrument cannot firmly hold the bone, then you should cut the visible end of the bone, so the instrument can grasp it.
And if you cannot reset the bone as we have said, strike it with an appropriate instrument, either chisel or saw, to your ability; then carve away the part that remains in the bone with sharpness and small shavings.
When the bone is reset and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural position. Keep doing what you are doing until it is in its proper place, then moisten a clean linen cloth with black stoppered wine, and do not apply anything on the wound, such as a salve or oil, which could cause pus and corruption; then administer bandages when you have restored the bone, leave the wound uncovered, and cover the entire area around it according to the size of the wound, taking care that the wound is not constricted by the break; many times this has been done by foolish surgeons and either caused additional pain or death or caused some rot; let the bindings be softer and more pliable than other bandages.
If the wound is bad or large and you fear that a mishap may occur, as we have said, and you find pain at the site, do not apply bandages; instead, wrap around it, in place of bandages, hard cloths and bind them. And after one or two days, if the wound begins to swell, remove everything that was applied to it and apply healing ointments such as tetrafarmaçon and similar ones.
And it is necessary that you dislocate the member twice a day, at morning and evening, as long as it is healed and sound.
And the limb should be set in such a way that the bone protrudes slightly downwards gently.
If it passes many days and the bone cannot heal but rather protrudes again, as you know there are small fragments of bone, for this reason, it is necessary that you try to press the wound, and remove all those dislocated fragments that cause pain.
If a fistula appears in the area or any other corruption, it is necessary to treat it, as described in the chapter above. And when the bone is broken and open on the limb, such as the femur or shoulder bones, do not drain it, for often death occurs; but leave it until it can heal; perhaps it will heal after 20 days or 30; then treat the wound if possible; and if not, leave it.
The buboes (swellings caused by infection) coming upon the sore
Often times after the breaking of health, it happens especially near the joint, and it is a sight to behold the appearance of the limb; and by chance, the limb cannot perform its natural functions.
Therefore, take care if it is fresh: administer medicines such as aloes, incense, myrrh, and sycamore bark, acacia, and similar others, either taking one of these things or all together, and grind them with sharp vinegar or egg white or honey; then place the mixture in a stoppered jar, strain it well, and do not let it out for many days; then drain it, and start another, until the swelling is gone; or you can use a well-made piece of plank, as the property of the plank is that it removes all inflammation from the limbs. If the swelling has turned into hardness like stone, it needs to be removed, either by chopping it off, and making the excess apparent; or you can shave it, until it is removed, and heal it when it is healed.
When the bone fracture is healed and remains afterwards, the limb becomes weak and delicate for several reasons: one reason being that it was tied too tightly, but not sufficiently as required; or because there were too many ligaments, preventing nourishment to reach the limb; or due to excessive soaking; or due to excessive movement at the wrong time; or due to a lack of blood in the body, making it weak.
The treatment is to have the patient eat well and make his body lean, until the blood multiplies within him; administer baths and give joy and comfort; then apply tar to the limb so that the tar attracts great nourishment, and soak it often with cold water, until nourishment reaches the limb; and return it to its natural shape.
twisted limb after health
When the limbs are twisted after being restored and the bones are broken open and the shape of the limb is disfigured, do not believe the foolish who say that one should break the limb anew and many fools have done this in our land; and this practice is condemned, and it brings great harm, and possibly death. However, if the swellings and torments are fresh, it is necessary that they be treated with warm water or softening herbs such as vismalve leaves, roots, medlots, and similar things; and you make a soothing poultice, like dyaquilon well made, and take musk root of vismalve and mix it with ginger oil or sesame oil, and make a poultice on top; or you take fat figs, grind them with wheat bran, and similar medicines that alleviate the pain.
And sometimes the swelling is removed by rubbing continuously and for a long time with moist hands. Movement should be brought to the limb every hour.
And if the tortuosity is enlarged and hardened, as a stone, and it requires iron removal, it must be covered up to the bone, making an incision with a subtle, delicate knife; and put cotton and bandage in the treatment.
Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation occurs in anyone, it must now be returned without delay.
If one delays, the joint swells, and if it is reset, at times it will be put back into place; therefore, it must not be moved until the swelling subsides, as this often brings pus and other pain.
Nevertheless, when this happens, treat the patient with medicine, then let him rest until the abscesses have subsided; then heat and oil the affected limb, gently move it, and treat each member according to the treatment that will come to its place.
And I have ordered the chapters of dislocations of the head down to the feet.
of the jawbones
It seldom happens that the jawbones are dislocated in both places, and dislocations of both occur in two ways: either they are partially displaced from their place and softened a little; or they are completely dislocated, hanging towards the side, and the saliva flows from the mouth which it cannot hold, nor can it close its mouth, and wraps its tongue with speech.
When a small dislocation returns through various positions.
And if it is complete and healed, you must reset it promptly and without delay.
And the minister holds the head of the patient, and places his thumb of one hand in the root of the dislocation of the jaw within the mouth, if the dislocation is two parts; and the other hand should be spread apart, to equalize it; and instruct the patient to soften, his jaws, and move them from all sides.
And the mirrors [should be "patient"] align it [the dislocation] evenly, until it returns to its place.
And if the jaw bones are dislocated together, warm them with hot water and oil, moving them gently; do not force them, as we have said.
And when they are aligned evenly and the patient's mouth is closed well, cover it with a cloth soaked in a balm made of rose oil and wax, then hold it gently with thin ligatures.
And the patient lies on his back with his arms between two pillows, so that he does not move either to the right or left, and does not strain himself, but takes soft food until the pain is relieved, and the jaws are immobilized.
And then soften what he wants slightly, and do not force it to open the mouth for eating and drinking, until the mandible is well knit and healed.
And if the two mandibles cannot be set correctly within an hour and are not converted to their places, fever and customary sweats come, and possibly abdominal swelling and perhaps vomiting of clear mucus.
And when you see this, then know that it is destruction; and many times the person who experiences this dies within eight days.
of the collarbone
The collarbone cannot be dislocated from its continuous connection with the chest and the breast, but it is occasionally dislocated at the end, and this can be felt.
And the restoration is that the patient lies down on his back and extends his arms; then presses the joint firmly with the palm, and it will return; then place the elbow and bandage it tightly.
And the joint that is towards the chest cannot be dislocated; if it does, and if it occasionally dislocates, then reset it to its place as we have said; then place the elbow and bandage it tightly, and advise the patient to rest until he is well.
And thus the head of the shoulder is reset when it is dislocated from its place.
When the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture and cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Note that the shoulder dislocates in only four ways: one is when it dislocates at the socket below; another is at the upper arm; and sometimes it dislocates above, but this happens rarely.
It does not dislocate behind the shoulder or inside the nerves, and often it dislocates below toward the socket, especially in those with little fat, for it can jump out quickly; in those with enough fat, it jumps out slightly, but returns slowly.
And by chance, happens to some men percussion or fracture, and inflames the shoulder with an abscess hot, and thinks that it is dislocated by this.
Therefore, you must verify it, as long as you are certain; and then begin the treatment.
And it is known that dislocation when it moves towards the socket, and makes a distinction between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find between them a clear difference. and you will find in the shoulder's head a hole, and under the socket to the shoulder's head, as if it were an eye; and the sick person cannot return his hand to its place, nor move at all.
and likewise, if it [the shoulder] is dislocated upwards, it should not be hidden, for you can clearly feel it on touch.
this type of dislocation is not to be forced back when it is new, or if the child is sick.
The manner is that the servant lifts the patient's hand upwards, then puts your thumbs under the elbow, and forces the joint upward to its place; then the servant lifts the hand, and extends it upwards, put it back in place; it will come out quickly.
And if it does not come out as we have said in normal hours after that, then the patient should be bathed in hot water; and bring a soothing and comforting balm, such as a decoction of elder and fenugreek and melilot in hot water, and apply it.
Then the patient should lie down on his back, and a piece of cotton equal in size should be placed under the affected shoulder, not too soft nor too hard, then the hand of the patient is held by the assistant, and the upper part of the shoulder is moved properly.
And another assistant holds the head of the patient so it does not move downward; that shoulder will come back immediately, and if you see it slipping in this manner, you should hold it firmly in place.
and there should be a man present who is larger than the patient; he must face towards the side of the affected shoulder and push it downwards under the patient's armpit, lifting the affected arm upward so that the patient hangs from it. And another minister draws the hand of the patient towards the abdomen. And if the patient is too lightweight, he can hold something heavy with him to prevent dislocation returning immediately.
You can also reset it in another way: that is, you stick a long needle into the ground so that the head of the shoulder is as round as a pea, and it should not be too thick nor too thin. Then it should be placed under the patient but with a soft cloth underneath, and the patient should lie with his arm extended along the length of the bed; then his hand should be turned over to the other side, and the joint will return to its place quickly.
And if it does not want to return due to all these things that we have said, then do this cure: take one tison of two arms' length and four fingers wide, which has a round head for full entry into the joint, according to this shape:
Then place the head of the tison on the sick man's joint, so that it does not burn the patient, then put it into the joint of the sick person; extend one arm above the tison, and hold the shoulder above the tison, and the hand at the end of the arm, then place the arm on a wooden wedge of a width equal to four fingers, and stretch out the other hand downwards, and let the body hang from the other side: the joint will be reset immediately.
And when it is in, however it may be, you must put a cloth equal to the joint underneath the joint, then apply a plaster made of milled powder, with incense and egg white all over the shoulder and around, then hold it under the joint as it moves, and twist the thread around the plaster, and bind the hand to its neck, and let the hands remain in this position.
And it must be eaten little by little, as long as the members are comforted, for it will heal more quickly; and afterwards eat more after 5 or 7 days, and move it; and if it is closed up and not softened, it is healed.
If the joint is moved out of its place due to moisture that has come or for some other reason, then you must administer cautery to it in three places, as stated in the chapter on cauteries.
If you do all this and it dislocates again after 7 days, and the joint cannot hold, and the arm above cannot be lifted, then understand that the nerve at the base of the shoulder is cut or stretched or weakened; and understand that the joint will never be set in its place.
The dislocation that is towards the hip or the backside is made by force and extension of hands, and another instrument is used for it; treat it until it heals.
And if after healing, the member has pain and sluggishness in movement, the patient should take baths many times until the pain subsides and returns to its original state.
of the dislocation cost   (This line doesn't make sense as it is, the translation provided above suggests that "de" is a preposition in this context but "dislocation" is a noun and it should be translated as "of the dislocation". However, "coute" seems to be missing from the sentence. The original text might be incomplete or missing information.)
Know that the joint of the thigh is dislocated at points, and it dislocates at points again; if it has been dislocated in all directions, both front and back, and dislocation cannot be corrected because it can clearly be seen and felt, as each dislocation displaces according to its shape. And when you join the sick thigh with the sound one, if you can clearly see it. For the joint is dislocated, and cannot bend the arm nor touch the shoulder at all.
And it should be reset in such a way that abscesses do not come where the joint is, because if abscesses come where the joint is, it would be difficult to set; and perhaps it cannot be completely reset from all sides, especially when it is at the back; it is worse than other dislocations, and causes greater pain, and possibly death.
And the restoration is such, when it can be brought back to its place, that you extend your hand to your two hands; and his arms should be spread out, and his hands around the mirror as necessary, above and below, and push the jointure towards their peaks together, or to the root of his palm, until it returns to its place.
If the dislocation is in front, then return when you bend your hand to your hand, and press from the root of the palm on the dislocated side.
If it does not return to its place, administer strong extension; and it is necessary for two people to extend the arm, and they should press it with their hands so that it does not move during the extension; then turn the arm on each side, and when you have wrapped a double-length and wide cloth around it...
And when the surgeon joins the joint to his hand, he should apply some oil for softening the joint, then push the joint back into place until it returns.
And when it is in place, he should put on a plaster made with egg white and apply pressure, then hold the arm around the patient's neck for some days, then release it.
If the joint is closed in its place, remove the bandage and leave it; if you see that the joint is not holding well, renew the plaster and the bandage, leaving it in this state for some days until it is firmly set; then release it.
And if it feels pain after the resetting of the joint and it becomes motionless, wash and scrub it well, and press until it is soothed; or place a sheep fat poultice on the joint, then leave it for one day and one night, then remove it, and let him enter or take a bath; and when it weeps, wipe the joint gently, then place the poultice back on, then let him enter or take a bath; and do this 2 or 3 times until it is healed; and if you see, place warm wet sheep's wool with butter on it and hold it there; it will return to its position.
the dislocation of the hand
The dislocation of the hand's joint, and its reset is easy compared to other jointures; it must be returned to its place promptly, in the same hour when it is dislocated, unless the ligaments are inflamed, or there comes an abscess hot.
And the repositioning is that you place the sick hand on a table, and extend the minister's hand, and the mirror should be placed opposite it, so that the patient puts his palm above the appearance of the jointure, and pushes until it returns to its place.
Moreover, it is necessary that you look to see if it is in the correct position; then place the patient's back of his hand on a table for extension and repositioning. And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, place the patient's hand dorsal side on the table, and have them place their hand over the appearance of the joint. If it returns now, that is good.
And if not, apply plasters to soothe abscesses and let them remain in place to begin the healing process.
And if it cannot be endured and you cannot put it back in place after some days, the dislocated joint remains.
And the patient should not be forced to endure pain as long as his hand is injured and cannot grasp anything: therefore know that the nerves are severed or the arteries; there is no other means of help but to stretch by fire cautery in this case, and possibly nothing else.
And when the hand is injured, place it in the plaster that we have mentioned, then stretch and leave for 5 days, then remove the bandage and leave as such.
If it cannot move well and there is no swelling, apply warm water and rub until it is healed.
Of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Sometimes the fingers of the hand are dislocated on both sides, sometimes at the back of the palm or the palm itself.
Then push the finger, and push the dislocation back towards its socket until it returns, then hold the head of the finger, and bend it towards the part where it is dislocated.
and leave it for 2 days, then make it even on the third day; and tie it as we have said, and loosen the bandage from time to time, and make it move, and re-tie it; do this repeatedly until it is straight.
And similarly do the same, if it is dislocated in the stomach of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it heals; and similarly do the same, when it is dislocated from another place.
And also do the same for the dislocation of the backbone in the spine.
When the backbone in the spine or neck is dislocated, or there are many dislocations, there is no cure for it, as death quickly comes to the patient.
And the signs are that the evacuations escape without volition and cannot be held, and many limbs become softened, or the two legs or both arms, or just one.
And often, the spine becomes paralyzed at four parts; the one that becomes paralyzed at the back is called "Gilbositez":
The cure is that you observe if the Gilbositez has come from childhood; if it has not healed or recovered at all, then there is no remedy for it.
And those that come from falling or blows or similar things, the ancient methods of healing said in great words, but there was not much benefit in it;
But I have bound it according to my intention, and have fashioned instruments in various ways.
I say that in the disease that comes beforehand, no remedy or health can be found.
And similarly, the one that comes directly between the two sides cannot be cured except for the one that comes at the back, as I said.
And it is that the patient should be extended on an even surface, and have something held underneath him so he does not bleed.
Then stick one needle in the head and another at the feet, and tie a ligature across the patient's ankles, and another at the thighs, and at the knees, and at the wrists.
and two ministers know the ligatures, one at the head and the others at the feet, between the two needles.
and be closed, the needles as we have said, and the mirrors place their hands on the spine formed, until it returns.
And if it does not return by this cure, take a table three spans long and hollow underneath, and the patient should be on his side, and push the end of the table under the side, then place the middle of the table on the spine. and place the mirrors on the other end of the table, and press well, until it returns to its place; if you see, do it with the screw that turns with the hand.
And it is that you insert two needles into the head of the patient with one arm's length, and toward the feet two others, and between each needle, from outside and inside, there should be a hand's breadth of space.
And in each splinter or fracture, where the bone turns, and the splinters are firmly set in the ground so they do not move; and between every two splinters there is a turning splinter, like links of a chain, and in two turning splinters there are two small splinters of one span long, to turn the fracture;
Then tie the splint that is between the ends of the fracture towards the head, and another splint towards the feet at the other fracture end, and each minister turns their fracture, and the master aligns the spine equal as we have said.
And when it is aligned, put on a dressing of desiccative with egg white, then the plasters, and then a stick of a table of four feet long, which takes the position of the swelling and the part of the vertebrae that is healthy, then tie it with a splint as we have said, and use the patient with subtle nursing until it is healed;
And if any thing comes at the end of health, it is necessary to administer softening and calming medicines, with the herb that we have said before; and sometimes they administer a piece of lead.
And sometimes the appearance comes at the back of the spondylus of the back, and it is believed to be dislocation; but it is the bone that opens, for which one should not have any presumption: perhaps death will come.
of the hip dislocations
Know that the joints of the neck and the shoulder come undone only by dislocations, not in any other way; and the joint of the neck is dislocated according to four parts: inside and outside, front and back; and it dislocates more on the inside, and less so in front and behind.
And the knowledge of an internal dislocation is that when the injured limb is joined with the healthy one, the thigh of the sick person is longer and their knee more open than the healthy one, and the sick person cannot bend their knee in fire. And it is the loosed joint that swells with pus due to abscess, because the thigh bone comes there.
And the sign of him who it comes to flee, is that this event is contrary to those mentioned before.
And the signs of him whose leg it is in front, are that it should be well aligned according to the completion; however, do not double the knee with pain, and if you want to make it walk, it cannot go forward, and retains its urine, and swells the ankle, and when it goes, it passes over the heel.
And the signs of him whose back it is, are that he cannot extend his knee, nor bend it, and this leg is more twisted than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the hip of the thigh is at the place beneath the ribs.
The re-alignments of this kind of dislocation are that you examine if the dislocations are old and remain in their position without treatment; no treatment should be assumed for them, nor should there be any presumption.
In the case of fresh dislocations, which are of four types of dislocation, hurry and try to re-align the joint and push it inward and outward, moving it from side to side; by chance if it returns, no other treatment is needed.
And if it does not return in this manner, then you need to prepare a strong assistant and firmly hold the leg with two hands, or tie one end above the knee;    \n And another assistant extends his hand over it in such a way that he pushes his hands under the patient's buttocks, then pulls on a rope tied above the thigh; and another holds the head with the rope.
And all pull simultaneously, until the patient is raised from the ground once and remains hanging.
This method of extension is common to four similar situations, and if the dislocation returns as we have said, it is good.
If the joint is not in its proper place, treatment for its appearance is required. When the dislocation is at the front, you should remind the patient to lie on their healthy side, then put the rope around the thigh root and the place that is under the angle, then pull the rope up towards the angle and towards the shoulder.
Then take another assistant and grab the large thigh of the diseased joint, and extend it outward in this manner: it will now return to its place; and this method of dislocation is easier than the others.
And if you cannot hold it in this manner as we have said, then you should bind the feet of the patient tightly with a strong rope above the heels and knees, and the diseased leg should be extended two feet further than the others;
Then let him be hung by the head from a pole, and let there be two long arms below; then command one minister to embrace the thigh, and let another minister hold onto it with the patient, who is now embracing the thigh, because the joint will soon return quickly.
And when the dislocation is to the outside, let the patient lie down, as we have said in the one who has gout, and draw a cord tightly above the affected leg and on the thigh also.
Then put two twigs, one on the head and one at the feet, then stick one twig between the thighs in the patient's groin area. And plant the dampen cloths around [the affected area] to prevent bleeding, then extend each minister towards him, and equalize the dislocation with his hand.
If it returns, that is good. If not, place him on a bed and press as we have said in the gout, and let the patient lie on the healthy side.
When the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to extend the affected leg quickly, and as I have said; place the patient's pain on the opposite side, then press with the other hand and pull it back towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is at the shoulder, it should not be extended below, nor raised up from the ground, but rather it should remain as when the haunch is dislocated at the shoulder, as we have said in the lying-down position on two pillows. And it should be placed on its back, and the limb extended as we have said before, and press on the joint against the table.
and when the patient extends his legs, they will be even; then adjust the thighs, place the splint, and bind with a bandage so that the haunch does not move.
And let it rest for three or four days, then release it, and place a plaster on top of it; if you see that they are even, hold them steady as before, and leave it. Three days; then release it, and make it walk well, until the limb is comfortable.
of the dislocation at the knee
The knee is dislocated in four ways: inside and outside, behind; it should not be dislocated in front.
And the signs are that you instruct the patient to bend his leg at the knee, and if it does not bend at the knee, know that it is dislocated.
and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit straight, extend his leg if he can, place your back on his front side, and place his foot on your feet.
then take his knee with your hands, pull it apart between your hands, then bend the two sides of the knee together; and another assistant extends his foot until the knees return to their place, and the signs are that he bends his leg at the knee easily.
And apply the plaster on it, and make the leg straight at the knee, and bind them together strongly for three or four days, then release; and do not let the patient walk, until the limb is comforted.
And if the member is not whole, give strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the fracture, until it heals.
of the ankle dislocation
The heels are sometimes crushed, and sometimes completely dislocated, both inside and out.
And the signs that the ankle is swollen, and it bulges in the part where it is dislocated:
The reduction is easy, and it should be performed gently when the limb is only crushed (swollen).
And when it is dislocated completely, you should make the patient sit straight, and hold one minister by the leg, above the ankle;
then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and then to the left two times, then stretch it upwards, and push the foot up forcefully;
and do this two times, as we have said, pushing and pulling the foot; if it returns, that is good; if not, resume the work, for it will return.
And if it cannot return in that way, lay the patient on his back on the ground and firmly push a 1-foot long stick into the ground between his thighs, tying cloths around it so as not to prick the patient.
Then mark the minister (the attendant or assistant) the thigh, and another minister extends the leg to his hands or arm, placing it across the neck of the leg. Then both ministers (attendants or assistants) extend themselves equally, and the stretcher should be close between the patient's thighs to hold the patient when he is being stretched.
Then place the hand equal to the dislocation, and another servant holds the healthy leg underneath; and the dislocation will return quickly.
And when it is in position, apply the plaster and poultice on top, and form it, tie it to the leg, and guard the veins that are above the ankle, so the bindings are not too tight.
And leave it for two or three days and if the bindings loosen, tighten them again; then untie it on the third day or the fourth, and advise the patient to walk for four days; And if it goes before this term, it is not certain that it will not dislocate again.
And if an abscess swells there, you must drain it, as we have said elsewhere, until it is healed.
the two (hands)
When both hands are dislocated, they must be carefully stretched out without strain, and it is an easy thing to do.
And if the dislocation is in any way near the back of the thigh, you must make the patient sit on a flat surface or table straight up, and put your foot on what opens those joints, then press firmly on your foot until it goes back.
When it is even and there is nothing to open, place two chairs under the foot of the leg, then press firmly and leave for three days, then release it; let it rest until it heals.
of wound and dislocation together
When a wound occurs with a dislocation and it is to be restored, many times the patient dies.
Do not be presumptuous in the treatment, unless you are wise in the art and have used it for a long time, and unless you are compassionate, merciful and slow, do not be hasty.
Use at the beginning of things soothing abscess hot, and leave the patient in the hands of God if you see no hope of health. and when you see hope, then reset the limb to its place, so that the abscess grows there.
And when the limbs are at rest, administer soothing substances to abscesses, and treat wounds as appropriate, using dried herbs;
If the dislocation results in a fracture, and small bones are displaced, set them, and do as we have said in simple diseases;
And protect yourself from fear, as I have said, for it hurts you according to your Creator, and for the wisdom of your weapon and body. Amen;
