I have completed this book for you, my very dear son, which is the end of the knowledge of medicine along with its fullness, and I have finished it through its explanations and declarations. And it came to me in a vision that I will complete this for you with this treatise, which is a part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
And because the work of hands is corrupted in our region and is foreign to everyone in everything, science and learning perish and are destroyed, and there remains nothing of them except small descriptions in books by the ancients that the hands have altered. And from this [comes] error and vanity; intentions are closed off and knowledge is driven away.
It seems to me that I shall revive [it] together with the arrangement of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will come together with the forms of cautery instruments, as well as other tools for work, along with the alignment of the declaration and preparation of them, as is necessary.
And because no good craftsmen are found in our times, the art of medicine has become distant. And he who undertakes it should be summoned in the knowledge of anatomy, as Galen says, until he knows the judgment of members, and their shapes and joints and separations, and have knowledge of bones and nerves and sinews and the number of bones, and their movement and those that move and those that rest, and the direction of their outflow.
And for this reason Hippocrates says that a name without work is nothing, and the same applies to the art of healing.
We tell you in the introduction of this book that one who is not knowledgeable about the things mentioned above, should be careful so as not to err and not to harm people; in such a way that I have seen many times that those who engage in this science and abandon their science and experience.
For I saw a foolish man who cut open one abscess of scrofula or the throat of a woman, and cut the arteries of the neck; therefore so much blood came out that the woman fell dead in her hands.
And I saw another man who drew a stone from an old man, and the stone was large; with it he carried away a piece of the bladder, and the man died within four days.
And I had already been called to treat it, and saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and knew well that if they cut it, he would die.
And there was another physician who took care of one of the duke of our land, who had his leg broken and with the break came an injury; and the physicians, full of ignorance, pulled the break over the wound by strong force, and did not leave any splint on the wound, but let it be thus set; and he commanded that it should not be dislocated again; and it remained so until the leg became completely swollen and the toes and came to destruction.
I was called to come to him, and I hurried to come and dislocate the leg; and when I dislocated it, it was peaceful and felt no pain.
But all the corruption had already been confirmed in the limb, and it could not be healed; and the corruption did not stop spreading through the limb until the entire limb was lost.
And another eye that collapses an abscess and then inflames it through the evil of its dominion.
For when the chancre is purged of melancholic humor, it should not be touched with iron unless it is in a place where all can be removed that is corrupt.
And therefore, dear son, it is necessary for you to know that the work of hands is divided into two divisions: one where there is danger in many positions; and I will show in each part of this book where there is fear and danger.
Therefore it is necessary that you take care, so that the foolish eye cannot speak ill of you.
If you take up your weapons in cushioning, and approach your patients gently and firmly, and use the best way, so that through God's grace you may come to salvation and be praised; and leave behind the diseases full of great suffering; and remove your weapons from those that cause doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you can depart from this world to the other of glory.
Galen warned in some of his admonitions: "Do not take on bad illnesses, lest you be called foolish physician."
I have devised this treatise according to three chapters.
The first chapter is about fire cauterization and the cauterization of medicine for ague, and it is arranged from head to toes; and about the shapes of instruments, and the devices for cauterizing, and everything necessary in the work.
The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and abscesses and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and it is arranged and the shapes of instruments.
The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and it is arranged from head to toes, and about the shapes of instruments.
Therefore, as we remember our work, it is necessary that I tell the quality of aid and the harm of each complexion.
I say that the quality of aid, and the harm, is the longest and most subtle speech and secret responses; and many wise men spoke of it, and agreed with this; and they relied little on their words, because I will reduce the length.
I say that cautery helps universally to all complexions where there is matter, whether it be of the two complexions: hot with matter and dry with matter.
In a hot and dry complexion, some people said that cautery is great help; and others said the opposite: that cautery has no value for disease caused by heat and drought.
For the nature of fire is hot and should not be used to treat hot diseases with heat or drought; and this is what those who said the opposite claim: that cautery provides great help for hot and dry diseases in humans. If you understand the body of a man and its moisture according to the nature of fire, you will find it cold.
And I agree to this statement. For I have found it sometimes through experience.
And every way, do not interfere unless one who has tested it, and who knows through long experience the chapter of cauteries, and the diversity of men's constitutions, and the dispositions and causes of their diseases, and the occurrences and space of time; we have no fear from other constitutions, especially in cold and moist diseases. And all should submit themselves to the cautery treatment.
And know, sons, that cautery together with fire is one of the secrets of cures, and of greater kindness than cauterization with hot medicine.
For fire is simple and does not harm any other member except the one it touches.
Hot medicines spread from one member to another when they are applied, and cause illness of grave healing; and by chance, the patient may die.
Fire, because of its highness and the kindness of its substance, does not do this if there is no excess.
And I have discovered this for you through experiment and by the length of service and study that I have put into my art, and it is true concerning the things; therefore, I apologize for the length of the words, for I do not wish to deprive you of the secret which concerns fire, and the quality of the work, how it drives off diseases from the body, as the philosopher says in demonstrating; accept this in your thoughts.
And know, my son, that they agreed on what time the cauteries should be performed and chose their companions.
And I say that the cautery is suitable in all times, because the harm occurring is kept under control by the aid of the cautery; and indeed, if the cauteries are necessary for pain relief, it cannot be postponed until a more serious illness comes to the member.
And never think about it, dear child, as the foolish do; for a disease cured by cautery has no return; and they say so; but it is not as they believe, because cauteries are not medicine that changes complexion, but rather dries humors causing pain, and works more quickly than other medicine due to its power and its virtue.
It is possible that the disease sometimes comes according to the complexion of the patient and the nature of the disease and its virtue; and superfluidities are gathered in him through the consumption of foods and similar things, unless cauteries are administered where there is little superfluity or moisture, as in cauterization for pain, and similar things; but this does not happen often.
And many people do not understand why cauteries are called the end of medicine, but it is true; however, they do not believe that cauteries are more effective after other medicines, but their belief is false; cauteries are the last resort in medicine because when we administer methods of cures for any disease and they are not effective, then we administer cautery, and it works. Then it is clear that cauteries are at the rear of medicine, not according to the intentions of foolish physicians.
The ancients said that cauteries made of gold are more effective than those of iron, and they said this not because of the quality of gold or the highness of its substance; but rather they claimed that the tips of cauteries do not produce pus, but it is not true since I have tested it, and found that it is true in some men; and cauteries made of gold are more effective than those of iron, as they said.
And yet when you heat an instrument of gold, you do not know if it is hot by the color of gold, and sometimes it cools down quickly; and if you heat it too much, it burns; and thus there are many impediments to this.
And for this reason, we use fire cautery which we have adapted to our work.
I have instructed you on this chapter about the head from the neck to the feet, because the path is easier to find.
olive oil cautery
This cautery is good for both hot and cold conditions of the brain, and it is used due to a disease known as "soda," and because of many humors that descend from the head to the eyes and ears, and because of numerous dreams and pain in the teeth and throat, and most importantly, for all diseases that come from coldness such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar diseases.
The form of this cautery is that the patient should be purged by a medicinal solution, clearing the head four times or twice, according to what the qualities and age and condition of the sick person can tolerate; and then you make an incision at the back of the patient's head.
Then make the patient sit cross-legged between your hands and put his hands on something; afterward, place the base of your palm over the root of his nose between his two eyes; and where your fingers will meet, it bleeds from there. Then heat the cautery called "olivare," which is the shape:
And put it on the place marked with ink, and do so while pressing and pulling your hand little by little, turning it over; then lift your hand immediately if you see the bone sticking out a little bit; if you don't see it, continue the cautery until you see the bone as I told you; afterwards take a piece of silk, put it in warm water and soft cotton inside, put it on the place, and leave it for three days; afterwards put a thin linen cloth soaked in butter on it; leave it there until the burn is healed; afterwards heal the wound with the ointment called "tetrafarmaçon" until it is healed.
And the ancients said, when an overwound (or ulcer) remains open longer, it drains more; and for this reason, let it be dressed (treated).
And some said that the cautery (treatment involving fire) should be allowed to burn a part of the bone and then the burnt part of the bone should be removed and healed.
And others say that the cautery (treatment involving fire) should be applied strongly so as to break the bone as wide as one vertebra that women put in their vaginas because the humors issue out more freely; and then the wound should be left open for a long time; after that, it should be healed and bandaged.
And these two types of cauteries do not seem good to me in all respects, except for certain people who have fear; and it seems to me that I should let them be; because the heads are weakened by continuous solutions of nature, as we witness with other limbs; and even when the head of the patient is naturally weak, the first appearance of cautery seems more healing and beneficial to me, and in this way, I work for the sake of safety.
from the old pain of the head
When the head has chronic and long-lasting pain, the patient should use ear drops and pills called "cochie," and purge of the head, oils, and plasters; and if one performs cautery on it as we have said before, it is of no value.
Take care if the patient's shoulder is of strong nature and not too cold; then cauterize beneath it with that fire cautery as we have said before.
Perform cauterization on each horn of the head up to the bone, as we have said before, and perform one cautery or treatment called "vasselz"; it is one of the two in which ventouses are placed; hold your hand so you do not see beyond the bone: the patient feels much greater pain in this cauterization than in others, and I will speak more about it later; and the cauterizations on the horns should be subtler than those used for the middle of the head, and this is their form:
of the head cautery When sudden pain occurs in one part of the head and the disease spreads to the eyes, and the head is purged by various medicines, and other treatments as I have said in the division of diseases are performed but none help; then cauterization is done according to two methods: namely, with hot medicine and fire.
The cauterization with hot medicine is that you take an onion and peel the skin off it, and put one piece of onion at each eye where the pain is, in such a way that you can place the onion under the skin; and when it is placed, press it well and leave it for twelve hours; then remove the onion and treat the area with salt for two or three days, and then cover it with linen dipped in butter as long as it lasts.
After the onion treatment until it is healed; and if you see that this does not help, perform one of the treatments with burning medicines that I have written or the tenth treatment for burning medicines.
The fire cautery is of this kind. Heat the iron according to these forms:
It is called "clos" because the head is made in the shape of a claw or has one and a half inches of curvature, and it is medium-sized with a small appearance; place it on the painful spot, hold your hand firmly and slightly tap the iron, so that half the thickness of the tip is burned; lift your hand to prevent the artery from burning, and draw out the abundance of blood.
After placing cotton on a piece of linen, place it for four days; then put damp cotton in vinegar, and then treat the spot with ointment until it heals; and if you want to cauterize this migraine with the iron called "cultellare", prick it entirely, but be careful not to pierce the artery in this migraine that is not old.
From migraine
When curing migraine as previously mentioned in the divisions of diseases, and it does not benefit from the cauteries mentioned in medicine and iron, then you must heat the cautery called "cultellare" until it becomes white; and so place it on the side of the temple along a line of half a finger's length, and press once with your hand, but do not cover the artery nor let the pressure reach the bone; protect the jawbone from mute people when they eat, and let the veins have no regard for the mute and prevent spasmus from coming to the patient, and protect against discharge of blood from the artery when it is cut, or when cutting have great fear and especially to those who do not know, and are unstudied and inexperienced; leave the procedure in progress; but I will tell you how to stop the flow of blood when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it should be in this book.
And if you see that this cautery does not help the disease and the patient is suffering, cauterize it on the head as previously mentioned, and treat the wound until it heals; and if you see, administer the cautery we have said or the chapter on the extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has two blades; and this cautery is better than the other and more helpful.
Of the pain of the ears from coldness
When pain in the ear comes from coldness and it has been treated with soluble medicines and other remedies as we have said in the division, and the pain does not subside, then apply this cautery called 'poins', which is made as follows:
After piercing the affected ear all around, or in both places where the pain is located, move away slightly from the root of the ear once you have marked the place to be treated; have ten points around each ear; treat the area until it is healed.
Of the torment of the mouth
The torment to be cured by cautery is not foreign to those that move from flux, as we have said in the divisions of diseases; and do not perform cautery on the similar cases that come from scorch and from spasm of nerves.
When you cure this similar torment that stops flux from the ears and cleansing of the head and gargarism, and this does not suffice, then you must cauterize the patient with four cauteries: one in the root of the ear, and another a little distance away from the temple, and the third at the corner of the lips; place the cautery in the open healthy part and make it cauterize towards the top of the ear slightly below the skull, and another in the temple as long as a thumb; and let the cautery stay until half of the coal is burned; and this is the form of the cautery:
And it is similar to the surgeon's tool that we have mentioned, but it is somewhat more delicate and requires the knife to be slightly larger; after curing the wound as I have previously said, let it heal when it becomes healthy.
When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, but it does not improve, and the patient has no fever, then perform four cauterizations: two on the top of the forehead, one in the skull, and one at the vessel called "vasselz" as I have previously mentioned, and the last cauterization on the stomach's mouth; let them be treated as we have said before.
diarrhea
For this disease, give the patient large years and round pills to the brain; after that, anoint the head of the patient all over, and place the plaster of mustard (made from sinapi) on top of the occipital bone. This is the method of cautery: if you do it as I have said.
If it is healthy in this manner, it is good; and if not, make four cauteries on the head descending from neck to collarbone, and have space between each cautery of two large ones; and cure as with others, and if you see it heal, give one cautery in the middle; and if necessary, two more on the two horns, and cure until it is healthy; and let the cauteries that are called "olivare" be as I have said before.
of the chill in the head It is necessary that the head (of the patient) be cleaned with years and whatever was said before; after cleaning the patient's head, then make the cautery in the head and on each horn, one behind and three on the spine of the neck; and if there is a need for more, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the disease is severe, make four cauteries on the spine of the back; and let it be until the most painful spot is burned, then remove your hand; afterwards, cure it until it is healed, and let the cautery which is called "olivare" that was said before be used.
Of epilepsy
Epileptics should not use cautery except for those who are febrile, and it is necessary first to clean the brain with years and other treatments as was said in the division when the patient is large and suffering from taking medicine.
And if it is an infant who cannot endure it, give him gargling and chewing frequently with soft food; afterwards, put the head in a millstone, and apply 1 cautery as described before, and 1 cautery on the fontanelle, and on each cornea; and if the patient is weak and tolerant, apply cauteries as I have said to him who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped as I have described.
If the patient is an infant, apply a gentle cautery in the following manner:
When caused by melancholy are the superfluidities or corrupt and swollen fluids, then cauterize with such cauteries as we have said to him who has paralysis.
And if the superfluidity is declining towards melancholy and the body of the patient is moist, then give them to drink something by which the brain may be purified, according to what was mentioned before in the division.
Then place the patient cross-legged; then make a linen bandage well made, like a circle, and put it around the head; and the patient should be crossed, and held firmly from all sides; after this apply the liner, and rub with old butter; and heat it gently at fire so that it can be applied without causing discomfort to the patient; afterwards remove the circle inside the head, and let it cool; and do this to the patient every week once with good management, until they are well.
If you see that the patient is to be cauterized by making multiple pricks over the entire cautery, this method moistens the brain greatly; then place damp cotton soaked in butter and linseed oil on top of it.
Of the eyes When the eyes come first by the signs that I have said in the division, then begin and give the patient something purifying the head, and protect it from all moisture, and make him sweat or bathe more often while fasting.
Afterwards, command him to rest his head and make a fire cautery on the head, and make two cauteries on the temples where the eyelid swelling is on both eyes or one eye; and pierce all the veins and arteries that are under the eyebrow, and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple; and watch for bleeding, and if you see too much blood flowing, stop it with your power as you have.
And I will teach you in the extraction of the arteries and in the incision the cautery how to stop it; and sometimes they make a fire cautery or heat something under the two bones at the back.
The tears of the body (translated from Old French)
When the eyes become old and accustomed to being on the veins, or from the arteries that are visible on the outside of the head; and it is seen that this is due to cold phlegmatic superfluities, then let him perform the cautery as I have said at the beginning of the chapter, namely: cautery in the head, two cauteries on the temples, two cauteries or cauterizations under the eyes, and if necessary, cauterize skillfully above the eyebrows with a small cautery.
The tears of the body within the eyes (translated from Old French)
When you treat the patient according to what we have said in the division, but it does not help, then give a sick person three nux vomica (poison nuts); after that, roast the head and do a olive oil cautery or millet cautery; and make two cauterizations called "clavilis" over the two sores, one beneath the hair; be careful not to cover the artery. And this is the form of the cautery called “clavilis”:
When the paper of oil is softened by disease and moisture, then do this type of cautery called “olivary.” Here is its form:
And if you wish to perform two cauterizations on the two sorcerers who are as long as sorcerers are; and do not leave the hand except until the third part of the paper is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
the hair which pricks the oil Sometimes the hair of the oils are transformed into a burn and prick the oil, and one performs cauterization in two ways: either by fire or with burning medicine.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they have grown even and long, then place the patient on a paper with the hairs marked out in the shape of the myrtle leaf, and begin the sign at the base of the hairs; then put damp cotton soaked in egg white and mustard oil on the oil, then heat the cautery to this shape:
After cauterizing over the marked shape repeatedly, so that the edges are burned; and the signs of the cure's success are that you see the paper withdrawn, and the hairs raised at the tip of the oil; then lift your hand, and let it be for four days, then put damp cotton in butter until the cautery is removed; afterwards heal with ointment until it is healed.
And if after that the hairs grow, and the paper is softened, then repeat the fire cautery on the same place as before; and if the hairs are curved, cauterize until the paper is raised to its natural position and even, and the hairs do not prick oil out.
The hot cautery in medicine is to instruct the patient to let their hairs grow long and even, then make parchment of the shape of a myrtle leaf; then take French soap and hot metal, one ounce of each, grind them together well; and do this quickly, so it does not cool; then spread on the form you have made like the leaf of myrtle, and put the parchment over the hairs; if the sickness only has one oil drop, work with one, and if in both; put cotton dampened with egg white underneath the oil; and the shoulder of the patient should be healthy and your finger should be on top showing the medicine, and press once and move it all each time the patient feels a bite from the medicine, for it bites like fire. When you have done that for a long time, remove the medicine from your finger. And when the bite has healed, lift up the affected area and check if the pus has been released as it was lifted by fire or incision; and if this is the case, then it is good. If not, apply more medicine to the area or where no medicine has worked yet, until your treatments are even, and your eyes focused; then put moist cotton on it in butter until the wound burns shut, afterwards cure the area with the ointment called "dyafenis" and another one until it heals.
And if you need to be careful in your treatment because the medicine is not sticking to the hairs.  If the pus becomes thick and the hairs prick in the oil, then repeat the application of medicine to that area which has been properly softened by the pus, as you have done before; afterwards cure it until it heals; and this is the shape of a comfrey leaf.
And know that the hair of men is diverse in size and smallness, and according to this you should adjust your treatments; and do not deviate from the correct way for those who are studying this art.
Of the treatment of fistula by cautery
When treating a fistula as we have said in the classification of diseases and your treatment does not help, then you must perform cautery on it according to this method.
Instruct the patient to put their head in a basin of warm water or near hot coals, and have the assistant hold the patient's head between their hands so it does not move or shake; after putting cotton moistened with egg white or soap and oil on the fistula, heat the cautery to the required temperature, making it shaped like the tip of a feather and attached to the cautery. If you wish, the cautery can be pointed from one side to the other, or as wide as a tent; but regardless, the former is more suitable for your task.
After pressing the fistula if it is open, drain the pus and dry it; if it is closed, open it and remove the scab; after placing the hot cautery on top, hold your hand on the cautery to the affected area near the oil, being careful not to make a mistake; place the cautery in the oil and burn it.
If you start the cautery up to the bone, it would be good. If not, restart the cauterization again once, and another time if needed, and leave it for 3 days; afterwards put cotton soaked in butter on it, and let the ointment drying treatment continue until it heals, and if 40 days pass without healing, put corrosive medicine on the exposed bone; and the king according to what is stated in his chapter.
And there is a way of cauterizing a fistula that none of the ancients mentioned. Understand a fistula, and cut the area; afterwards put one subtle camahan in the opening, which is shaped as follows: and they make the amount of one piece of lead; hold your hand firmly with camahan, and let the patient not move at all, so that the melted lead flows into its hole; it is necessary to put oil on the patient's cotton soaked in egg yolk or butter: the lead will heal the fistula and the wound miraculously.
And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have mentioned, it is good. If not, you must administer pepper to the nose and bring the fistula back into the heat of the nose as required in its proper place.
cavities in lips Many times there are cavities in lips called "hair", and even in children's lips.
When curing these cavities as we have said in sections, and the cure is not effective, then heat. I.e., a small cautery scalpel according to this shape:
And put him immediately into those cavities until he comes to the font; afterward, treat the wound with lime until it is healthy.
of the abscess in the throat
When an abscess comes in the root of the throat or in the eye, or palate, or roots of the teeth, after it becomes pus-filled and grows and turns into a fistula; and you treat it as we have said in divisions, but it does not help: then it is necessary that you have .i. cautery according to the size of the fistula; after letting out or piercing the fistula, hold your hand until the iron becomes hot at the source of it, and where the end is; and do this once or twice, after curing what we have said in treatments, until it is healthy; and if it is cured thus, it is good; but if not, you must discover the place and remove the corrupt bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
The double movement of teeth (or teeth grinding)
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat them with medicines but they do not improve, then place the head of the patient in hot water; afterwards, apply a heated cautery to the tooth in this manner: put a cane on the tooth; and insert the heated cautery quickly, keep your hand so that the patient feels the heat approaching the root of the tooth; after releasing your hand, continue the cauterization according to your will; afterwards fill the mouth of the patient with salt water, and bind it tightly for an hour and rinse thoroughly.
And in this way, the moving tooth is fixed and the gums are kept soft and moistures dried up.
Of the pain of teeth
When tooth pain comes from coldness, or there is coldness or fever, and the medicines do not help, then there should be need of cautery according to two ways: cautery with butter and cautery with fire.
Cautery with butter is as follows: take butter from a cow, and the end in an iron or copper spoon; after that take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a needle, then wet it in boiled butter and apply it immediately to the painful tooth and hold it until it cools down; repeat this often until its property reaches the root of the tooth. If you see the linen and cotton getting cold in the boiled butter, apply it again, but heat one hot iron next to the tooth.
1. The cauteries altogether are made with a rod of iron or brass, and it should be thick so that the fire does not reach the patient's mouth; heat the cautioner, from which the form will come after, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery is cooled; do this often, for the pain will be relieved that day itself or the next.
When scrophulas are of a fluid and cold moisture, and do not respond to digestion by medicines, then heat the cautery hair as follows comes the shape, and make two openings for the smoke to exit from the other part; and place the hot cautery on the abscess once, or twice if necessary, until it reaches the base of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, apply cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it as such for three days; and put soft cotton soaked in butter until the sore is healed; afterward cure the place with ointments and plasters until it is healed.
When the coldness prevails on the channel of the worm, and especially when it comes from a cold complexion, then the patient must first be purged with soluble medicines; afterward apply cautery at the root of the throat, but do not go near the throat, only a little bit. Afterward make one other cautery at the jointure of the neck to the head of the spine, and let it be the cautery that is called "clavicle" as we have the form before; and cure the place as we have said before until it is healed.
of the tooth When all and illness of worm are from cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or inflammation, and the disease is ancient, you should make two cauterizations on the forearm; and another cautery between the breasts; and let it be the cautery called "clavile" in the form as was said before.
And if you wish, make a cautery by pricking all along the cautery that is called "point" in the form given for ear disease; and let the points be up to 30 or around it. After curing the place as was said before, let the cautery be at four fingers distance according to this form:
And because the cauterizations are lighter, because you make them in pairs (two).
of the dislocation of the shoulder When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. After being attentive to the patient on his back and on his side; after locating the cavity that is within the hole with your left hand's tip; and if the joint is dislocated inside, heat the cautery which has two nerves as shown here:
and cauterize the cavity until it penetrates to the costal cartilage, and the figure of the cautery consists of four cauteries; and for this reason, caution is taken with the cautery that has two nerves, because the shapes of cauterization are these cauteries; and the nerves are according to the subtlety of a tent and this is the shape of the cautery that has two nerves:
And sometimes it is dislocated on this, namely the nerve, for which there are eight cauteries.
After apply the cautery to crush with oil; after make the patient rest, and do not move the limbs for long time until it is well comforted.
If it is dislocated above, which happens seldom, then do cautery on the thick part of the cautery clavicle, or many cauteries in pricking. For the jointure is restored, and moisture is removed, and the patient recovers.
the cautery of pleurisy
The ancient ones said that for pleurisy, one should apply fire cauteries made from roots of aristolochia, and in this manner: take a long root of aristolochia, the largest you can find, and let it be dry, and also as large and as long as your thumb; wet it in oil, heat it up, and then cauterize one cautery between the chest and neck, and two small cauteries a little downwards in the area below the beard; and two cauteries between the fifth rib and the sixth, inclining slightly behind a little; one cautery on the side of the liver, and another above the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and two at the sides of the liver away from the cautery which is between the two shoulders; and do not squeeze your hand tightly, but perform it as freely as when smelling.
And they said that a certain old man uses a cautery resembling a razor and heats it up and places it between the ribs until it reaches the abscess; then the pain subsides as we have said in the liver abscess. However, in this work there is fear or death for many patients now, or fistula occurs which cannot be cured.
of the mouse
When you cure the disease of the mice, that is, leprosy, as we have said in the treatments, and it does not improve, then present three ways of cautery, all good.
The first method is that you make four or six cauteries in a line according to the length of the leprosy, according to the figure of the liver cautery as we have said before; and do not press your hand on the entire cautery, and let the patient remain conscious on his back.
Another method of cautery is that you heat the cautery with two nerves, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and shave the hair that is towards the leprosy, where the patient's growth comes towards his left side, and the elevations from which you shave the hair should be according to the length of the body, and the cautery should be according to the width of the body.
After the two inflamed nerves are heated until the boil is pierced from the other side, then pull out the cautery, and so there will be four. And if you see, if you cauterize all the cauteries at three nerves. After healing when it has discharged pus for a long time, and this is worth noting that the other treatments mentioned before should be done first.
After heating with sulphur or brimstone until it burns, then apply to the place of the boil; and if you see that the abscess is filled with pus, then open it carefully without hurting the healthy flesh; and after cleaning the wound, let it be covered with honey or oil.
Cauterization is not suitable for boils, except in the manner that is called "asclytes". When you treat it according to the methods we have said in divisions, and your treatment does not help, then you must do four cauteries around the boil, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the spleen, two at the back near the spine, and one at the place of the pain; and let the cauteries be close to the thick part of the skin.
After leaving the fire cautery open to purge for a long time, do not neglect the care of the patient after the cautery; and healing will be hastened, and the two intentions will be together with the help of God.
The form of the cautery for the abdomen is the clavicle as we have shown before; and that for the back is olive-shaped, as it is described above.
of the swelling of the feet When the feet are swollen in someone who is edema-ridden, and they are full of that yellow matter, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the foot between the little finger and the ring finger; and take your hand with the cautery without turning. And do not enter too deep, so as not to penetrate the yellow matter excessively, and let the cautery be in this form:
After doing two cauteries in each leg with the point of the knife; and let the cautery be long, one below the knee in front and the other outside the leg; leave the cauteries over it for a long time to heal, until the yellow matter disappears; after healing the other wounds as we have said.
of the emaciation
When the belly solution comes from coldness and moisture, while the digestive and retentive virtues in the stomach and intestine are obstructed and cannot be cured by means of treatment; and you see the patient suffering greatly and of strong constitution, do this: apply one large cautery on the stomach as described before (cautery of the stomach), around the navel circulate; and four subtle cauteries all around the abdomen, one subtle cautery clavicle, and two cauteries on the flanks.
And if you see the moisture abundant and the patient suffering, do cautery on the joints (of the limb) and one cautery on each joint, and two small cauteries on the stomach under the large one, because the treatment is beneficial when there is good assistance.
of the treatment of hemorrhoids
When hemorrhoids are founded, either one or more, and are old and are of large, cold, corrupted humors, and are treated as we have said in the divisions, and it does not help if you make cauteries: 4 on the spine of the back, that which is entirely exposed below the vertebrae and protrudes triangularly, and 1 cautery under the navel. 2 times;
And if you think that his stomach is cooled and the meat does not cook, and the face swells, then do one large cautery on the stomach as mentioned earlier, and another on the liver, and another on the spleen entirely to the clavicle; and leave the cautery open for a long time. After healing the place until it is healed.
of the hernia called "thelul"
When you apply the cautery to althelul, heat up the cautery that seems like a razor, and then place it all over the althelul to be cauterized; leave your hand there so that the cautery reaches the opening of the vein, so as not to miss it. Do this once or twice, and if there is much althelul, cauterize each one as we have said; after that, heal with ointments until they are healthy; and if you cauterize a large cautery on alchatim, it will have more help.
from an improperly healed wound
When the patient cannot bear incision or opening, as we will explain in its place, this disease comes which cannot be cured except by cautery.
1. When a fistula comes, and it is swollen and filled with pus and corrupt moisture, you should probe its entire length with a subtle instrument, and be aware of how deep it goes entirely.
17. Here is the translation for the next sentence: When pain in the loins and severe swelling comes from the kidneys, and it does not take on female characteristics, then you should perform cautery over the kidneys on both sides with the cautery as previously mentioned; and if we cauterize it in the middle, it will have 4 cauteries in a line, and it will provide more help.
of the bladder When the bladder becomes weak and soft from cold and moisture, causing the patient to retain urine, then make a fire cautery in the area beyond the bladder, where the pubic hair begins, one on the right side and one on the left side, and both should be as long as one's thumb; and make one incision behind the back, or two if necessary; and make the cauteries sharp according to the shape previously described.
of the marriage When the marriage is cold and moist and does not allow conception, and the flowers are corrupted and their term is delayed; and when they come, there is great pain: then it is necessary to do four cauterizations around the womb, as we have said in the treatment of the bladder, and two cauterizations behind the back; and make the cauteries sharp, as we have said.
of the haunch
When the viscous fluids descend into the joint of the haunch and cause it to become immobile, and the signs are that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and the joint's location can be observed by sight, if necessary you should cauterize the patient over the joint of the haunch with a cautery resembling a circle, and sign in front of the joint around the area, so that the area is within the circle; and the cauterization should be similar to that used for the stomach.
And if this cautery is not present, make four large olive-shaped cauterizations, and the cauterizations should be as deep as all the wounds; and heal it until it is healthy.
of the pain of the haunch When pain comes in the loin of the haunch, and it is due to coldness and moisture; the patient is treated as we have said in the division, but the cure does not work, and the disease is old: then you must purge the patient of gross humors with fetid pills or other good-looking pills.
After performing the cautery; and the method of the cautery is according to two methods: namely with burning medications, or cauterization by fire. Cauterization by fire has many ways, one of which is as follows: you should cauterize on the loin of the haunch four triangular cauteries according to this shape, and make a deep and wide incision between each cautery with the thickness of a finger, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped; sometimes cauterization is made in the middle of the loin over the head of the haunch, so there are four according to this shape:
And if you wish, perform the fire cautery on the circular cauterizer mentioned earlier in the dislocation of the thigh; but do it in such a way that the circle encompasses the entire thigh, and all the flesh around the wound is burned.
And this is how one performs sciatica when the pain is in the thigh and does not reach the thigh or leg. If it reaches the thigh and the leg, do two cauterizations where the patient says that the pain is located, and one cautery below the ankle on the left side a little; let the cauteries be a scalpel-type, and burn the flesh around the wound; if the patient feels that the pain extends to the foot or close to it, cauterize where they feel the pain at four fingers or four cauteries called "fingers."
If necessary, do more; and if the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, perform a cautery with a scalpel-type or circular cauterizer, and be careful in all your cauterizations that you do not burn the nerves and large arteries, and that you do not cause greater harm and contraction to the patient.
And I myself have seen many who made cautery on the ankle bone of the foot, and they left it for so long that the leg swelled completely, and the toes also, and all the toes were pierced and corrupted. After a belly solution from which he died.
And if the pain is in two places together, make cautery in one and the other, as follows. // And the wise will say in the cautery of the shin, as follows: Make one iron rod the same size as a small nail of a finger, or slightly smaller, and it should be between-cheeks or from one between-cheek to the other at a distance equal to a nut of a thumb; and the between-cheeks should be above two parts, and they should resemble nuts, and have one iron handle well made; and this is its form:
Heat it up until it is all red and boiling hot, and then place it on the sick person's shin, turning it towards the healthy side; and cauterize once with one iron rod and leave for four days; then apply a plaster of butter, leaving the wound open for a long time; afterwards cure it with ointment until it is healed.
Albucasim says we should use little of this fire cautery due to fear of its gaze, and few use it; however, this is one of the good cauterizations that can endure it, where it scorches.
Of the pain in the back
When back pain comes from falling, or blows, or excessive bleeding, or similar causes of cold matter spreading, none of these cases are worth using cauterization except for the one that comes from the infusion of cold matter.
It is necessary afterwards that the patient is voided of foul pills or similar things, which are placed on the back where the pain is, three lines signed with ink, and in each line five cauteries or more according to the potency and quantity that the patient can endure; and the cautery should be done according to the cautery called "poins"; and if you see, do four cauteries or four according to the moderately sharp cautery in this manner:
This disease often comes to small children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have narrow anus when they defecate, and fear; and you find it in the lower spine on the back and in its appearance which comes over other spines.
When you see this and you wish to cure it, cauterize it with the cautery of that kind in this manner.
The cautionery must increase in each part of the spine. And if you see, cauterize around the spine with the pointed cautionery 2 or 3 lines, and the tips should be close to each other. Afterwards cure the place until it is healthy according to what we have said, and take care that you do not administer cautionery in a gilbositeit (a condition of swelling or inflammation) which is in the nerve.
For the pain of the joints
When the pain of the joints is due to moisture that spreads to each member of the body, and when pain comes in the feet, which are called "podagre" properly, and when it is caused by cold and medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured with cauteries in this manner: make a large amount of cautionery around the joint of the foot, and let the cautionery be olive-shaped according to this form:
And if it is necessary for you to press on the foot, make a fire cautery all over the cautery mark "point". And if the pains come up to the knee and at other joints, and this happens frequently, make a fire cautery on each knee. Four cauteries or four on each part, an olive oil cautery all over; and if you need more, do more, but do not hold your hand beyond the burned area.
And if the pains descend to the knees and back, administer the cautery as we have said in its chapter. If the pain is in the hands, do the pricking around the fleshy part two lines; and if there remains no pain in the fingers, do pricking on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if pains come up to the wrists or shoulders, cauterize each part, and care for the patient well and consider medicines. For if you provide good care and purge phlegm, it will be healed with God's help.
of the rupture of the siphac
When ruptures come in anger, and the intestines descend into the abdomen and it is newly formed, if you wish to cure it, it should not be touched that day; and it should be treated with things that relax the stomach, so that the intestines descend from the stomach. After doing this, make the patient sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his arm straight until the rupture is repaired, and bend them at your elbows, and press firmly on the site of the rupture above the wrist bone, and at a sign that resembles half a circle above the body; then heat the cautery according to this form:
until it is white and gives off heat signs. Then reposition the intestines to their place; and have the minister place his hand where they do not return; and work well the thighs on the patient, and put one cushion and one belt around the thighs, and another on the affected part that holds the hands; then put the cautery on the sign with your whole hand, and hold it straight and until you reach the bone, and if you do not touch it the first time, try again until you reach the bone; be careful not to let the intestines rise when you apply the cautery; do not burn them; and thus the patient may not die or suffer other harm.
And know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is of no value. It should be noted that the cauteries for children are fine according to their size, and those for adults according to theirs; after three days cure the wound from the cautery with butter until the burn is removed; afterwards cure it with other remedies until it heals, and lie the patient on his back for forty days until the wound is well sutured; and his excrements should be loosened so that the intestines do not rise when he wishes to go to the chamber.
And after forty days, when it wants to get up, bring a well-made bandage and keep it for forty more days; let it have good rest, that it does not work too much or drink too much or eat too much, and does not shout too loudly; and if it follows this instruction, it will be healed entirely. And I will say afterwards the cure of cutting in its chapter. of the wound from the belly
When wounds appear in other bellies and are known, and you see that they do not grow more, make one cautery of the cautery according to its size, and it should be burned the third part of the belly; afterwards cure as we have said; and no one of the ancients has said that it should be cauterized with a cautery at four angles according to this form:
But first, mark the location of the dislocation and make a line above the incision site, and another below, and place your hand on top of the entire cautery tool. However, the first cauteries are lighter and more mobile.
of ancient pain in any limb When pain occurs in any limb, be it from a fall or an injury, and this pain lasts a long time, and medicine does not cure it, therefore it should be cauterized with the cautery called "poins", and the cautery should be according to the length of the member, its smallness and weakness, and its virtue and location of twisting and of its pain. If it heals from the first cautery, that is good; but if not, start another cautery on top of it, as this is the custom, because the caution should move towards the limb that is closer, so you must make the cauteries until the patient is healed.
Of mixing
Mixtures are sometimes treated with cautionery, and similarly the sickness that comes from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy. When you wish to cauterize it, take care if the disease is at the beginning, and if it has been cured according to what we have said in the division, and does not descend nor remain; if you doubt that the corruption will spread throughout the sickness, then perform five cauteries on the head: one on the forehead at the end of the hairline; two on the temples; one behind the ear; and one on the nose, leaving your hand so that the cautery reaches the bone, and so that the scabs come out from it, so that the vapors of the gross humors may escape; and cauterize the eye according to what is before.
And if the mixture is scattered everywhere, it manifests clearly that you must cauterize it with the cauteries that we have said on the head, and one cautery in the neck, and two cauteries on the spine of the neck, and six cauteries on the spine of the back, and one large one on the buttock and one other near it, and two on the hips; and two on the sides, and two on the tendons of the feet, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and beware of the nerves that are above the last ribs, lest you burn them; and sometimes do a cautery on the bone of the fist, and one other on the bone of the stomach, and one other on the liver.
1. And know that the more you perform cautery, the more help it provides and benefits [the patient]; and know that sick people feel no pain during cauterization as healthy people do, because the body is already completely corrupted.
When the body part swells due to moisture, it should be treated with a poultice made from various herbs and applied for several days or nights as needed.
When swelling appears in any body part and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, but it is not healed, then cautery should be performed on the affected member according to its size and smallness. The cauterization should be shallow, about the thickness of a fingernail. After that, heal it with ointments until it is healed. Occasionally, cautery is done on the hand, foot, or back at the location where a nerve is silent, which removes the swelling; however, no one should interfere unless they are knowledgeable about body parts and the movement of nerves in the body.
From the sling (or bandage)
When the illness called "albaras" appears, and medical instruments are of no use, then cauterize it with a small hot iron, according to the thickness of the wound skin, until the blister is removed and its color changes; then treat it with flour and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, as well as the blood of a pig and the blood of an almond, each in turn; mix everything together, tie it up with a cloth, and apply it to the wound until it heals.
The treatment of syphilis by cauterization
When an abscess begins and you want to stop it, if you cauterize with the cautery that seems like a circle around the edge of the abscess. And yet wise men say that cautionery should be done in the middle of the abscess; and yet I do not think this is good, because I fear it will become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have seen it happen once before; and a more appropriate thing is that it should be cauterized around, with the cautery called "circular", as we have said in terms of cauteries.
the inflammation that cannot grow larger
When someone has a disease called "adubelati", which grows slowly due to the excess it produces, or because of the age of the patient when he is decrepit (meaning very old) and has little blood, or for some other reason; if you want to make it grow faster: then cauterize around with many small cauteries by pricking it; afterwards leave it as such. Because it will stop growing.
And if you see it pierced through and through with the fire-cautery, then heat the fire-cautery as described here:
And put your hand in the middle of that illness called "adubelati" until the cautery has pierced through the skin, and let the cautery be such that the patient feels the heat spread throughout his body in such a way that the course of the purgation is clear. Afterward, heal it perfectly when it is completely healed.
treatment with fire by iron
Another method of illness is called "corrodens," and it is nothing but an eating away of a limb, for it consumes the limbs as fire dries up dry wood. If you see this disease in a place that can be treated with cautery along with fire, then heat the cauteries, both small and large, according to the place or location where the illness is; after the cauterization of all parts until all corruption is removed, and nothing remains of it, cut out everything that is corrupt. And leave it for three days, and put on top of the cauterized places soft ointment made with oil until the burns from the fire are healed, and all corruption is removed. After the cure by poultices produces new skin. If after three days you see that healthy skin does not grow, that is good; if not, then repeat the cautery on the remaining corrupt parts. And this eating away is sometimes cured with medicine made of garlic instead of fire-cautery; but nevertheless, fire-cautery is more effective, and I have already discussed the cure for medicine made of garlic in another section: take it when needed.
The hairs which come to the feet
Often a disease called "claw" occurs on the feet according to our understanding, which is a large thing that claws the foot. And the cauterization of this disease is in two ways. That is to say, cauterization by fire and cauterization by hot water. Cauterization by fire is that you heat one cautery like a feather of a quill, made of good iron as much as it can penetrate the nail on all sides, and there should be subtle margins; after that place it all hot on the nail, and turn your hand all around the nail until it comes to the base of the nail; and leave it like this for four days until it begins to emit pus; then make an ointment of foul herbs boiled with oil, and leave the ointment over everything all night, and the nail will shrink and be removed from its roots. Then cure the place with warming liniment until it is healed.
If it is converted on the outside of the body and often occurs in hands and feet, then you should bring hot cauterization; and it is done in this way: take a cane of wax or iron, or a feather of quill, and put it over the nail and apply it to the warts (hairs); and place the cane so that it presses all around, then put a small amount of hot oil on it, and hold your hand well, and press your hand in turning so that the edges of the cane reach the root of the nail, and may find the hot oil penetrating to the root; and allow the patient to bear the bite of the hot oil for an hour; then leave it like this, and it will be removed from all its roots. Repeat this until you have burned all those on the body, then cure them with liniments that warm up.
The Cure for Trembling (literally: "the trembling care")
For some who tremble from coldness of the nerves or from quarter fever or any other illness, you should perform four or five cauterizations on the spine of the back, one between each vertebra; and one at the navel, and one above the stomach with the olive cautery; this will stop the trembling, and the healthiness will hasten away from the cold illness.
Putrid boils (literally: "smelly pustules")
At times, the body shows swellings filled with foul pus that come from corrupted substances. When they appear, it is necessary to perform a cautery on each head of the pustule: a subtle cautery made from a stick of myrtle, so that the tip can be heated by fire, or a long root of arsenic, or the cauterizing cauterizer. And sometimes they are cauterized at their beginning when they appear, following this method, and they cannot grow further, but the superfluous parts from which they come are destroyed, and they become healthy; however, it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
when an artery is cut At times, there are great discharges of blood from the cut artery that comes at an open wound or abscess incision, or to a cauterized limb, and similar things; it is a very serious matter to allow this to flow out.
And furthermore, whenever this happens, hasten to place your finger on the vein wound, and hold it very tightly until the blood is stopped from flowing; then take olive oil cauteries, both small and large, until they are all red; then take one, either large or small depending on the wound and where the artery is located; and place the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, and hold the cautery there until the blood is stopped flowing.
If the vein jumps when you hold your finger on it and the cautery stops, take hastily another one of the cauteries that are in the fire.
And continue to do this one after another until the blood is stopped flowing; and beware not to burn the nerve that is exposed, and no other harm comes upon the patient; and know that when the artery does not stop bleeding, it cannot be well stopped when the artery is large, unless this is done by one of the four ways that we have said: either by cautery, or by extraction if it has not been treated, or by tightly tying a thread, or by medicines placed on it that have the power to stop bleeding; and it should be tied and held in place accordingly.
Whoever applies tight bandages or places hot things on it, or similar things, will not benefit from it unless otherwise.
And if this happens and there is no medicine or remedy present, then put your finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and stretch it tightly over the wound and the vein; do not move it but wet it with cold water often until the wound is very cold, frozen, swollen, and held in place; and follow the instructions for cauteries and medicines that are needed.
We have told you in the first chapter about every disease in which fire cautery or a burning medicine is required, and about their kinds, causes, instruments, forms of cauteries; and I have placed that chapter up to the feet, and I will go into this chapter through the same way because it will be easier for you to find those things that you are looking for.
And so as I begin this, it is necessary, dear child, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of the cauteries, and for this reason it requires greater caution.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I warn you not to be foolish, because many people come for treatment. Some of them are so afflicted by their disease that they die easily from the madness they find due to their illness and the great severity of it; and this should be feared. And there are some who give their sense and say: "Wait, I am cured"; but the illness is deceitful. You should not consent to those who come to you with this manner, but put more trust in your honor than in your desire, and do not act recklessly but wisely regarding those of whom you are certain, and from which you can have experience; and use diagnosis and prognosis in the treatment of your patients to bring salvation; and this will help you acquire good reputation, glory, and memory of praise.
Dearest son, Our Lord grants you good understanding and righteousness, and if you desire to inspire by the holy inspiration of His hand, Amen.
I have organized this chapter in sections, as it is set out according to the chapter of cauteries, which I have previously explained from head to foot because you will find it easier to understand what is necessary.
full head swollen with water
Know that this illness often comes to children at birth, and sometimes it happens for reasons unknown.
And I have never seen this disease except in children, and all that I have seen hasten to death; therefore it seems to me worthwhile to abandon the work in some treatments.
And I saw a child whose neck was filled with water and his head swelled every day until he could no longer bear it; the moisture gathered under the skull bone between the skull and the bone; and since the moisture is between the skull and the bone, and the abscesses are small, you should make an incision large in the head; and let it be as long as two fingers, so that the moisture can pass; and here is the form of a lancet:
If the moisture is deeper and the abscesses are larger, make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
And if the moisture is beneath the bone and you see the joints at the head of each part opening wide when pressed with your hand from within, and it does not respond to you: you must make three incisions in the head of the joint like this:
After the incision remove all moisture from it. Then apply dressings and powders to the incisions and pour wine and oil on them and leave it like that for five days; then dislocate it, and care for the wound by bandaging and ointmenting, and let the joint stretch gradually, and give the patient dry meat of a moist animal until the limb is comfortable and healthy.
And another method of incision is that you observe the size of the abscess and its source, for sometimes it is in front, sometimes behind, sometimes on the right, and sometimes on the left.
Therefore, open where the abscess is located and drain the pus, and do as you are able; and be careful not to cover the artery; and let some blood flow, so that the patient may die a natural death due to bleeding and evacuation of moisture.
Then take remedies made from rue herb.
When any disease called "catarrh" occurs among the eyes or in a worse condition and the medicine does not help at all, then the last remedy is the cautery with which two arteries will be covered.
Therefore, when you wish to cover them, the patient should bend over his head; afterwards, rub the place with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then hold the patient's neck with one handkerchief; then look where the vein bites, and the places of both sides are behind the ears, and they are tied again; then mark the places with ink, then prick both with a sharp spatula of 2 parts until the wound comes up to the bone, and this should be through the wide part of the head.
And if you wish, push the spatula under the artery and strike it from above, cutting as deep as two fingers through it.
And when the vein is pricked, it should jump up without stopping repeatedly moving upward.
And if the artery does not open by itself, then you must measure the space of three fingers, then press and make incision up to the bone; and that which is required for blood to come out is 7 cubic centimeters, and sometimes a little more or less, according to what the patient can endure, and the swelling of the artery; then observe the wound: if it remains above the bone without any pus coming out, then do not apply the hot poultice that you intended, instead hold the wound closed and heal it with ointment until it heals.
from emigration
When old emigration and acute catarrh come, due to moisture in the tears and heat in the temples and ancient dementia and similar things, and it is treated by ways of medicine but none of it helps; if we open the arteries of the temples and cauterize them as we have described.
And the manner of extraction [of what is stuck] is that the patient tilts his head back towards the hairs on his temples, and listens to the artery that opens in the temple, for it opens well with its beating, and can be easily located except in some very cold people; and if it has been located, the patient tightens his neck with some cloth, then rubs the area with a rough fabric, and scratches the area with warm water until the artery becomes manifestly apparent; then take the spatula as shown here:
Then gently score the skin until you see the artery, then pull it up towards the prongs, and carefully separate the threads on each side; and if the artery is delicate, turn it at the tip of the spatula, then press that part according to the size of the two shoulders. For if it is not pressed, it will not open easily in all places.
And draw the blood from the 5 cm to the 4th one; and if the artery is large, it is necessary that you tie it with a thick silk thread, which prevents pus from coming before the wound of the incision, and allows the flow of blood; then cut off the excess between the two threads in that hour itself, and if you see, cauterize it with the cautery knife up to the bone until the shoulders are severed; and this is the mutilating work, if the patient does not have a fever and he is of a hot constitution.
For the cauteries are aid for curing the moisture; because it is of greater help to the moisture. For the extraction of arteries, one should fill the area with old cotton and place well-made tourniquets on it; and when they are loosened, if it is cured with dry medicines that make pus, and with tourniquets, until it heals; and if without a cut of the artery as you work, hurry to cover it with cautery, or use vitriol and squeeze it with your hand so that the blood does not flow out; and if you do not have this, place your finger on the area until it becomes frozen, and moisten the area with cold water and squeeze it as needed; and those that are swollen and heavier in the extraction of the artery should be cauterized with this sharp cautery cutting .5 inches deep, but they should be thick for a longer time to preserve their heat. For when the strumens are too thin, it retains less heat. And it should have between the two cuts, one being large in space; and when you have marked the two places, and you put hot iron on them until it reaches the bone, and pierce the vein in two places; and they should be separated by the two heads because it is not bonded with this cautery throughout; and this is the form of the cautery:
And the tears
When the tears from the eyes are flowing into the veins that are on top of the head of the fire, and it does not help with any medicine that is applied there, and you see the patient writhing in pain, and feel the forehead trembling like a fever; and if they are weak and moist so that the hair of the scalp falls out, and the scalp becomes scorched from the heat of the tears, then this treatment is needed.
And they called the ancient one "contused cure", and it is that you make a cut at the back of the patient who has this disease in the hair he has on his forehead, then you make four cuts equally along the length of the forehead; and one of the cuts as two fingers all the way down the forehead from above to below, and the others two at the sides, through the eyebrows, and be careful not to cut the arteries that are at the sides through the eyebrows; and move your hand away from the continuation of the two jaws, and let each wound be the size of three fingers joined together.
from the incision that is through the temple to the second incision; and scrape all the skull that is between the two cuts down to the scalp, then make another cut from the middle incision to the other second one, and then pull out this pointed instrument.
Push the instrument called "culter-like" into the first incision. It is very sharp from one side, but soft and not sharp from the other, and it has the shape of a: And make the cutting edge face towards the skin, and the soft part facing the bone, and push it until it reaches the middle incision. And cut all the veins that run from the top of the eyes as long as the incision is continuous to where the opening of the skin begins, and then continue in the middle incision to the other side; and then remove equal amounts of blood, expressing the level for the blood taken; then put a tent of old cotton in each incision, and put over it damp linen soaked in wine and oil and ashes, and make sure no pus comes in; on the third day, loosen the ligament, and apply a large amount of fresh onion juice, then treat with ointment of basilicon with rose oil, and other treatments for wounds, until it is healed.
of the eyelids
When anyone comes with an acute catarrh usually, and you see the eyes becoming swollen and small, and the vision blurred, and burned papers; and the hair falls out, and a headache occurs at pain ague, and the patient coughs; then recognize these symptoms that those matters and such catarrh do not come from any other place than many veins, and the medicine to cure it is that.
Then you instruct the patient to lean his back, then make a large cut in the front, and another deep one. (i.e., make an incision from the left temple to the right temple, and it should go up to the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move when eating; and when the bone is exposed, suck out all the blood with a sponge, and then press between the two sides of the cut and put old cotton, and linen strips; then cover it with dampened cloths soaked in wine and oil, and avoid hot abscess; when it is removed, you should rub the bone until char starts to form, then cure it with things that promote the growth of char.
In this way: take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony, and make a poultice; administer it to these wounds to promote the growth of char everywhere.
Of the stoppage of the ears
Anything that falls into the ears is one of the four things: grains, animals, stones or similar items like iron; seeds, beans, peas; or flowing matter such as water and sand and similar substances.
If a stone or other such thing falls into the ear and does not fit snugly in it nor grow inside it, place the affected ear near the sun. If you see the stone, apply some drops of purple oil or camphor oil, then provide extraction; have the patient cough to open the eardrum, and plug the ears with pieces of cloth or wool, and hold them above. Often, pus discharges through this treatment; and if it does not, provide extraction using fine tweezers as follows:
If it jumps out at the hinges, that's good; if not, introduce extraction with a thin hook of double curvature; and if it doesn't jump out by that means, make a wooden pin and push its head into the hole of the ear strongly, stop up that which is around the pin with soft wax so that the air cannot enter with the pin; then pull it out forcefully, for often it comes out in this way as we have said; and if it doesn't come out in this manner, take some glue from it and take the birds, and put any tool sharp for that purpose, and put a piece of cotton around; then press the glue on the stone or something else, and pull it out. If it doesn't jump out due to all the things that we have mentioned, hasten to make an incision in the ear so that pus and spasm come out; and the manner of the incision is such that you first lance the patient's head, drain the blood according to the measure of its power, then seat the patient between your hands and turn the ear upward, and make a small incision in the root of the ear at the fat or tissue dependent on it; and let the incision be like a crescent moon, until you reach the bone, then pull it out as much as possible, and suck the pus quickly to your mouth; and cure it until it is healed. And if it is a grain that swells, administer extraction; and if it cannot come out, administer a thin, slender spatula in this form:
And make an incision in the grain, but do not do this if you think that the grain is moist due to ear moisture, until you have made many cuts; then strain it with fine tweezers and water, as we have said, so that the extraction is clean.
When water falls into the ear, instruct the patient to use ear drops made of warm vinegar and honey first, and to stuff the ear with cotton wool. Let it lie on that ear itself where the water is. If it jumps out due to this, that's good. If not, take several small, light pebbles according to the size of your finger, heat one slightly in the fire; then make the patient hold a stone or a piece of cotton wool in his ear, and press another pebble against it from the other side, and strike another pebble on the stone in the ear; keep doing this with stones hitting stones until all the water jumps out completely, and it should jump out entirely. If you see, take one more stick, and push one of the pebbles into the ear, and heat the other end of the stick until the smallest piece of wood is burning; then repeat this process with other sticks until all the water has jumped out as we have said in the stone.
In the removal of an animal, if it is small like a flea and similar things, cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is large and can be felt, perform extraction with tweezers. This is the easier thing to remove from the ear.
In the extraction of worms from the ears, when you cure it as we have said in the division and the treatment of distillations, and if the cure does not benefit, then you should look at the ear in the sun: if any worms appear, take them with fine tweezers, and if they do not appear, take the string of which this form is given.
And make it narrow within and wide above. And insert the thinnest end into the ear according to the degree of pain of the patient, then pull the string completely; do this often until all the worms come out. If they do not obey to come out, stop the opening with cotton as I have said earlier; if the worms protrude not, administer distillations that the ancients have proven in the removal of worms, and you will find them or treat the distillations; and if you distill your oils and medicines into the ear to this apparatus, as you see in the given form:
And make it narrow within and wide above with a silver or iron frame having one small hole, and over it a cover for the distillation; and to press inside the distillation, use one apparatus of iron well made for this purpose; and if you see that you need a scraper and wrap cotton around the tip, then put your oil or juice and any medicines in the string, which should be in the ear; then insert the scraper with all the cotton into the ear, and press your hand gently until the oil is distilled or the ear becomes warm; let the patient smell it within, and make sure the distillation is heated to about the same temperature as when it is distilled in the ear; and be careful that it is not too cold, for the medicines will not be effective.
Of the stoppage of ears
No child is born without some deafness in the ears; and this same thing happens to men through stoppage of wounds or pus inside the ear, and this stoppage sometimes comes completely into the ear if it cannot be seen; and sometimes there is a little hole showing the deafness, which can easily be seen.
Therefore, if the stoppage comes completely into the ear and cannot be seen, it is difficult to cure in many cases. In such case, you must put the sick person's ear in the sun and look inside. If you see a visible obstruction, you should open it with the spatula as shown here:
And let it be sharp and piercing in front and behind entirely, so that it does not prick the ear; if the inflammation is of flesh or bone of the ear, then hold it with subtle tweezers and strike gently until all the flesh is removed.
If the inflammation is within the ear, then take a subtle and gentle razor and heat it slightly in the fire, then place it against the side of the ear. If you feel the inflammation causing pain in the ear, pierce it gently, ensuring not to injure the nerves of the ear; then put in the ear a lining according to the size of the wound, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.
Do this every day until the wound is healed, or take a lining and moisten it in rosewater and powdered vitriol; if you see the ear swollen, then you must pull out the lining and insert another moistened linen made of rose oil and beeswax until the swelling is removed; then heal it until it is healed.
And when bleeding occurs, immerse a sponge and linen in cold water, place it on the ear, and use other treatments to stop the bleeding which are either distilling methods.
of the charcoal from paper
This is the method by which hairs that are damp and dry come from paper. It is necessary to stretch them with pliers and tweezers, and then rub their roots with a copper spatula. Then place it on broken glass.
And if the hair cannot be removed by pulling, cauterize it with subtle lenticular cautery, and after incision is useful. Many times they repair, but nothing remains of their roots; and when the hairs are cauterized by fire, the roots burn and do not return.
Of the shingles
Often in paper there come out things that resemble shingles both in form and hardness, and for this reason the disease is called "hail," and it is a collection of large moisture on the upper and lower sides of the paper; the treatment is as follows: wait until the hail becomes silent from all sides, which is an easy matter to know; then make an incision around it, then gently scrape each part, then take tweezers and remove it. If you cannot cover it without puncturing the paper slightly, do not worry the patient; and if the wound is large, join it with a suture and cure it until it heals; but if it is small, do not use force, for the ointments restore it soon and irritate the skin.
And if the hail is descending inside the ear towards the upper part, turn over the paper, take tweezers and remove it, pressing from both sides; and if the paper is displaced by the incision, do not worry about it; and when the hail is removed, apply salty oil to the affected area and treat the wound with ointment until the patient recovers.
of the fat of the eyes
This is grease that is infused in cloths of paper above, and this often happens with children rather than adults, and it causes great discomfort to their eyes, and they come down with catarrh at mornings, and cannot endure the light of the sun because tears rush to their eyes; and because of this they lie on their faces immediately, and sleep thereon, and their cloths are wet beneath their eyelids moistening the inflammation and the appearance that have been covered with the grease which opens in oil. And when you press the eye between your fingers and feel the grease between them.
And the method of this procedure is that the patient places his head on your healthy one; then take one linen cloth and arrange a tent-like circle according to the quantity of grease from each part, then place it thereon; and press with your fingers on both sides so that the grease is gathered in the circle; then make a cut in the middle of the moisture using a sharp spatula making an incision no larger than the wound one makes in the vein opening; and cut through the skin until you see the grease; and in many cases, the grease comes out from the incision, according to the form of a white piece of fat.
1. Place a piece of thin, woven cloth between your fingers and turn your hand back and forth until it is spread out; make sure you do not stray in the incision, only to reach up to the marrow, and do not pierce it.
If the incision does not open at the beginning of the cut, slightly open it to make it appear; then spread it as we have said, soak cloths in water and oil, place them on the area, and hold bandages.
If there are such men who bite the oil and place it over to remove that moisture which is stuck. Then heal it until it is healed. And if an abscess hotly arises at the place, treat it with plasters soothing it until it is healed.
The hairs of the paper [or possibly: the hair on the paper]
When the hairs grow on paper contrary to nature, and are nurtured, they cause harm to the eyes, and bring about types of diseases such as tears commonly associated with paper, softening of the paper and albugine, to the point of causing damage to the eyes; and there are four methods of treatment: either by cauterization using fire, or through medication ague according to what is described in the previous chapter on cauterization, and it is done either by incision and stitching, or by canes, as I will explain.
You should place the head of the patient in your lap, then turn the paper with oil on your left hand; if it is converted (meaning if it curls around the oil), that is good; if not, you should poke an awl at each end of the paper where the hairs are growing out of the hairs; and remove one filament above the entire length of the paper, then shave the area beneath the paper where the hairs grow, entirely through the spatumile (possibly a kind of blunt knife or scalpel), from the large tear down to the small one; then pull out one filament, and place a small tent made of cotton and wool under the paper, then sew a figure of an incense thong (or possibly myrtle) on top of the paper, ensuring that the figure is proportionate to the amount of paper you wish to raise.
And if there is a need to apply a large amount of papyrus as it has been softened; then spread the entire plaster on two lines that you have marked, starting from the large blister until the small one; and let one of the incisions be near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then push the cone into one of the two angles of the wound, then peel off all the skin; then bring the two edges together with a stitch of a needle and fine wool thread, squeeze out the blood, and make the excess threads adhere to the two scissors with any sticky substance, if you want to do this; and if not, have no cure for it, then leave the stitches and threads for two to four days; then treat the wound without stitching with dry and constricting things, as the papyrus revives at the wound's edge and holds it together, but the stitches are rotten (as the ancients say), and this is labor without fear.
and in another way: and it is that you sign the papyrus with a figure like the thorn bush of myrtle, as we have counted, at four incisions opened according to the form shown here:
then apply this equally over the small wounds according to the shape shown here:
And if you cannot hold the pliers, and the object is not even, take a needle with one thread, and insert it through the figure; take another thread from the large notch, and the second thread from the small, and assemble the threads equally between your fingers; then lift your hand equally, and lift the skin as you have described, then sew together the two lips of the wound by stitching, and treat it until it is healed; and if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with cerote and similar ointments.
Sometimes the hair of paper is converted: it is necessary to use what we have described for incision; but sewing in one and the other is more artificial.
The cure of dogs is as follows: and it is that you convert the paper and fold it according to what I said, and then make two cords by hand, and two thin threads equally long as the paper and the thickness of the spatula; take the two corners of the four pieces where the threads are; then assemble the one and the other subtly above the paper with oil, and bind the two cords from the four parts; leave it in this manner for several days, and the skin that is bound will die, rot and peel off, until it falls away.
If it takes a long time, if you must apply force, then heal it until it is healed; and when the wound will be sutured, and the paper lifted, and the hairs will not grow anymore; and this is the shape of two dogs that you will make according to this figure, and according to this length and width:
The work (task) is such that you take a fine needle, and insert one thread of silk and fine; then assemble the dogs' heads closely and skillfully, and let the length of the threads be one palm long; then arrange another thin thread of silk briefly, and join the heads of the threads; then place the patient's head in your healthy state; expose it to the sun so that the work is visible, because this is a subtle and small work, then pierce the needle through the entire chase (hair) at the root of the hair adjacent, and let it penetrate quickly through the paper over the natural hair; then pull out the hair up to the chase, and place the hair in the chase, if there is one or two or three or more; then pull your hand so that the hairs come out from all the chase together with the natural hair.
And if the chase is treated and the hairs do not come out with it, you will draw the chase down to the thread that you have arranged, until the chase comes out of the skin and can be seen by the oil's vision; then you will draw the chase and the thread, and let the oil and the patient rest for two or three days, until the hair roots and new flesh grows; and if the hairs are small, you should accompany one long natural hair with it, and let it grow along with that, until it is extended and then shave it.
From the corruption of oil
When this illness, called "alecrati" or corruption comes in the oil, there are two ways it occurs: one natural and one unnatural. It happens suddenly due to a wound, an incision, or a cautery, and similar things.
And the method of work in this case is to split that joint, separate its lips, and put linen tents inside it, and leave it until it heals; and you should not use anything in the treatment of it that dries and tightens. For if you do this, the illness returns worse than before; but you should work with things that soften, such as fenugreek; and the roasted linseed oil or linen seeds boiled and ground into any oil, and a linen tent should be wrapped around it, and treated with these.
And the treasures of your cure are that you must take care so that it does not heal closed again in its former shape; and this work that we have said is only remedy for this disease, so that it does not return in its former shape.
the pus that comes in the oil
This disease called "axacrati", which is both natural and accidental. The accidents come from wounds and fissures and cauteries and similar things; and the way of the work in it is that you take an awl, where it has one double thread, and pierce it into the pus, and make it go from left to right eye, so that the threads come out at two cheeks of the pus; then put the charcoal on top of the awl, and apply a spatula wide.
And if the figure of the paper returns as it should, that is good; if not, take a rasp and place it in the slit, turn the paper, and make two slits where the costal cartilage lies within the paper; and let the corners of the two slits be at the angles of the incision you made, and let them form an angle such that when they are assembled, the figure will be like the figure of a letter with the name "Y Greek"; then remove that cartilage, according to its thickness where it underlies the paper, then join the two separated parts using a linen thread; then treat as we have said for the medicines softening and soothing, until it heals.
If the illness comes from a slit or stitch or cautery, it is necessary that you make a deep incision under the hairs of the paper, as previously mentioned; then separate between the two leaves of a linen cloth, as I said; and the work should be done according to the shape of the illness, for it is very diverse in shape, and the wise masters prepare tools with all possible skill to bring the figure back to its natural form; and the patients themselves, according to what is necessary for the work and the use of various instruments in various positions.
quickly from the paper
When this suture occurs in the hands of men in such a manner that the paper above is glued with white oil, and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then you must insert the point of a razor beneath the paper, and lift it up; hold it with pincers until you remove the substance that adheres to the spatula, which should not be too sharp nor too rough, so as not to cause pain to the patient due to a too sharp spatula injuring the oil; make your incision, from which you will scrape the assembled matter, lightly, so that the paper returns to its natural form; and heal the entire assembled matter, and sometimes in the sharp oil it becomes infected, and you lift up the sharp soft liquid and collyrium; then put between the paper and the oil a tent of linen, and put over the oil dampened wool in abundance from an egg; and after the third day use collyrium and other healing substances until it is healed.
the tip of the spatula
Note that the nail has two forms: it is nerve-like and resembles a hard spike, and another which is not nerve-like but resembles white solidified moisture when touched with iron and cooked in pincers, and neither begin near the great eyelid, but gradually grow to cover the entire eye and light and movement of the oil.
And the method of incision is that the patient places their head in your hand, then you pull out the hairs; next take paper with your hand, then bend the nail into tweezers of small double curvature and hold it above; then take a needle, put a horse hair or cow or ox hair and a strong thread on it, bend the tip of the needle slightly and pierce the nail, and pass the needle through completely, tie the nail with the thread and hold it above, remove all the hair from the side of the nail where there is skin and silk at the root to the head, then crush the remaining part in the root of the armpit with all subtle spatumile and small forces, leaving the natural flesh or armpit so that blood does not come out of the armpit as usual; and sometimes the nail is only placed on the incision and at the thread, as we have said; then remove all the spatumile from the place as described here:
And ensure that the spatumile does not touch the flesh and tear it, and that the vein is not pierced; then after the incision pour oil a little bit of broken fat and make a poultice from litharge, and leave it until the next day; then treat it as needed until it heals.
And if the nail is not nerveous and you cannot push the needle through it, and the uncines cannot enter it, this condition of the nail is often treated with medicine; and as I have mentioned in the division, when you see it covered, then open the oil of the patient and take a little sharp spatumile according to this shape:
And gently scrape the nail above, and if you see that it does not diminish at all and the reason persists, then distill from your mouth into the collyrium oil made of litharge and red collyrium powder, and instill the oil until the next day; then perform the same work again according to this same procedure, until it is completely healed.
If nothing opposes you in the oil, as with an abscess, then let it lactate, and first treat the abscess hot until it is healed, then perform the same work as before, until it is healed.
And if the appearance of the flesh of the wound harms the oil greatly, suspend it in onion juice and cut a small portion of it, so that tears do not come out; then distill red collyrium oil made of litharge.
Of the flesh which grows upon the eyeball
There are times when a red flesh grows over the eyeball of some men, covering it and turning it towards the outside and resembling a rosebud from a balustrade; and the operation is such that the patient places his head on the couch, then opens the eyes, and all that skin surrounding it should be cut with scissors accordingly, and it must be kept tight; then cut the first layer of skin, and continue cutting to the end with the razor, and be careful not to wound the oil gland at the operation; and let the incision be made with a spatula as described in the operation of the nail and with small forces like those used to remove the septum, according to the form shown after this chapter.
And when the incision is completed and all the skin is removed, use oil of egg white or you crush it where you distill red colloid and resemble corrosive medicines, and place on top the oil facing outward cotton with chicken egg yolk, so that it is assured that the abscess remains hot; and if something remains there, and the wound becomes covered, and you doubt that the abscess remains hot, leave the oil and treat the abscess with cooling remedies for hot abscesses; then return to your operation until it heals, and do this for each skin layer that is treated with oil in this manner.
But in every case it is necessary that you ease the treatment of each weak part along the natural way; and regarding the accidental way, in the work of iron; and do not strike your hand into any of these works until you see that this member can endure that work.
of the eyes
These are red eyes covered by oil and take their work in sight and weaken the eye all day. Therefore, it is necessary first to check if the oil, where the sebel is, is outside and has no other disease but the sebel; then proceed as follows: Instruct the patient to put his head on your healthy side, then hold these eyes still for a long time according to your wisdom, and make the compresses subtle and double according to this shape:
And the organs should be two times in one body according to this form:
Then these veins should be gently squeezed subtly, and the blood sucked out hour by hour until you see the veins swell outside of the oil; and ensure that you do not prick the oil with the points of the spathulas, and perform this task at midday before the sun, and be very warm during your work so as not to overheat the veins; and when you have done this, if it distills green and red oil colicers to correct those that remain clogged.
And if you cannot collect everything in that hour, make a plaster on the oil of soothing things for the pain of the eyes, and leave it for some days until the pain is alleviated and the abscess is sure to heal, then continue as before in this manner until it is healthy; and this is the form of treatment:
of the fistula of the oil
The mirroring fistula is called "arissati": when you cure it with cautery and burning medicine as I have previously said, and it is not healed, there is a trick in it that you open above the abscess, where it should die, and drain all the moisture that is there, until the bone is exposed.
And when the bone is exposed, and you see the corruption and blackness, you should cover it with all the instruments mentioned here; it is called "rough head," and should be made of iron as shown in the following figure:
And place it on the bone that is corrupt, then turn it between your hands, and press your hand slightly until you know that the corruption is restored; do this once, then restore the bone with medicinal force.
If the joint is sutured, and pus forms there, and the body of the bone is sutured, and remains like that for 40 days, and it does not swell or abscess, and no bad accident occurs, know that it is healthy; if this is not the case, then there is no other remedy but to return the fistula to the hollow of the thigh according to this form: and it is that you uncover the bone a second time with iron, and with medicinal hot things, and when it is uncovered, take one awl according to this form, and let the head of the awl be at four angles, and the shaft be tapered until the tip as you see here:
then place it on the bone near the socket, and move your hand away from the oil by about one finger's breadth, then turn the awl all the way until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it if they hold their hand over their thigh; and then restore the joint with dry medicine as I have shown you, and when pus forms and hardens the joint, the matter goes to the thigh; it is an easier thing for the patient.
From the flow of oil
When the eyes are wide open throughout the entire body and there is no disturbance in the ship, nor any diminishment, you must restrain the patient; then clean it, apply poultices or hot irons to help heal, then put oil on .i. link made of cedarwood and aloe and incense and saffron, and then hold the oil tight, and bandage it with cloths and linen; and the manner of the linens is that you take soft linens, fold each one in four, and then place one on top of another according to the quantity that the eyes require; then hold them together with a strong bandage, and renew the poultices to help heal without cutting; then remove the poultices and leave the oil tight for day and night, and if the link dissolves, you must tighten it strongly; then remove the link after the day and night, and if you see the oil healing, that is good; if not, repeat the bandage, the linens, the link and the poultices until it heals.
From the rupture of a rotten cloth
When disruptions come in the watery eye and open, and they bring forth paper-like matter, as small as a grain of resin, and it is frightening to see; then, if you cover it, the remedy is such that you insert an awl into the root of the part underneath until the one above, then insert another awl with double thread from the corner of the wound; and make it perforate, leave the first awl according to its position; then hold the eye of the double-threaded filament and wrap a part of the eye around it, and tighten it well, then remove the awl and put soft wool soaked in oil on top of it; and leave it until the filaments grow with the eye, then cure the oil with comforting substances until the wound is healed; and sometimes the wound is held closed by the eye on each side of a circle of cloth, until it is healed.
And if the eyes become large in appearance, pierce them with a fine spatula that comes from oil, and correct the moisture albujine, and then remove it; then leave it until it is healed.
of the oil bowl
This disease called "alcunnati" is not far from being an abscess assembled in the eye, resembling an acute swelling, but it is not an acute one; and the appearance of its operation is such that you make the patient sit on a chair prepared and upright. Then take the head with both hands, move it as much as you see the abscess coming to your eyes; then pierce it, and do not drain and uncover the light, and let the patient observe the things as he used to; and if it does not drain, know that it is an acute one, and if the draining of the abscess is not prepared as we have said. Seat the patient between your hands, then take the subtle spatumile and poke through the corneal cloth .1 inch along the continuation of the conjunctive with the cornea and the corona, until the abscess issues; and when it has issued, distill in the hot, thick oil mixed with honey, or acute or fenugreek boiled with honey, then cure it with another treatment until it is healed.
the acute oils
We have the appearance of acute oils in their division, and what is necessary for piercing; if you operate according to health. You should place the patient between your hands, away from light due to the sun, and press the healthy oil and tighten it very firmly; then take a piece of paper of the oil with your left hand if the hairs are on the left side, or with your right hand if the hairs are on the right side; then take in your right hand (left hand) the instrument called "almagda", or in your left hand (right hand), if the hairs are on the other side; then put the point of the instrument through the cornea at a distance of one finger's width, along the lower blenchore of the oil, to the minor eyelid part; then push the "almagda" instrument firmly, and press your hand as much as it pierces in the blenchore of the oil, and feel that the "almagda" comes to the void place; and the measure of the way "almagda" should be at the full length of the space from the eyelid to the end of the black line; and this is the cornea of the oil; you will see the bone in the paper due to the clarity of the corneal cloth, and then put the instrument as far as the place where the acute is, then press it down a little more. If the acute drains now, let the patient observe in front of him and the instrument in his oil.
After a short rest, if the second vein rises again, place the force with the instrument, and when it is pierced and does not rise further, press it gently around your hand little by little; then put in a little bit of gemmed oil on top, and let it drain out from within. Then put oil soaked linen or cloth in rose oil and egg abundantly, and seal with the oil. In our time, and those of our era, we put common powder with an abundance of egg on top.
And if the oil cannot enter due to its hardness, as there are some people who have excessively hard hairs; in such cases, you must take the instrument called "alberit", which is shaped like this:
Then pierce only the conjunctiva without going too deep, but make a shallow incision first, then insert oil, as we have said; and when the task is completed, arrange for the patient to sleep on his back in a dark room for seven leagues; be careful of all movements, take light foods, and do not move his head either to the right or left, and bind him according to his position until the third day; then unbind him in the same dark room, examine his sight, show him some things, and then rebind him for a week; it is not advisable to do this during the treatment time or after the incision is made, but rather to alleviate it because the oil rises quickly.
If an abscess swells up, you should lance the oil before the seventh day, and direct the one who soothes an abscess; and when it is soothed, you should close the eye and place a linen cloth over it for a day or two, and remain in that dark house. Then leave the house little by little, and convert to your rooms; and know that no disciple should interfere in this case.
And one came to us who was from the Yrach, who told us that in his country everyone was subjected to almagda piercing, so that the water comes out, but I never saw anyone in our land, nor did I read it in any ancient books; and perhaps it is a new thing.
And here are the resemblances of the forms of almagda, because those who do not know them will see them; and they are from arain properly:
And the head of oxen of this same subtlety, and the rear end in four corners should be sharp.
of the cartilage on the nose
Sometimes nasal cartilages are born or grow in various ways, causing some to resemble scorpions with many legs; and there may be some whose cartilage is swollen in dark color, and others of good bone color. Therefore, for those cartilages that are swollen but not inflamed, you must have the patient sit between your hands facing the sun; open his nostrils, and pour warm water onto these cartilages, then pull them out; afterwards, grasp what you can hold with a fine sharp spatula on one side until you know that the cartilage is completely removed.
And if there remains any thing uncovered that cannot be covered, open it all with sharp and thin instruments, so nothing remains; and if the abscess is not closed, apply the remedy as necessary; and if the abscesses are malignant, hasten and cauterize until the pus is drained and all the charred matter is removed, then cover or dress it with oil or vinegar.
If there is no discharge of pus and moisture reaches the palace (the head), it indicates that it is healthy; but if moisture does not perforate as necessary, it means that charred matter has formed in the bone above, so instruments do not work to cut: then you should insert a large flax thread into the nostril up to the power of your hand, and pull it out smelling the pus coming from inside the nose; and have children at school perform this many times, and it is an easy thing for him who wishes to do it; then hold one head with one hand that comes through the nostril, and the other head that comes through the mouth with the other hand, and know which one follows the other by us who are present near the flax thread. Perform this until you know that the flax thread has rotted the charred matter; then remove the flax thread, drain the blood, wet the flax in Egyptian ointment, and replace it back to the nostril as before; perform this for 4 days or more, until the ointment corrodes everything that is remaining of the charred matter; and then apply a linen cloth to the nose for several days until it is healthy, and if there is need for drying medicines, use them; and this is the form of the instrument for purging the head, as it is said when distilling oils and medicines through the nostrils.
And it should be of silver or brass, resembling a covered lamp, as a pipe, and lead it thus; and if you see, make a closed pipe, and the instruments full for purging the head; and have one handle on the head to hold when heating the oil or any liquid.
About the skin over the nose
Many times a disease called "telul" appears on the forehead of the nose and grows larger and larger until it is visible to see; therefore, you must cut it at the beginning and completely excise it, then put the cautery or burning medicine over it; and if you delay covering it until it becomes large, take care if it is hard, dark in color, with poor sensitivity: do not touch it with iron because it is an enlarged abscess, for when it is touched even once, it causes great harm to the patient; and if the abscess is soft touching, not hard in color, and you can cover it completely, have the patient empty their bowels and cautiously cut it, then cure the area with drying and constricting substances.
When the nose is cut and sewn
Know that when a dislocation of continuation comes in one of these cartilages, it is not much use except in some men. Therefore, if such an event occurs in any, you should examine whether the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then sew together the two lips (of the joint) with stitches, then heal it until it heals completely; and if the lips have already been disconnected from one side and the other, you must cut all the areas where they are torn apart as much as they smell, then reconnect the two lips with stitches and tighten them, and sprinkle powder of dragon's blood powder on top, and incense pulverized; and place a piece of plaster of strong or another plaster that adheres on top of the powders, and let it remain until it solidifies by itself, then heal it with ointment until it heals completely.
The method of sewing is that you assemble the dislocation: either by needles, as we have said in the abdomen stitching; or by thread, as I told you earlier.
of the lips (of a wound)
In the hands of men, an abscess hard within the lips occurs, resembling grains of various sizes; then you must turn the lips and make a cut above each one, take it with the forceps and crush it in every part; afterwards use vitriol powder on the wound until the pus is drained; and then apply alum to heal the wound with dry things until it is healthy.
from the jawbone
Often a swelling arises on the jawbone, which the ancients called "albulus"; you must hold it with the forceps and crush its root, allowing the blood to flow out; then apply vitriol powder or other drying powders to the wound; if the swelling returns after the incision and this happens repeatedly, you must crush it again and cauterize it; but it does not return after cauterization. These are the shapes of instruments for covering.
Of sores
Sometimes there are sores gathered at the root of the teeth, within the mouth between the gums, rough and harsh scabs that are ugly; and sometimes the teeth turn black and greenish, as corruption comes to the gum, and the teeth stink; it is necessary that you make the patient sit with your hands, and his head in your lap, and clean the teeth or scabs exposed, until nothing remains; and do this for blackness and greenness, and for yellowish and other spots, until they are cleaned; and if you remove what is there at the first instance, that is good; if not, start again on the second day and the third, as long as you have everything cleaned; and know that the teeth need different types of instruments to clean them, according to what the work shows, because the one who cleans the teeth has different shapes than the one who cleans between the teeth; and these forms and others should be with you prepared.
When you cure the tooth of its pain, it is necessary that you draw slowly as much as possible, for this must not be done quickly; because it is a very high substance up to where there is no excuse to shave. Therefore, when the patient is constrained to draw a tooth, it is necessary that you are certain of the diseased tooth. Many times, despite the pain the patient feels, they may believe it is a healthy tooth and pull out the good one; however, the pain does not disappear until the diseased tooth has been removed, as we have observed with many saints; and when you are certain of the diseased tooth, you should incise around the tooth all the way. Use a strong spatula to protect the gum from all sides; then move it with your fingers or subtle pliers at the very base and base of the tooth, until it is well loosened; then firmly hold the pliers; and keep the patient's head in your saint between your knees, so that it does not move.
After the tooth is drawn out correctly and it does not come out easily, take any of these instruments and push gently from each side, and move it as you did before. If the root is pierced and eaten away, you must fill it with bandages where the holes are; then hold it subtly with pliers so that it does not break while being pulled; and it must be done very carefully around the gum to remove the tooth.
And be aware that you do not break it, and leave a part behind, and return the tooth to the patient due to the malice of the root causing greater pain than before. Be careful that you do not do as the ignorant saints sometimes do, who with their haste and recklessness break the chariot (the tooth), and do not bring what we have mentioned; but they sometimes cause great disease through the roots that remain or because of the broken chariot, as we have often seen; and when the tooth is drawn, wash the area with wine or oil and soap; and if bleeding comes out, apply vitriol powder; if this does not work, cauterize it.
The forms of the instruments, which mute the teeth first, should be long pointed and have thick handles, not bending when you pull the tooth; and these are the forms:
And have large handles so they do not bend when pulling, made of good iron, and toothed for holding on.
of the root of the teeth When the root remains at the opening, you must place cotton wool moistened in butter on it for 1 to 2 days until the wound is softened, then insert the forceps called "algefri", making the head seem like a beak; and within them make it as smooth as a file, this is its shape:
If the roots do not come out with all these forceps, you must uncover the flesh all around the root, and put in the instrument called "althali", namely tweezers, of which this is its shape:
And let it be large and thick so that it does not break, and if the root jumps out with these, that's good; if not, help yourself with all the instruments, of which the forms come hereafter:
And if one helps himself with this instrument which has two prongs, this is its shape:
And other iron instruments that are in front for the reasons of teeth, and of this instrument which resembles large pliers, here is its shape:
And let this instrument be strong so that it cannot break, and know that many instruments of teeth are; and similarly, other instruments, which are not counted here; and the wise masters discover their own instrument by themselves, according to what their work and the disease indicate, for there are such diseases where the ancients did not teach an instrument due to diversity among them, and if it breaks the cart or any other bone, or it could be used, then search for the instruments that are needed, which I have told you, and help with movements, here is its shape: And let them be large and strong to hold the bone, so it does not slip, but can be held and removed; then restore the joint with medicines suitable for this, and if there is purulence in the bone, and it is small, use this instrument entirely:
When teeth appear not according to natural form, and the shape is ugly, especially in virgin women, if you know that the teeth are not aligned after the tooth, and it is not in the correct position, and cannot be straightened or filed: then use a rasp; and if there is an abscess with the tooth, take this instrument whose form is like a small beak, and sharp at the end:
The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
And it is similarly like the file from which one makes the needles; and in the file, the tooth little by little gnaws at hand for many light hours, so that it does not move until it chisels through; then the flat part at the end must be smoothed with any sharpener, and if the tip is too sharp and it bites the tongue, it is necessary to file down the sharpness so that it does not bite the tongue or corrupt the speech.
when the teeth loosen
When the teeth loosen, whether from impact or falling out, and the patient cannot press down on that which they eat without spitting, and you have tried to cure them with constricting medicines, but it is of no use; then you must restrain them with a gold wire, for silver wires become green and rot, but gold does not change; and the wire should be medium-sized, neither too thick nor too thin, according to the space between the teeth; and if you see that the teeth are moving, take the wire and tie it double between the healthy teeth, then place the diseased teeth in between them, if there is one or more, as long as you can do so skillfully up to the healthy tooth on the other side; then start covering again until you reach the part where you started, and hold your hand skillfully and firmly, so that it does not move; and hold your position at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape. Then grip the diseased teeth with the wire in pliers, assemble them, and reposition them, placing them in such a way that they do not bite the tongue; and then leave them as tight as they can stay, and if they loosen or the wires break, you must restrain it with another wire; if it remains and serves for some time, it is the form of the tooth and the figure of the arrangement of the two healthy teeth, and the two diseased teeth, as you see:
And when a tooth falls out, if you replace it in its place, freshly, as we have said; and do not interfere unless the person is wise and patient. Sometimes one makes the shape of an ox's tooth, and replaces it where it lacks, and holds it in place as we have said, and let it stay for a long time.
To cover the ligament of the tongue
Sometimes the ligament under the tongue comes from nature itself or due to accidental injury; and the treatments are as follows: open the mouth of the patient, hold their head steady, lift the tongue, then cover the nervous ligament with a wide piece of material, until the tongue is dislocated from its place, and if it feels hard or not, and this is due to sudden injury, insert an ointment and cover it widely; ensure that the cut is not too deep, as there is an artery beneath it. After you have done this, raise the tongue with rose water or warm water, then put a linen tent over it; let the patient bite it every night so the wound can heal. If discharge of blood occurs, apply vitriol powder; and if the wound does not heal, cauterize it with slow-burning cautery which is good for this purpose, then treat it with another treatment until it heals.
And if you see a swelling of various colors, whether black or hard, such that the patient does not feel it, do not touch it, for it is a boil; and if it is descending towards whiteness and there is moisture, throw the onion on it, and let a thin spatula be placed beneath it and release it from both sides; and if it resists your work, put vitriol powder on it until it is burned, then return to your work as long as you draw out all the pus; then remove the pus and serum, and cure it with other cures until it heals.
swellings of the throat
Sometimes there come within the throat swellings called "godath," and they are properly called the two almonds. When you treat them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, be careful: if it is a hard abscess of small size and light color, do not touch it with iron. If it is red and the root is thick, do not touch it with iron, for the reason of bleeding; but leave it until it becomes soft, and then you will cut it open or it will burst by itself; if it is white in color and the root is thin, prepare the instrument to cover it, but first make sure that the abscess is calm and quiet. Then have the patient sit before the sun, and his head should be on your hand, and open his mouth and take the sergeant between his hands, and press the tongue down onto the entire instrument, as shown here; it is made of silver or thin brass, like a knife:
Can you press the tongue with this instrument, and you see the abscess, then take the onion and thrust it into the abscess, and pull it upwards as far as you can; and pull out any foreign matter from there, afterwards strike with the instrument, in which form it appears similar to a hammer; and yet the head is bent, and one part is against another, and they are very sharp, and made of iron or bronze:
And if you don't have this instrument, strike it with the pliers, in which form it appears similar to:
And if you do not have the instrument, strike one of the abscesses, and then strike the other in the same manner; after making an incision, gargarize the patient with hot, sharp, and mild water, and when bleeding occurs, gargarize the patient with hot, or scorched pomegranate seeds, or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the blood is stopped; then let it heal until it is healed; and sometimes other abscesses than the two appear in the throat, if they do, strike them accordingly as the two equal.
I will treat a woman with an abscess that was inside her throat, to be precise, a small abscess; and it had grown very close all over the throat, so the woman could not exhale due to the blocked passage, and she could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if it lasted for a day or two. The abscess had swollen so much that it had filled about two pouches through the two openings of the throat. Then I immediately lanced it once, then pulled out a large piece of pus; afterwards I opened another hole in the other opening of the throat, and I opened her mouth and pressed her tongue; after that, I lanced the abscess again, took a part of it, and only a little blood came out; thus the passage from the throat was unblocked for the woman, and she began to drink water and then wine, and did not stop cutting away at that abscess for a long time; the abscess grew again and filled the space I had created, until it became very large; then I trapped it and cauterized it inside her throat: thus the growth of the abscess was stopped; and I left those parts, and nothing more happened to them except that God did something with them afterwards.
I will treat a woman with an eye problem that was inside her eyeball, in other words, an inflammation of the eyelid; and it had grown very close all over the eyelid, so the woman could not open her eyes due to the swelling, and she could neither see nor blink, and would have gone blind if it lasted for a day or two. The inflammation had swollen so much that it had filled about two pouches inside the eyeball. Then I immediately lanced it once, then pulled out a large piece of pus; afterwards I opened another hole in the other side of the eyelid, and I held her eyelids open and pressed them against each other; after that, I lanced the inflammation again, took a part of it, and only a little blood came out; thus the growth of the inflammation was stopped for the woman, and she began to see again. The inflammation grew again and filled the space I had created, until it became very large; then I trapped it and cauterized it inside her eyeball: thus the growth of the inflammation was stopped; and I left those parts, and nothing more happened to them except that God did something with them afterwards.
When the eye swelling is long and narrow, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is thick and round, it is called "eye". When it is treated as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not work, and you see that the large abscesses are subsiding, and it becomes subtle, you must cut it; and the one that is rounded and not long; and it is red or purple or black, you must make an incision of it. For there is great danger with the patient. Therefore, when you see it, according to the way I have said, in terms of its thickness and length, you should make the patient sit facing the sun, and press his tongue against the instrument we have mentioned earlier; then lance the abscess in the eye, pull it out, and cut it at one or two of the intervals that I have said in the incision of the almonds. And you must not cut more than the superfluidity that is beyond the natural limit; for if you do, it causes pain to the voice and speech; and after the lancing, use what we have said in the incision of the almonds, and let it heal until it is healed. And if the patient fears the cutting, you must use an instrument for cauterization to ease his fear. The method of cauterization is hot and sharp. It is that the patient puts his head in your lap, and then you press his tongue against the instrument we have mentioned in the chapter on cautery, and hold it with a hot, sharp object, so that it is not too thick or too clear; and use the handle of this instrument, as shown here:
And if the head of a hair or medication is put on a head, as the comb of a spoon, and the instrument is placed entirely over the medicine above the eye; and the patient lies on his side, so that saliva and mucus flow from his mouth into the medicine, but not down the throat, and the blood; then hold your hand over the entire medicine and press it onto the eye for about half an hour until you see it swell and the bites of the medicine are appeased; and if you see, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, moisten the cotton in the medicine, and place the instrument all over the cotton in the canal above, until the cotton sticks to the eye; and do this repeatedly, until the cautery is complete, then let it dry, and lie for four or five days. And if you have to start the cautery again with the medicine, renew it, and after the cautery, wash around the eye with cotton wrapped in butter, clean what is around the medicine; and irrigate with cold water, and heal with gargarisms until it is healthy.
This cure is more effective than incision, not only cautery; if it is healed by fumigation according to this method, take camomile, yarrow, rue, and wormwood, and assemble them all or some of these in one pot, and put them inside, and boil it; the pot should be well sealed with strong clay, and inside the pot have one comb-like instrument as follows: And it should be made of silver or lead, and one of the heads should be inserted into the mouth of the patient until the vapors rise to the eye through the canal, until the eye is killed; afterwards renew it repeatedly, until the eye dries, and make sure you do not perform this at the beginning of an abscess boil, because many things may happen; and do not do this unless in the declination of an abscess boil. And if this instrument is not present, take a canal and place inside the patient's head a hen's feather eggshell, so that the patient's mouth does not become too hot; because the hen's eggshell will not let the vapor burden the mouth, and it is good cure along with salvation.
Often it happens that a bone or fish spine enters the throat, or something similar; in such cases, you must pull out what you can see and press the tongue against the sun with all instruments so that you can see it move; and if it does not open by itself and is swallowed back into the throat, make the patient vomit as soon as the food is cooked in the stomach; perhaps the object will be expelled through vomiting; or if the patient swallows a piece of sponge, a piece of cotton, a root of lettuce, or a small piece of dry bread; tie a thread to the sponge and then swallow it; and when it reaches the place, it will stick, and then you pull it out; and if it does not come out as described above, take a plank-like instrument in this shape:
And let the instrument be curved at the top so that it can enter the throat more easily, and hold the head up high; and be careful not to touch the epiglottis, or the patient will choke, do not push the bone deeper; it is better for the patient to push the instrument, because it can move or the object is expelled; if they push it downward, you pull it out equally with the instrument until it is expelled.
of the saliva from the throat
At times, the saliva of the patient is used as medicine, as I've mentioned in the division, by means of medicines. And when it does not help at all, then look into the throat of the patient towards the sun, since you press his tongue with the instrument I have told you about. If you see saliva, draw it out with a small spoon or fine tweezers suitable for that purpose. If these are not available, use a hair-rope, put it in the patient's throat, then push or lift the end of the rope with a hot iron and do this frequently. And keep the patient wet all day long. Then take a full ounce of cold water, open his mouth, pour it in so he can swallow, move it with your hand often; and as soon as the saliva feels the water, it will drop out.
If it does not drop out as we have said, fumigate the patient with asafetida, using the instrument I have told you about in the fumigation of the eye; do this many times, for it will certainly come out. The manner of fumigation is that you take a pot that has charcoal and cover it with a perforated cloth, and place the tip of the instrument inside; then pour your fumigation into it, and make the patient hold the head of the cane in his mouth, and close his mouth so that no smoke escapes, but comes only to the saliva; and the saliva will now certainly come out, and if it does not drop out, repeat the fumigation many times; let the patient endure thirst, eat salted foods and almonds, and drink no water; then it will be necessary that it goes out through this method.
And the shape of the instrument used to treat the wound, appears, when it can be seen, resembles curved tweezers for entering into the throat; and it has the appearance of a syringe beak, and it should have roughness of lime, so that what it takes, it cannot let go; here is its shape:
Chapters on abscesses
Abscesses have many similarities, according to what is recalled in the following sections of this book from one and another, and they are different in perforation and incision; and there are two ways in which the first way resembles it because it contains moisture. And the second way is in joints or at organs. Indeed, abscesses on the head are different than those on the base, and abscesses around a bone are different than those that come up at joints, and each should have its judgment in treatment.
And if there are abscesses which should not be pierced until the bubble is ripe according to its completion; and if there are such abscesses that it is necessary to pierce them when they are hard, and do not die according to their ripening, like abscesses located near joints. For when abscesses arise near joints, and it is left until it is burst, possibly the ligament and nerve of the joint will become corrupted, which causes contraction in that member. Or if the abscess is located at the principal part, and you delay the perforation until it is ripe, it will harm the principal part; or if it is located at the base, if pierced before it is ripe, it will not be possible to pierce it fully, and it will become tunneled inside, and a fistula will form, and will not heal in a long time.
And you should know the time for perforating the abscess which is ripe according to its completion, and it is when the pain is alleviated, and the disappearance of the fever, and the decrease of the pain and redness, and the swelling and subsiding of the head of the abscess, and other signs; and you should make the perforation sit lower than the abscess, and where it has started to open; and the perforation should be as long as the body, and if the abscess is on the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all places equal or without a covering.
In the places that swell, according to that member. And when abscesses are in fleshy areas, it is better to leave the perforation until it is confirmed in digestion completion, as we have said. For if you pierce it beforehand, the body will fill with much pus; and possibly harden the edges and the inside of it. And for any abscess that is pierced according to the size of the body, according to what the member requires. And it should be necessary to bring small abscesses, small perforations; and large abscesses, large perforations, and many cuts according to the appearance of the size of the abscess; and for such abscesses where the care is required, and covered; when it has become as thin as a cloth, and softened, it should be treated like the babies: and for those that are cut into four angles, and for those whose cover is like the myrtle leaf, as abscesses from the joints; and for such abscesses where a round cut is made, and other cuts and similar covering.
One who has no head, such as an abscess superficial, it is necessary that you pierce it fully; and when the abscess is large and it contains a great bulge, and you pierce it, do not draw out all the pus in that hour, but draw out some of it; stop up the abscess until the next day, then draw nothing incorrectly; do this many times with care, as much as the pus subsides; meanwhile if the patient is weak, or a woman, or small children, or old men weakened, be careful for sometimes the pus escapes suddenly with the death of the patient, and you will not be at fault. Therefore, avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced your abscess, clean the wound, and check if the wound from the abscess is small; and if it is wide open, bring linen or old cotton; and if it is a large abscess and there is much damage, it is necessary that you stuff in every one a linen bandage so that they meet each other; and if you have cut into the abscess part of the skin, and you have shaved around it, it is necessary that you fill it with old cotton or raw linen without moisture, and bind it until the third day; then remove it, and cure it with ointment until it heals.
If bleeding occurs in your work, bring cold water and ash, wet a cloth and place it on the place repeatedly. And if the bleeding persists, provide treatment and care, and the powders that I have mentioned in this book, and if it is winter, and the limbs or abscesses are very nervous, it is necessary that you put hot towels and cloths moistened with wine and oil on them; and if it is summer, and the limbs are fatty, it is necessary that you place cold towels moistened with water and oil, or cold water and oil, until the third day, as we have said; then remove the abscess and clean and treat it as necessary, until it heals.
And this must be known universally in the treatment of abscesses; now I have told you how to proceed with the treatments of abscesses, and here is the chapter.
The sores
For the small abscesses that come on the head, there are methods known to us, similar to poultices, such as a linseed bag and many others. Some have fat and moisture like pustules; and some are hard and stony at the base and there is no doubt whether the arteries interfere. And the treatment of the abdomen is that you prove it with all instruments called "entromissoire", from which the following form comes, what it contains. For if it contains moisture, they do it above the long way. And when the moisture is emptied, scrape skin without leaving any hair that contains that moisture, for it returns immediately when one leaves anything; then put cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is present; otherwise in water and oil, and apply it to the wound and leave it until the next day; and those who are delayed by night will come back. And renew the cotton the second and third day, as before, until you know that it does not remain by night; then treat the wound with ointment as appropriate, until it is healthy. And if the abscess contains one knot of fat, cut according to this form, long; and throw your onions there, and scrape it from all sides, and apply all your care to draw out the purulence where it lies; and if the arteries interfere with you, do as I told you before. And do the same for the abscess if it is hard and stony, and treat and heal as I told you.
And the treatment for a hard and moist abscess is easier because it has little blood. And if any of these abscesses or head have no moisture, and one of those I cut where an old woman's head was, I found the abscess like a hard stone, rough and white, and could not break; and if one had pierced it with anything, it would have made as deep a wound as from a stone. In other abscesses coming from the head or elsewhere, they should be opened all day long depending on the location, to let pus out; and treat them as necessary.
of scrofulas
Often this abscess occurs at the neck, under the chin, and in armpits, and sometimes it appears elsewhere on the body, and they are swollen and connected to each other. And each scrofula is properly within its own cavity, as we have said of the lymph node and the abscess of the head; and the appearances of these scrofulas are many. There are some that contain moisture, and there are some that are malignant and do not want to obey health. In such a case when you see it in good condition for treatment, and it resembles the color of the body, and it is silent on all sides and is neither near the nerves of the neck nor the artery nor the conduit, and is not deep; then you should cut it above, remove the skin from each part, and place two fingers of the cautery at the opening, as we have said in abscesses of the head; and pull gently and carefully, making sure that you do not cover the nerve or vein, and do not use too sharp a lancet or cutter, so that the hand does not slip, and look ahead so that you do not cover what should not be covered.
And if you cut the vein or artery and it does not stop bleeding, put vitriol powder or some powders that stop blood into the wound, and press the wound; leave it until the abscess is soothed and the wound becomes soft and starts to pus. When the pus is stopped, return to your work; then check if there are any small scrofulas remaining near the root of the scrofula, cut and clean them. If there is a large one at the root of the scrofula, do not cut that scrofula at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread, and let it fall out through the thread, without causing harm; then dress the wound with old cotton dipped in Egyptian ointment, then cure.
And if you treat the entire scrofula (boil), you must gather the two lips of the wound and sew them together, as there is no room for excess due to the large size of the scrofula. You should cover the root and draw out the pus, and sew it as we have said. For those scrofulas with excess, pierce where it has been closed; and pierce it as described above, depending on its location, then introduce tents with ointment and similar things, so that it corrupts what remains of the corruption; and when the wound is clean, cure it with ointment made from sweet-smelling char.
And for strangury (a difficult or painful urination), you must crush barley grain in wine and give it to drink, and add the juice of dried figs; this will ease the pain and make urination easier.
The ancients spoke of the size of the throat; however, I have never seen one do it in our land, and it is written in their words.
For those who have squinch, the incision of the throat called "epiglote" should be made; and no aid should be given by them, because all the veins and the opening of the sickness are in those who have an abscess hot in the mouth, or in the throat, or in two almond-sized places. When the sickness is in the channel of the mouth, it is necessary to cover the epiglote to avoid the danger of strangulation.
Then, when we want to cut the epiglote, it is necessary that we cut it below four circles or two small cuts across, between the circles or through the thickness of the siphac, not in the cartilage.
And if the loins are to be cut open for the incision of the epiglottis where there is no flesh, and the vessels are long in length.
And if the master is afraid, then you must stretch the skin of the throat in its entire length, then split the cartilage as far as it reaches to the trachea; and sever the vessels of blood if you see anything, and then cauterize the wound, as we have said.
And it is demonstrated by the incision of the trachea which passes through the broken place, and by the lack of voice.
And leave the wound open for a while.
And when the hour has passed during which doubt exists about strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound with care, and close it entirely without damaging the cartilage; then administer medicines that promote healing until it is healed.
Al-Zahrawi says one should not do this until the throat is completely stopped up and the patient has been judged dead and his spirit departed. Then tie the epiglottis for this reason, because the patient cannot breathe properly and breathes through the wound, and thus is kept from death.
And therefore the ancients command to leave the wound open until the malice of the sickness has passed, and it has passed in 3 days or 4. And then they command to sew up the wound and heal, until it is healed;
and I will tell you what I saw. I saw that a maiden took one knife, and stuck it in her throat, and cut part of the windpipe.
And I was called to heal it, but found it lifeless.
I discovered the wound and found blood flowing from it, but I realized that neither voice nor conduit could be heard or followed except through the throat, and the veins flowed through the wound.
I quickly sewed up the wound and cured it until it was healed;
And it did not happen to the maiden that her voice became hoarse, and she returned afterwards to her condition.
Therefore I say that in the swelling of the epiglottis there should be no fear.
From the large throat.
This abscess is called "throat hernia", and it is a large abscess of a yellowish color, and it is common in women.
And it is according to two ways: natural and accidental; where the natural has no instrument.
And the accidental is according to two ways, where one is similar to fatness in us, and the other way is similar to an abscess that comes from us due to arteries. And there is fear, and one should not perform strong actions on anyone who is small; it must be proven and searched through the entire opening. If you find it as hard as a knot and it cannot be opened in any way, strike it like one strikes the nose, and pull it all the way off if there is any of it left. And bind it well, and heal it as necessary, until it is completely healed.
of the nose
Many ways to perform a nose surgery exist, which I will describe one by one.
And now I must explain all the difference between dislocation and fracture.
Dislocation is characterized by heat and fever lasting until the swelling has passed, then the fracture is complete, after which the fever and heat subside.
With a fracture, there is no heat or fever or pain, and it contains one sack, which is its own sac and is the same color as the body, and begins like an abscess, and becomes large.
And they can be of two types: fat or moist, and they are often the same colors as I have mentioned in the classification.
It is necessary when you come to the cure of the knot, that you test and inquire first about every instrument which is called "entromissoire", according to what its form will come or chapter which follows.
And the method of the inquiry of abscesses by us is that you take or the more moist place that you find in the abscess and turn your fingers little by little, until you feel that the instrument has pierced the core, then according to the size of the abscess;
Then draw the instrument called "entromissoire", and take care that it does not break.
If moisture runs out of the wound, make it color as I have said for other abscesses;
and if after the incision no moisture comes out, know that it is fat, then make a cross-shaped incision, take hold of it with pincers, gently scrape off from both sides and watch the cloth or bandage you pull through it to ensure it comes out healthy with the knot;
And if you cannot pull it out whole, then draw it out in pieces so that nothing remains.
If there remains nothing, it returns many times to the nose.
If it persists a little and does not bother you, apply some corrosive powder to the wound, hold the wound closed, put warm soothing things on the abscess, and treat it with other treatments until it heals.
If it is large, make two lips of the wound, and treat it with a remedy that stops bleeding.
And if the vein is beating against you or something else, rush and use vitriol powder instead, let it lie for 2 to 4 days until the wound heals, and allow the boil of blood to rest; then return to cover what was left uncovered with linen.
Here are the forms of the probing instruments, and there are three types: large, medium, and small; and if it has four squares which are called "albaret", and one which is called "breb", and there are three types: large, medium, and small, to surround abscesses with fistula.
and they are similar to the needles used to sew charms, made of citron cane, iron, or silver. The yellow ones are more valuable for surrounding the boils with fistula.
And there are three kinds: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the wounds.
The shapes of the ulcers resemble each other, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and if there are ulcers with two curves in four ways too.   \*The text seems to be referring to the types and number of ulcers, but it is unclear what the "two curves" might refer to without further context.\*
and if there are ulcers with four curves, they also have four kinds; and if there are ulcers with two curves, or ulcers with only one curve, and all of them are in their place.   \*The text seems to be referring to the types and number of ulcers, but it is unclear what the "two curves" and "four curves" might refer to without further context.\*
The head of these [things] which are cut open is sharp, and of those who do not cut all the way through except from one side, where scourging of the nerves takes place, because the vein or nerve should not be struck.
And of these incisions [or openings], the skin is tied together in bands so that the patient does not hurt himself at the opening of abscesses.
And they are of four kinds: large, small, and medium-sized, as you see.
And it is not used anywhere other than in charnu (charred) limbs, such as legs, arms, breasts, and similar joints.
And sometimes another small instrument is made, resembling fists' scourges, in this shape, to draw blood:
and it is placed sometimes at the place that heals from veins and arteries, and sometimes it is returned in this large shape:
At times, the breasts of some men swell when they begin to rot, until they seem like breasts of a woman;
and remain ugly and swollen, and whoever wishes to cure them, it is necessary to be according to this form of the following line b to g: then remove the fat, apply medicine to the wound with healing herbs, then sew together the two lips of the wound to heal it until it is healed;
and if the breast leans downwards and is flattened due to its size like women, cut it into two pieces along similar cuts; From this, one should keep the other at the end of both, so that the larger line contains the smaller one according to this form, from this line 'b' up to line 'g'. then peel the skin that is between the two lips (of an arrow wound), remove the fat, and apply what we have said about stitching and powders, and whatever is necessary in the treatment, until it heals.
and if it is not healed or the incision is not completely made because the patient does not want to rest, or due to bleeding, then fill the wound with moist cotton in a corrosive ointment. And leave it to consume what remains of meat and fat, then heal it when it is clean.
from the abscess on the buttocks
These abscesses that come under the buttocks are treated as hard scrofulas with swellings that contain moisture.
Therefore, those containing moisture should be cut according to this form, from line b to line g: And when the entire hole that is in the abscess is emptied, fill the wound with old cotton, and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and apply ointment as needed until it heals.
And if the abscess resembles scrofula, make incisions as we have said in the treatment of scrofula, and if the wound forms a hole, bring fire as we have said before.
from the cutting of the artery
When an artery is ruptured, and the skin that is above it becomes sutured, there are often abscesses, and the same happens to an opened vein and abscess.
And if one knows it so, as for the artery, the abscesses last a long time. and when you feel it with your hands, it feels narrow; and when it is for the vein, it appears roundish.
And it is foolish to cover this abscess, especially when it is under the armpit or near joints and the collarbone, and it is very large. Therefore, the treatment of iron is required to be avoided, and the same applies to those who have it on their head, and in those who are swollen with artery blood, they should be incised above the skin lengthwise.
Therefore, the treatment of iron is required to be avoided, and the same applies to those who have it on their head, and in those who are swollen with artery blood, they should be incised above the skin lengthwise. Then cut open the abdomen as often as necessary, and carefully separate the artery from the fabric, while it is exposed.
Then insert an awl beneath it and pierce it to the other side, and tie the artery with a double thread for two inches, as I have shown you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples.
Then do not move the joint that is between the two ligaments of an incision until the pus inside it subsides and the abscess is healed.
then apply the treatment as for a broken bone, until the ligament heals. Then treat this with poultice according to the remedy for the sickness, until it is healed.
and if the abscess is due to the swelling of the vein, then you must smear this with your hand the entire skin from the abscess.   --> and if the abscess arises from a swollen vein, then you should smear this over the whole skin from the abscess using your hand. Then push the needle beneath the joint that you hold with your hand, and make it pierce through, and have one double thread so that you pull it from the other side; Then tie the abscess, as I told you, or thread one of the two parts with two needles;
and if you doubt that the thread will pass through, push another needle through all one thread under the abscess at the incision of the first needle, and tighten the threads fourfold;
Then pierce the abscess until the excess drains out of it, then pierce the excess pus and leave what is connected.
Then place a damp cloth soaked in wine and oil on it, then administer treatments of tents and liniments until it heals.
abscesses of the nerves
Just as abscesses occur in arteries and veins, abscesses of the nerves occur when they are injured or from excessive labor, and similar things.
And this often occurs in shoulders and thumbs, and in all places where there are joints, that is to say, severe abscesses, and its color resembles the body's color, and it is found in many conditions causing pain.
And when it is being straightened, the patient feels pain, and it is not completely within the body, but under the skin.
And it should be completely closed on all sides, and not go forward or backward, nor up or down, and the one in the joints should not be covered with iron, for perhaps it would contract.
And he who has a head or forehead, should apply the spatula (spatule). If the abscess is small, hold it with tweezers and strike its root.
If it is large, suspend it by the onyx (onyche), peel it, then bone it and close the wound with stitches, and let it heal until it is healed.
Hanging large swellings There is often in bellies and nowhere else the disease called "fungus," which resembles warts, and has subtle roots and large heads; some of them are small and others are very large.
I saw one man who had two bellies that resembled fungi more than anything else, and there was no difference between them, they were white, had a small root, were slit open, and ran moisture continually.
I cut them open and found in one of them 16 ounces, and in the other 5 pounds, and the wounds on incision were such that if you look at the patient it is moist, and the color of the artery is white, soft, and has a subtle root;
If the body is pierced by a splinter and the fire cautery is in your presence, for the tailbone there are often excessive bleeding, and if the blood overwhelms you, then hurry to cauterize.
and if you see the patient afraid and fearful of the iron incision, take a well-made thread and tie the artery as we have said, and leave it for two days;
and then tighten it and do not stop tightening the thread until the artery is cut through by it and there is work felt; and if the roots are large, fear for yourself likewise, but you can certainly cover half of it,
Then fire-cauterize so that it does not return; then heal the wound and make sure you do not cover the thin layer which is of fox color, poor sensation, and milk gaze.
For this abscess hardened, and I will come to the treatment of leprosy hereafter.
when the boil bursts
If the appearance of the boil comes from cauterization of a wound or a cut in the scrotum, as happens in other places, or from blood that flows from veins or arteries as described earlier, or from swelling;
and if it is from the incision of the scrotum and the emergence of the boil, its appearance resembles the color of the body, and it is a light thing with little pain, and opens in various ways. and if it is from the intestine, then it is more varied, and when it is pressed with the fingers, it sinks back in, and then returns, and sometimes it becomes hardened, and greatly enlarges at the entrance of the bath and through great labor.
And if it is due to moisture, it is an easy matter and opens easily when you press it with your hand, do not constrain it; and if it is due to blood, it opens by these signs: the abscesses are large and hard, and they are pierced according to a certain quantity.
and if it is due to windiness, it yields easily with pressure, and the work appears when you look at it whether it is from the blood of the artery or vein or windiness. You must leave the treatment. For there is doubt and fear as I told you in the chapter of abscesses, for the artery and vein.
And if the appearance is due to the intestines or the belly, you should instruct the patient to bend their back and be stretched out straight, then hold around the abdomen tightly. then command him to bear gently with your hands, then go around the side that you have held with a spatula. extend the half of the abscess above to the great incision.
Then stretch half of the abscess extended over the thread, and push your index finger into it to search for the intestine. If you find the intestine caught in the thread, untie it and push the intestine out through the opening of the abdomen.
And if you find the boil, take it by its base and cut off the excess.
And if the artery or vein becomes obstructed, it will go round and then return to your work, take two needles, insert two sharp threads, put the needles around what you have made in a cross shape that you pierce.
then hold the abscess for four leagues above the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and leave the place as it is until it can, and cut off the dead flesh by itself. or you strike it when it becomes soft and can, then heal what is required, and cut off the abscess as we have said.
or you strike it when it becomes soft and can, then heal what is required, and cut off the abscess as we have said. And draw out the blood or moisture that you find, then heal the wound as needed, and bind the wound.
of the sore
We have said in the division the similarities of a sore and how to treat it with medicines and when to use iron cure; now let us say what a sore is like in marriage, and great caution should be taken in its treatment, and the ancients said that when sores are in places where they can be shaved like sores that occur in mammary glands and thighs, and similar places, it must be completely removed when it begins; but when it is large and old, one should not approach it, for I have never seen anyone heal it; no one has ever healed it before me.
And the operations, when they are in place and can be removed as we have said, it is that you purge the patient once of black bile; then make him purge if he has obvious fullness, then prepare the patient. That is, shave the area where the operation will take place; then pour boiling oil or other hot substance over the wound, and let all pus flow out; leave no bone or cartilage unbroken; and let all blood flow freely. And press well on the area with your hand or something else, and if the discharge of blood opposes the incision of an artery or a vein, cauterize it until the wound is closed; then heal it with other treatment until it heals.
of the hydropieric disease We have previously explained the signs of hydropiery and the methods by which the water is made, and the symptoms of each form, as well as the treatment using medicine and iron. These are only revealed in two forms of hydropiery - tympanites and hypoarch, for they are fatal. Therefore, when treating this form of hydropiery known as "eclites" with medicine, and if the treatment does not help, one should consider whether the patient is weak or has other diseases such as a solution of the stomach and similar things. In such cases, iron should not be used because there is doubt. If you see a strong patient who only has hydropiery and no other disease, then proceed as follows: Lift the patient upright on your hands, and the minister presses the belly from below, directing the liquid to the lowest part of the buttocks. Then take the pointed spinal probe according to this shape: It should be pierced through two parts and not so deep that it reaches the intestine when inserted, nor should it blunt.
Then check if the urine is directed towards the intestines: If it is directed due to liver disease, the incision should be on the left side of the belly two fingers' width; and if it is due to constipation, it should be on the right, and the patient must not lie on the incision so that superfluous fluids do not run to that weak place.
Then pierce the skin with the tool and push it, then put your hand between the skin and the bladder as when peeling an apple to the thickness of a nail or more. Then pierce the bladder until the instrument comes to the watery place, which is the bladder, then draw it out and put this tool of the form shown here: It resembles a thin silver chain, made from lead or light iron, and has one small hole on the underside; it has three holes on one side, two on another, and one on another; and the bladder is shaped like a quill, and this is the shape of the incision that scribes carve the pen.
On the head above is the anus, so that when the instrument comes to the water, now push it up on the instrument; empty then either half or a third part, for if you empty more than necessary in that hour, perhaps the patient will die from the resolution of his spirit due to the weapon, or he will faint, or he will come close to death.
but empty according to the amount of its power, and according to what the dispositions of the power mean in the patient and his pulse; then pull out the instrument and hold the water, and it is now held back for the caution that stops the bleeding which is above the siphon, as I have spoken about, so you pierce as follows; then restart the instrument the next day if you see the patient suffering from this, and draw out a small amount of water.
Do this every day, and be careful not to let it stay too long but only a little water. And if you doubt about the patient, and you leave much water, cure him with burial or hot sand, and by sweating or bathing and in the sun, and anoint with wine; and cure him with drying medicines until he is healthy, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of the water, as I have said before.
Of the stopping of the penis A child is sometimes born without foreskin or the foreskin is small and not in its proper place. If this needs to be addressed immediately, it should be pierced with a very thin spatula as follows: then place a fine silken cloth on the foreskin and hold it and keep it for 2 to 4 days until urine can be produced, at which point the cloth should be removed and urination allowed; and if necessary, it should be replaced, as the urine that comes out does not close it. If the foreskin is small, it may be treated with a piece of silk cloth as mentioned earlier, which will allow it to expand. Those who do not have the foreskin in its proper place are blistered, for no one is born with the foreskin at the head of the penis, so they cannot urinate before raising their penis; and they cannot enjoy sexual intercourse because the matter cannot reach the opening, and this is a bad disease.
And the manner of work is that the patient lies supine on his back, with the head of the penis and the buttocks at the same level, so that the testicle falls into the scrotum as required; and guard against excessive bleeding that often occurs, and if it happens, stop the bleeding from the wound, and treat the wound until it is healed.
of the penis ulcers Often this albathe appears on the penis, and it is an appearance of ugly sores; and there are both malignant and non-malignant ones; you must pick them up once a week with a thin instrument, cut and clean them all, then put cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment on top; then treat it with diaphinicon ointment until it is healed. And if the elbow is unhealthy, of a putrid color and swollen, it is necessary that you apply cautery. When you have applied it, and if the elbow is inside the arm, with some part within the flesh and some part protruding, it is necessary that you remove the elbow which is within first; and when it is sewn up, cure it externally. For when you treat it together, the joints of the arm are not secure, and blackness and corruption come into the arm and the elbow joint; it is necessary to clean everything that is black and corrupted, then place it on a plaster made of honey and flour which is made from the rind of pumpkin seeds and apply other treatments until it heals.
And if bleeding occurs, apply the lunar cautery according to this form: The cauterization should have two dispositions together: for the bleeding, and for corruption; and if the joint of the arm is corrupted and retracted, it is necessary that you bore a channel in the arm with a plank, and make the patient urinate; and when the hairs are separated at the tip of the arm which occurs in those who have not been circumcised, or occurs due to an injury or abscess, then it is necessary to shave it with one instrument, until the ligaments are disconnected, and the joint of the arm is released from all sides.
And if it is a painful thing to speak of this, you should make an incision with a lancet about half an inch deep along the vein and the skin; then pierce carefully between two fingers, and place one thin linen cloth soaked in cold water on it immediately.
of circumcision (when referring to the surgical procedure)
Circumcision is not without reason and similar to other wounds; however, when we perform this work by our will and specifically on infants, it is necessary that we do the best work and the easiest for salvation.
I say that the ancients did not speak of circumcising their children, for they did not practice it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired through experience.
For I have wanted most of the masters and surgeons who performed circumcision around one day and all at once; however, there were those who feared it because there are two layers, and by chance if one above is cut, the one below may remain.
Or the coping is covered, and the pain is doubled; and at the circumcision of the tip of the member, it is not certain that the point of the tool touches the member; and by chance, the iron may slip during the circumcision of the nail, and ruin the work, and many times they are born without need for circumcision, and I have wanted this.
Of the amputation which is made at the joint of the limb I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut equally well above as below.
When you press your hand, it cuts equally throughout the entire thickness; but that the thread be well tightened around the skin; and should the method of the first operation be that you make the child think that you do not tie the thread around him except for the rod only, and then let him go in all ways that you can. Then you make him be between your hands straight, and place the forces (tools) between your hands or under your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments; then put your hand to the rod and blow or say a word, and draw it up until the head of the rod is in; then clean it well of the filth that has assembled there, then tie the ligature signet with a double thread, then tie the other end to another ligament; hold the second ligature at the knuckle and at the index finger, and cut between the two ligaments, then pull the cord quickly and draw the tip of the rod.
Then you make him be between your hands straight, and place the forces (tools) between your hands or under your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments; then put your hand to the rod and blow or say a word, and draw it up until the head of the rod is in; then clean it well of the filth that has assembled there, then tie the ligature signet with a double thread, then tie the other end to another ligament; hold the second ligature at the knuckle and at the index finger, and cut between the two ligaments, then pull the cord quickly and draw the tip of the rod. Then let the blood coagulate point by point, for it is clotted; and put powder on top and on the powder place a piece of cloth glued with a spoonful of cooked egg white steeped in rosewater, mixed with fresh rose oil; and leave it until the next day, and treat it with another treatment until it heals.
The shape of the forces for healing is as follows: the two shoulders should be tender and should be cut, and they should also be as large as the fist equally.
The error of healing is when the flesh within is cut open; therefore, it must be stretched with the nail, so that the joint becomes abscessed; and equalize it, and if you cannot hold it with the nail, use pliers, and then equalize it.
And if they exceed three days, and that which is beneath the worm [abscess] is swollen, let it be left until the abscess subsides, and gently lance it; if it bursts as you can move it, do not injure the part of the worm, this will not harm it.
Cure the place with powder, as we have said treating powders, and if it bursts excessively, and goes above, it will not harm; so cure it, as we have said, until it is healed.
retention of urine
The retention of urine is from obstruction by a stone, or blood congealed, or pus, or frozen water, or similar things, as we have said in the division.
and if the urine is not expelled, and you see it is retained due to the stone in the bladder or neck of the bladder, then the patient must be bent over his knees; his feet should be placed on a table or support, and he should extend his abdomen from the upper part of his back, and hold the patient as firmly as he can; and then the neck of the bladder is forced to express the stone above it, so that the urine is expelled.
and if it does not come as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must administer extraction with all the instruments called "syringe," of which this is the form: it should be made of thin, light silver head, like a bird's feather; and its cane should be one and a half palms long, and fine at the top.
And the method of the urine discharge is as follows: you take one double thread, tie one end to the head, be it of linen or cotton, and push the head into the syringe with the thread inside; then gather the excess of the linen and push it up to the head of the syringe, then oil or butter the syringe and place the patient on a seat, and anoint the bladder and penis with moist oil, olive oil, and warm water;
then gently insert the syringe into the penis until it reaches the base of the penis, then bend the penis upward towards the scrotum; then push the syringe forward up to the bladder, and have the patient feel it coming until it empties completely, which is not done according to this order for any other reason than that the guide leading where it goes is twisted; then draw the thread all along the linen piece by piece, and the urine follows the linen, then pull the thread fiercely, and correct the urine.
and repeat the syringe until the bladder is emptied and the patient is relieved.
Illness of the bladder (or urinary system)
For scorchings or blood coming into the bladder (or urinary system), or pus is gathered there, and you see it distill acids and medicines, do all the instruments that are called "clepsydra" (hydrotherapy device). The shape is:
It is closed, and if it is three punctures: two from one side and one from the other, as you can see; and the medicine should flow through the channel so that it stops the penis well without addition, if one can draw out the moisture, and push when necessary.
And when you see throwing your medicines into the bladder, place the head of the goat in the moisture, and draw it through with what is within; if you pull the moisture out of the goat, and then push forcefully on what was within; the moisture will enter, and come to the bladder now, so that the patient can feel it.
and this is the form of the subtle enema for cleansing the bladder; it is as follows:
It is made of silver or copper, and the head is higher. Underneath it are one hand or the link. Then take a sheep bladder and put the moisture that you want to enema the bladder with inside. Next, sew it between two hands using good double thread, and heat one end of the moisturizer over the fire. Then insert the tip of the enema into the vagina, then hold your hand on top of the bladder, until the patient feels that the moisturizer has entered the bladder.
And if you do not have the bladder, take a piece of parchment and make one circle, pierce it roundly around; then put a strong thread into these holes, then assemble the circle as one would assemble a thimble, and place inside it what you see of oil and moisture and water, and tie it in the instrument; and do as you have done with the bladder, press it with your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
of stones
We have said in the division of stones the methods and extraction along with medicines; and I have said the difference between the stone implanted in the rain and all the signs, and in what stone one should operate according to size; and in the bladder, and in the vein; and I will tell you openly and briefly.
I say that the stone in the bladder happens more often to children, and it is a sign that the water jumps from the bladder resembling water in its subtlety; it opens a passage, enlarges the patient's urine channel, and pierces it many times, then ties it up; and many foundations occur because of these jumps; and children's healing is light until they are four years old, and it is very severe in the elderly, and it is in the middle, for those who are between youth and old age; and the treatment is lighter for those who have large stones, than for those who have small ones.
And when we come to the treatment, first it is necessary to cleanse the patient with an enema, to draw out all the filth that is in the intestines. For it sometimes hinders seeking the stone.
Then take the patient by the feet and tilt them downwards, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and sometimes moves upwards; then make him sit between your hands prepared, and his hands should be under his thighs, so that the bladder is entirely declining downwards; then press and touch it with your hand.
If you feel the stone in the abdomen, act quickly and cut into it now. And if it does not fall to the touch of everything, moisten your left index finger with oil, if the patient is a child or an unfinished young person; dip it in its foundation, seek the stone, and when you find it at your finger, pierce the kidney; then press down on it and push it towards where you intend to cut.
Instruct the assistant to press the kidney with his hand, and command him to extend his right hand upwards, and with his left hand remove the skin that is beneath the testicles in the part where the incision is made; then put the spatula covering it, so that it forms:
And make an incision between the testicles and the foundation, not in the middle but along the left side of the navel; and it should be straight above the stone, and your fingers should be close to or on the foundation, and the incision should be wide across, and thin within, according to the size of the stone, not too large;
By chance, if the pressure is applied which is at its base, it should leap without any effort; know that there is a stone or angles and margins there; if it is grated (or ground), if it is soft like a plum and round, then it will issue out easily.
Then in the place where there are angles and margins, make a larger incision; if it does not leap, then you must strain on top with pliers like a liming tool at its head to force the stone out without escaping; or push a subtle curved instrument under the stone at its head; and if you cannot trick it in this way, widen .1 inch and remove the cortex; if it does not come out, strain it with vitriol.
And if there are more than one stone, push the largest one into the bladder first, then hit it, then draw it out, and the smaller ones after if there are more. If it is very large, it must be broken, and a larger incision must be made. For the patient, two things can happen: either he dies or urine comes out immediately where the lees cannot seal; but nevertheless, make an effort to draw or break with pliers as much as you can until it is drawn out in pieces;
And when you have completed your work, apply the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and hold it closed, then place a damp cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in oil and cold rosewater and cool water on top, to ease the abscess heat; afterwards, make the patient rest on his neck, and do not undo the bandage until the third day.
When you undo it (the bandage), wash well the wound with oil and water, then apply the ointment of defyfinicon and the ointment of basilicon until it heals.
And if an abscess with erosion comes on the wound and blood clots in the bladder, and it is retained in this way without urinating, then you must press your thumb on the wound, and drain the blood, for if it remains, it will cause the bladder to corrode and perforate.
Then clean the wound that is wet and dirty and full of pus, and help in all ways you know while it is healthy; and it is necessary to bind both legs and place the medicine on the site.
If the stone is small and it is conducted along the urine and stuck in, and urine cannot come out; cure it as I say hereafter, cut it multiple times, and excuse yourself from the cutting because of this treatment. I have already proven this thus.
Take one iron rod according to this form and with four angles pierced in one thorn:
Then take a thread and tie it around the shaft of the stone inside the bladder, so that it cannot return to the bladder; then push the awl lightly into the shaft; and turn the awl little by little in the stone, until you can pierce the stone from another side; soon the urine will come out, then press your hand on what is stuck inside the stone which is within the shaft. Soon it will be broken, and flee with the urine, and the patient will be healed;
and if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, tie a thread around the stone and another one above, then drive the shaft towards the stone between the two threads, then pull it out, and untie the first thread, and clean the congealed blood from the wound; heal it until it heals.
of the stone from women
It happens rarely that a stone enters a woman, and if it ever occurs, the cure is severe, and it is forbidden for four reasons: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a woman who knows well how to examine herself, especially when she is chaste.
And the third way is that perhaps one cannot find a woman skilled in this art with hands; and the fourth way is that the stone within the woman is deeper than the stone in a man, so it requires a more profound incision, causing great fear.
And if you must resort to this, you should take a skilled midwife, and if one is difficult to find, do not hesitate to have a chaste maiden of subtle understanding; and present her to a wise bailiff or a woman who knows a part of the art, and order her to perform whatever you command regarding the incision of the stone.
And examine well if the woman is a virgin: then her husband must enter her door or foundation and seek the stone; and if he finds it, he should press it under his door, and recommend that she push her door with the sickness, and hold and press her left hand on her bladder.
If he finds it, then she should push it gently from the bladder to the root of the thigh until it reaches the root of the groin; then strike on the stone at the root of the thigh near the cervix, where it is most movable, and feel the stone in that area; and do not move her hand above or below the stone, and make a small cut at the first sign of movement.
Then push the root towards the loins, if you feel the stone, make an incision in the wound so that the stone can come out, and know that there are many types of stones: small or large, rough or smooth, long or round, and with ridges. Know their appearances to recognize their outcome.
And if the bone protrudes, place vitriol powder on it and keep it for an hour until the bone is set; then return to your work, as long as the stone remains hard, and have tools that I told you for the extraction of the stone in men to assist you in your work.
If the bone protrudes and it is an artery that is cut, place powder on the area and bind it with straps and bandages, do not attempt to move it again, and leave the stone alone and do not draw it out, as there is a risk the patient may die; then treat the wound.
And when the heat of the blood has subsided and the wounds have closed, return to your work, as long as the stone remains hard.
Of carnous hernia
Aquose is not something other than an accumulation of moisture or white pus, which is beneath the bladder, containing the egg; and it is called "white pus", and sometimes it is properly within the egg's membrane, if one thinks it is another egg; and this is the skin of the bladder between the white pus that we have said, and this does not occur unless there is a rupture.
And the generation of this accumulation is due to weakness that comes from the bladder, and this matter is spread out.
And sometimes it comes from impact on the bladder, and this moisture can have various colors: either it becomes darkening to yellow, or it is without red, black, white, or watery white, and this happens more often.
And these are the signs to recognize this assembly, for if it is white and soft as we have said, then it is an abscess, i.e., a long pouch like the shape of an egg, and its opening does not appear, for it has moisture all around.
And if there is moisture in the very fabric [of the abscess], then it is an abscess with part of the egg-like shape, and for this reason, one thinks that it is another [type of] abscess.
and if the moisture is between the skin of the egg-like shape and the white soft part, one can feel it well; therefore, when you want to know the color of the moisture, probe it all around carefully, so that the form [of the abscess] may be as described above. Accordingly, the one who comes after the incision judges what is inside.
Accordingly, the one who comes after the incision judges what is inside. And when we cure it with iron, the patient should be anesthetized to our power and the replenishment of his body; then lay him on his back, upon a thing slightly elevated, and place a lot of cloth underneath him.
Then lay on his left side, and command the assistant to sit on the right, and extend the rod to one of the two breasts of the neck.
then take the spatula of the left side and cut the skin of the neck between them from the base to the tip, making your incision straight in dividing the skin of the neck up to a whitish spot, and peel it off gently according to your power.
Then pierce the bladder completely full of water at one large opening, and drain all the water, and then place your fingers, and stretch the bladder upwards; do not touch the core of the kidneys, but only the bladder; cut through everything or in pieces the side of it carefully, for if you do not cut it well, the water will return.
And if the egg jumps out of your work, reset it in its place when you have completed the bladder work; then join the two layers of the kidney core with a stitch, and treat it as you would other wounds until it heals.
And if you find the egg corrupted with some other disease, you must tie the vessels that are suspended, taking care of the discharge of blood; then cut the kidney and remove the bladder, and treat it as we have said.
And if the wound has gathered pus in two parts, know that these are the branches; if you cut the other part similarly, then suck out the blood, and put moistened linen in oil on it.
and put linen moistened in wine and oil on it, and place two coins on top, and cover with double cloth, and tie it all up with a rope in this shape:
Then take two cloths made of coarse linen in this shape and sew them together to form a band around the thigh, placing one coin on its base up to the back, and the other at the handle part. The remaining ends should be gathered into the buckle of the garter.
And at times, medicine is this ramice of cautery in the place of iron-size wound, and it is that you take .i. a subtle cautery cultellaire, and strike the skin of the boil, and let it be heated as we have said, so that the white pus containing water becomes exposed;
if you take the cautery in this form, and pierce the pus to the bone, and scrape it with this subtle hot cautery;
and strike it in all ways that you can, until you scorch everything; and beware that the fire does not touch the egg; and know that this work is more salvation; and be careful of the decorum of blood, and beware of the works of cutting.
And if anything opposes you, an abscess swelling or bleeding, or something else, heal what is causing the problem, as described earlier.
And if the patient is afraid and does not want to wait for this procedure due to its horror, I recommend perforation as I have told you; and when you are completely certain that you have located the affected area by the signs we have mentioned, pierce it.
Make the patient sit on an elevated seat. Then, pierce the abscess in the lower part at least as wide as a finger's width, and extend the perforation along the length of the body; make the incisions large enough so that all the pus can flow out.
Then put cotton over the area, hold it in place, and allow the remaining moisture to drain off. After that, treat the wound until it heals.
And if the white cloth does not allow the moisture to drain out of the wound, then you must insert a reed or instrument for draining pus, such as the one described earlier; and expand 1/2 inch of the wound, check that the pus is returning and collected afterwards, and after 6 months or so, when it has collected as before, the patient will recover.
from the abscess of the cheek
Know that in the treatment of this condition, there is fear in various positions, which makes it seem to me that one should move [the patient];
And I will tell you the work and the appearance of the abscess.
Therefore, many abscesses come from the body, especially in the bowels; and this happens often.
This is due to excessive sourness or heat that spreads in the bowels, or from injury;
And the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body; and it does not find pain, and it is a painful abscess;
And possibly it is a painful and hard abscess, and sometimes it comes from an artery, or from inflammation of the vein.
When it is from an artery, it can be known by the hot disposition of the abscess when you press it with your fingers. And it is not necessary to touch it.
A person who is afflicted by swelling of the vein can be recognized by their disposition to express the touch of the fingers.
and can make the cut on this appearance, and on other sores; and it is that you cut the core of the cyst, then lift the egg upwards, and slice off the white part gently, and release the support of the egg from all sides of the egg.
If the egg is already soft with these pimples, then it is necessary to draw the egg and cut it.
And if it is a boil on the face, or in that which is within the cavities, you should release all the pus and let it heal.
And if the birth of the pimple is hidden inward, you should cut it all and remove the egg, as we have said.
And when your work is completed, apply linen cloth wet with rose oil and wine to the wound, then treat it with other treatments until it heals.
Of the abscess of the cheeks
This is an abscess enclosed by a swelling resembling a boil, with the softening of bones. and the patient groans greatly as he goes.
and the remedy for this disease is as dangerous as that mentioned before.
and yet we will tell you the procedure for it, according to what the ancients did.
It is necessary that you make the patient sit on a raised seat, then you press the suspension of the shoulder blades downwards towards your hands. Touch the scrotum that are near to the penis and burn it with the master's branding iron, then stretch them out fully.
Then cut the foreskin with a sharp spatula wide across the scrotum until it is exposed,
and then flay from each side as we have said in the extraction of the arteries that are in the temples;
Then insert an awl or one with two threads, and tie it at the first joint where the vein has appeared, and tie it straight to the other end. Then press them with a hammer, according to the length of the body, and draw out the corrupt moisture.
Then treat the wound as one would for other wounds or with a bowl, so that no blood gushes out from either eye.
because in this way there is no harm, and if all the veins become swollen, it is necessary to draw out the blood from every vein. If the eye does not lose its moisture due to the incision of veins, they dry out and cannot help themselves.
of the dislocation of the thigh The occurrence of this rupture is by the incision that comes from the dislocation of the thigh or the extension on the abdomen in the area of the groin, because the intestines descend from that rupture to one of the anuses.
And this wound is either shallow or extended, and these are the two ways of great pain caused by them: either by blow, jump, fall, or lifting of heavy objects, and similar things;
And the signs when it is from the extension of the wound are that they occur little by little, over a long time, and do not come suddenly; And the abscesses are equal up to the full part, because the wounds follow the intestines.
And the signs are when it is of the incision of the intestine, which causes sudden pain at the beginning, and the abscesses appear differently, under the skin near, and this is due to the rupture of the internal organs and the body going into shock due to the incision.
And sometimes the intestines are twisted with it and held in place, causing great pain to suffer by the patient, especially when pressed.
And in these iron treatments, fear is present, so one must escape from them.
And the method of work is that you instruct the patient to draw out the intestines with their hand from within in the wound, if they can enter. then hold it by its neck between your hands, and lift the thighs;
then stretch out the stomach to above, and strike the entire skin of the intestines with a long knife; then insert the fingers of the waist in the same manner as needed to open the wound, and make them so that the entrails can come out.
Then scrape the sifac (?) that is under the skin of the kidneys, until the white sifac (?) is exposed from all sides;
Put your index finger into the place where follows the kidney, between the first white sifac (?) that is under the skin of the egg (?), and between the second white sifac (?).
And remove what is behind the egg and between the second white sifac (?); then move your hand to the right inside the kidney, and bring the first white sifac upward towards your left hand, and lift the egg towards the lower part of the belly. And instruct the minister to stretch out the egg in high position, and untie that which is at the back of the ligament.
And ask your hands if there is any intestine unrolled or hard white matter, and if you find any such thing, push it into the belly under.
Then take a needle with one thick thread made of ten threads and push it in the back part of the syfac, which is after the hide of the kidneys; behind the waist, then cut the heads that appear from the threads, until there are four threads. Then assemble one on top of the other in a cross shape, and tie it with a strong cord of 2 parts where we have said is below the skin of the knees. Then wrap the legs with cloths and tie them up using a cord of 2 parts so that no visitors who tend to it or pus can enter it. and put the cord in place according to the first long cord of 2 feet, and after these 2 cords leave a space below the skin of the knees as big as a thumb.
And after all the other according to the roundness that the egg bears; then strike in the part which is beneath the skin of the shoulders, as far as it penetrates and bends, as we have said before.
Then apply dampened wool in oil, and place it on wounds, and apply the thread that we have mentioned. And sometimes the white pustules are cauterized as we have said before, after incising, due to fear of blood flow.
For this happens often, and leave the ligament until it chooses to loosen; and if it delays in falling out, you should irrigate with warm water, and apply what has been said above, until it loosens.
Then treat the wound with another remedy, until it heals perfectly.
of soft hernia
In this remedy, I never saw anyone dare to perform the cure with iron.
And the ancients said that it is made like a graft that connects the bone, in this manner you bind the vessels, after cutting them lightly below.
Then fill it in and treat the abscess of those who work on it, until the vessels bleed; and heal it as we have said, until it is healthy.
Sometimes gangrene comes in wounds, as we have said, and open the veins; and do not remove any intestines from the bowels, and if some are removed, it is bad, and repair them every hour.
And if it remains too long at this point, the wound or pus gathers, as the intestines discharge.
This happens by the spreading of the pus (abscess), which is harmful, as we have said, because it is spread, then it becomes soft and swollen, and the sores open up.
and the cure is by cautery, as we have said before; and sometimes it is cured by iron in this way:
and the patient lies on his back on a flat surface between your hands, then strike the swollen area with an iron rod of about three finger-widths wide;
And then draw out the pus that is under the skin, afterwards take the rod and place it on the apparent place of the abscess;
And press to the bottom of the stomach, then cut two apparent places on the sides of the abscess above the rod's head, and make one and the other;
then extract the rod's head, and do not cover it with anything or stretch or extend the abscess or any other thing, as I told you in the treatment of intestinal worms.
Then heal it with wound treatment. And when you bandage the wounds, if they fester and infect the wound, keep treating it until it heals.
The siphon is constricted, without any appearance in the opening, and the cauteries are moved closer to salvation.
of the softening of the skin on the cheeks
Many times the skin on the cheeks becomes soft in some men, because the charms that are inside are softened and it is visible; and it is necessary, when one sees it needs to be cured, to make the patient lie on their back, and to cut the softened skin on top of the natural skin; then bring the two lips together at a stitch, and if you see, sew first the excess skin that has been softened at 2 or 4 strong stitches; then cut between the stitches, and the wound is cured as other wounds, until it heals, and sew the thread.
the punishment
It is mentioned that chastisement is discussed in our law, and I would rather not speak of it in this book, as it is not necessary for the purpose at hand. There are two reasons: one is when the mirrors in the law respond to questions about it and its cure; the other, because we often need chastisement of animals to help us, such as goats, sheep, pigs, and others. Therefore, I say that chastisement is performed in two ways: either by attraction or by cutting. In the way we perform it by attraction, we sit the animal in hot water until its genitals are softened; then we grasp them with our hand, keeping them pressed until they are put back and you no longer feel them.
hermaphrodites
1. Hermaphroditism is according to .ij. (two) kinds in humans: the first kind is when there are two openings apert as in the figure of nature of a woman, where it has hair, and sometimes urine appears from within them. And the second kind is in women, who have something above the penis as a rod and two openings. The treatment of a man and a woman is that you cut around the adjacent parts (or genitals), and treat them like other wounds; in the second kind, however, for men whose urine squirts through the skin of the openings, there is no cure.
the treatment
tentigene is a growth on the natural part, which is too ugly to see; and some women have it as big as a hand, and this is its treatment. You should remove the excess of the growth with your hand or scissors, and lightly cut it; do not go too deep so that bleeding does not occur, then cure it with other remedies until it heals. For another growth that arises from the husband's mouth, and leaks, and sometimes squirts out, and is like a cow, and for this reason, it was called by the ancients "cow disease." You should cut it off as described above, and cure it until it heals.
Of a dislocation
The dislocation occurs when the birth canal is not perceived or too narrow, and it is either natural by birth or accidental due to illness; or it is caused by a twisted presentation, or by a subtle or large fistula, and it happens in the marriage chamber, on the side, or under it, regardless of where it is. It should be avoided, and the conception, childbirth, and flowers should be prevented from occurring. Recognition of these conditions is through the observation of the belly. If the swelling appears near the hands or at the right side, then do this: place your two index fingers together, and the woman should lie on her back with her legs spread; then form the two fingers, so that the subtle fistula remains round, and the swelling is reduced; then take wool, wet it in oil, and put it on the area. Let the woman rest at home each day, so that it cannot heal. If the fistula is hard and large, you must cut it with a spatumile resembling a mirte leaf. If the swelling is of flesh born, suspend it to the onyx and cut; have ready the medicines for stopping bleeding, such as acacia, dragon's blood, incense, all mixed with much egg; then bring a wide plank, so that the wound cannot heal; and in this way let it be long, and bring a tent of dry linen; then cure other wounds until it is healed. And when in childbirth there comes flesh born, it should be covered in this manner, unless the abscess is enlarged. For in an enlarged abscess in childbirth, one should not touch to heal.
Of hemorrhoids
1. "Emorroydes are openings of veins that often do not heal without cauterization, and when emorroides become old they turn into thrombosis; and we have said in the division what their similarities are, and the signs, and I will say here those which receive cure."
"of the anus abscesses"
Many types of abscesses come in the anus, such as carbuncles, pierced abscesses, herpes, fistulas, hemorrhoids, and other illnesses that I have mentioned in the division. Therefore, it is necessary that I speak here about the carbuncle abscess which comes in the anus, which is not the same as those that collect pus; and if you want to know the work of iron, look to see if the carbuncle abscess is acute at the beginning of its occurrence, and full of heat and fever, and becomes red when touched. Do not rush to pierce it, but let it heal until the pain subsides; then make the patient lie on one seat, and have two small seats or he can lean on them, and support his back and bend his legs towards the opposite side of the leg; spread his thighs, and put his arms under his knees, and tie them well with a strong rope; then suck out the pus from the affected side, and bring the instrument used to open the anus opening. The form follows as described here: it is necessary that when you introduce this instrument, that you pierce the rectum first to know the depth of the anus, so that the instrument does not enter too deeply or burn the patient; if the instrument is larger, cover the depth of the anus with cloths, so that the instrument does not hurt it; and cover the top, and mark the instrument. When the abscess opens, and one massages it by hand, it must be covered with a clean bandage, or lint; and when the carbuncle is empty, put dry rose oil or green oil-soaked cloths on the wound, and place the cloth from the wound at the opening of the anus, and over the anus and the handle, place a clean, moistened cloth soaked in vinegar or cooked malves; then apply ointment after two days, until it heals; and sometimes lift the anus and the wound with an enema of vinegar and honey, and then of cooked lys roots and aristolochia longa. Then return to the ointment. If the wound is healing in the anus, it is necessary that you avoid burning with iron, but treat it as we have mentioned in the division.
Of childbirth
The midwife must first recognize the figure of natural childbirth and its signs when she sees the woman pushing downward and desiring to urinate; then hasten the birth of the infant; for when it descends towards the head, the second one follows with it; and when you see these signs, it is necessary to gently press the woman's abdomen so that the infant comes out quickly; for when it rises towards the head, the afterbirth is expelled by the husband with his waste through good cleansing; and this which comes in another way does not come naturally. For sometimes it comes on its feet, or the body or thighs, or hands, or on the abdomen, or backside, and is turned accidentally onto its neck, and by other evil figures; it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and skillful in these matters, and to avoid error and deception, and I will show you all the figures as to how one should assist.
If the infant comes down naturally towards its head and the woman gives birth with difficulty, and the vital forces of the infant are weak, make her sit on a saddle or have women hold her; and anoint her nature with oil or fenugreek that has been cooked, and then insert the small spatula (spatumile) between her fingers as shown in the figure: And split the second bone, and strike it with its claw so that the moisture which is within escapes; and press the woman's abdomen until the child descends, and if it does not descend, then you must fumigate the woman with musk-scented fenugreek oil; afterwards make her take and vomit emetics, and hold her mouth and nose closed for an hour; this will now cause the child to be born.
of the birth of the child upon its feet When the child is born on its feet, then you must push it upwards; and then turn [the limb] slowly and slowly, until it is even.
then take one piece of cloth and stretch it slowly and slowly.
Can it jump up to the knees, if commanded, and make it vomit with condyssium (a type of medication); if it jumps up (it means the wound or lesion), God willing.
And if it is not as we have said, turn it little by little until it is according to the natural figure. Thus it should be done gently.
And if it does not come as we have said, take mastic resin of high quality, oil of roses, and melted gum arabic, and grind everything in one mortar. and place the mixture on the nature of the woman from within and outside this ointment. Make him sit in acute pain beneath his ribs;
and when it is softened below [the affected area], make one cupping glass of myrrh, place it on top, and leave it for an hour; Then make him sit on a chair, then make him vomit and hold his mouth and nose closed, and press lightly on the stomach, because the infant is now struggling; from the birth of the child on its knees When an infant comes in this form, place the bale (balister) with your hands slowly.
From the emergence of the child which comes out one hand wide It is necessary to manipulate the hand [to deliver it]. If you cannot manipulate [the baby], raise the woman and walk around.
If it cannot walk, lay it on a bed or a flat surface, and bend its legs.
then administer the musk-like substance I have mentioned;
and if it does not give birth, lay it on a chair or seat, then try to bring back the hand. and deliver the child according to its natural shape, make it vomit, and tell her to take hold of it until the afterbirth issues forth.
The issue of the child on its neck, and it has spread out its hands, and its face turned towards the back of its mother. You must hold the child's hand firmly, then turn it gradually and gently rotate it.
And when it is equalized, place it on a high muslin cloth and oil, as we have said, then instruct it to move gradually.
And when you have done this, make it sit on a chair and instruct it to take hold of itself; then make it vomit. In this same manner, treat everything else.
In this same manner, treat everything else. When it comes to be in this manner for everything, press the dislocation with your finger, until the moisture is expelled.
And if the child pushes up against its face and neck, press it from the back so that it is not held, and the child dies.
Then push the child inside until you have placed it as required, and command the woman to take care of herself once.
From the birth of twins   (or from twin pregnancy) It is known that twins are born often and sometimes three or four; and this is not strange and rarely happens.   (It is common for twins to be born, but it is rare for more than two to be born at once.) It is a strange thing, and if they are named, they do not live.   (It is a rare occurrence that twins are named and survive.)
I know that they [the symptoms] multiply, and are desired by the one who inflicts them, who is tied to evil.
And sometimes they occur naturally like teeth under the gums, as we have said.
And if they emerge violently, the treatment is as we have said, and let the bailiff be skilled, and do quickly and easily whatever it does. and perform it in such a way that it contributes to healing. Of many children
Of many children Sometimes they are formed in marriage (i.e. one, two, three, four, five, six, seven or more, up to fifteen), and all are fully formed like a child by the measurement of the sagacious Glorious One (God),
And it is necessary that the bailiff knows all this, for sometimes similar things happen; Carry out as required.
Of a dead child.
When treating the woman with a dead child or miscarriage, as I have said in the division, and it does not come forth, and you are forced to work by hand; It is necessary to know if the woman is of sound virtue, and not have any accident or fear of death.
The woman should be laid on her back, with her head lowered, and her legs raised.
The minister shall shave her from the waist down, or tie her to the bed so that she is not treated in the delivery of the child;
Then rub the mouth of the midwife with moist oils mixed with musk and fenugreek and flaxseed, then anoint her hands with these oils and these musks. Then push it gently into the socket, then seek one level where it can fit.
and beware if the entrails are protruding that they should draw them back onto their head; if he inserts the tendons into his eyes or neck or mouth or palate or under his beard or near the joints or near the ribs,
And if the dislocation is on limbs, pierce or press them gently towards the middle.
And you should hold the limb with your right hand and place the flat part between your left-hand fingers, and push it all the way with your entire hand gently, and pierce the limb in one of the places mentioned until it reaches the empty state.
then pierce towards another bone, where needed, so that the dislocations are equal;
And then it should be straightened equally by moving from one side to the other, in order for movement to occur, and the bones should be brought together tightly to hold them as shown here:
If there remains a part, then the physician should apply oil to one of his fingers and push it into that part, and pull the other part.
And if there remains no part, then place this bone or higher up and do so until it goes completely out.
And if one hand comes before the other and cannot return due to strain, then you should wrap it in a cloth, until it goes away;
Then cut the tendon at the base of the joint or at the palm, and you must do the same in the other hand, and with both feet.
And if the child's hips are wide and they are narrow at birth, or if there is a sharp head assembled, It is necessary that you insert the pointed sponge between your fingers, and bend the head and extract the pus. you should take it to the instrument called "almidach", from which the shape comes with the tools or chapter that follows this one.
and in the same way make the child naturally born with a large head; and then cut the bones with the pincers.
And if the shoulder jumps out and is held by force, it should be cut open, as far as the moisture that has come out or gone deeper;
If it cannot be pushed back in, then break it into parts where you can.
And if it is swollen in the belly or under the ribs, then you must cut through until the moisture comes out.
And if it is swollen above its feet, the treatment is light and the repositioning to the mouth of the bladder is easy.
And if it [the dislocation] is in the stomach or the thigh, you must straighten it by wrapping it with a cloth wrapped around your hand; and cause the moisture that is there to correct;
and if other limbs are dislocated, and the joint remains; place the ball of your hand inside the wound, and pull up to the mouth of the wound; Then put one or two iron rods, and pull it out.
if the mouth of the worm boil is constricted due to the hot poultice that has come, do not stir it. then you must administer moist and fatty things; And apply soothing plasters, and let them rest in warm softening agents.
And if the bone is on the side, and you can put it back in place, apply what was said in the previous section about setting a live bone.
And if you cannot set it, break it into pieces and take nothing from the second joint.
And when you have done this, apply what was said in the previous section about dressing wounds with lint that comes from a female donkey.
And if bleeding occurs (when performing cautery), it must be stopped with tight restraint, and other treatments should be applied.
I saw a woman whose womb had killed an infant, then consulted another physician about it, and the other revived the infant. After a long time, an abscess appeared in the buttock and swelled so much that it opened up and began to rot.
I was called for the treatment, and I thought about it for a long time, but could not stop the wound from bleeding.
I place strong plaster, and from it comes out a bone, and after some days another one. I marveled greatly, because the stomach has no bones.
I thought that it was the bones of a dead child.
I sought the wound, and extracted several bones until the woman improved; And a woman endures for long times like this, and suddenly a little swelling occurs at the base.
And I have not recorded this chapter for any other reason than that when the master discovers an unusual thing, he knows what remedy to apply.
to bring the marriage back to its place
Here comes the form of the screw press, with which one measures books; and at each turn, both heads of the two levers move. The horns (whatever they refer to) should be more delicate for the restriction, and made of ebony or boxwood.
And the mouth of the pipe should be two fingers wide, and the edge of the tree stump one finger thick, and long and a half palm. And within the two leagues (units of measurement) should be two joints of this same pipe, which are sealed on both ends, half a palm long or slightly more.
And this two joints are inserted into the mouth of the mallet for opening when turning the two horns.
Another form, resembling something more subtle and lighter, should be made of ebony or boxwood, in the likeness of pincers. and it should have two heads and two pincers, as you see, of a palm's length, and two fingers' width.
and when you see opening the woman, use all the instruments; make her sit on one bed, with her legs apart and her feet hanging. then insert the two pincers into the woman together, and hold the head of the instrument under her thighs. Then work your hand with all the instruments, just like you have done with the tweezers equally, according to the quantity that you see to open the mouth of the wound, until the pig lets out what it wants.
These instruments are all covered and multiplied according to their resemblance; and when the surgeons have prepared them, he works more quickly, and higher for humans due to their quantity.
Never despise the instrument that you have not prepared, because their necessity is not excusable.
When the afterbirth is retained during childbirth, you must command the patient to retain her lochia, and then make her vomit with emetics, and hold your hands on her mouth and nose. If she jumps due to this, it is good.
If this does not happen, take one pot and make a pessary or plug with it, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the woman, such as rue, anise, chamomile, cascara sagrada, and centaury;
All these herbs, or some of them, should be cooked or boiled in water over fire; then place a cane or the mouth of the pot on one end, and the other end into the mouth of the patient.
and hold the plaster until the vapors enter the patient's body; then make him vomit, as we have said. If the patient jumps up quickly.   \n\nSi ung de ses membres est ostez, si com avons dit, se le pointe et fai grosse pele pour que il ne refreigne, et on met en la plaie ung cestui qu’il ne demurra pas; si li coupe la veine ou il demande, et aucune fois ne demeurez pas. And if it remains after this treatment and does not heal, instruct the woman to moisten her left hand in sesame oil or mustard plaster, and then apply it to nature.
Then you should second her; and when she has found it, grasp it and stretch it little by little straight out, so that the husband does not feel pain during extraction. But you must move it gently to the right and left, and then pull; it will come out and discharge.
And if the mouth of the morsus (a bite or wound) is stretched open, we have said the treatment of emptying, and fumigation of herbs;
And if it (the treatment) does not include all that we have said, ensure you do not pull;
But it is necessary that the one at the mouth of the bite (morsus), you tie it to the woman's cuxie, then cleanse it with ointment four-formula;
If it [the dislocation] is put back and will come forth, but nevertheless, when it could do so, a bad smell comes to the stomach and head, and it injures the patient.
Therefore, fumigations suitable for this are necessary: no ancient has proven fumigation of dill and dried figs.
The form of the instrument with which one fumigates the woman to retain the flowers and the afterbirth is as follows:
And it is of glass-like appearance similar to a cane, and place the head subtle in its nature, and the broad shoulders above the fire;
And let the fumigation be over the coals, and the tinder until it is burnt out, then start another.
of piercing the foundation   (This line does not have a complete sentence in Old French and is likely an incomplete or fragmentary text)
Many children are born without the foundation pierced, but rather it has been stopped up with some subtle syrup;   (This line does not have a complete sentence in Old French and is likely an incomplete or fragmentary text) Therefore, it is necessary for the baler to pierce that spot with its tip at the appropriate depth, and not to pierce it with an acute spatula, and be careful that it does not touch the ligament.
Then put on a soft cloth moistened with wine and oil, then treat with ointment until it heals.
And if you doubt that it will burst open again, place a splint of wood and leave it for many hours, and remove it when the child is seen to go into the bedrooms.
And sometimes comes this sudden swelling of wound or abscess; it is necessary to cover the affected area: if it is a wound, as we have said, with the lard of pig.
of the fistula from the foundation Fistulas that come from below the foundation are nodulation, and growth that comes above the foundation and in the space between two parts,
If it has a fistula or more than one; and when that node is old, it works, and yet moisture wakes up pus or thin boils,
Sometimes these fistulas are persistent; and they are recognized by those who notice either discharge or windiness when the patient has discharge, and occasionally it leaps one way or another.
And if it has fistulas that penetrate to the bladder and halfway up the penis; and they reach to the joint of the thigh and notch of the pelvis.
And thus one recognizes a persistent fistula at its base, and not a non-persistent one: and you should press your index finger or base on it, and insert a fine awl of iron or steel into the fistula where there is no twisting.
and if it has a twist, then insert a fine splint of wood or horsehair until you feel the splint or hair at your finger:
and if you don't feel it, and there is no purulent discharge, wind, or worms, as we have said: Know that it does not pierce at all; hasten to cure it.
And when the fistula extends up to the bladder or the passage for urine, if it discharges urine and cannot be healed by medicine.
If it pierces up to the knee joint, then is the tendon coming to the surface; If there is no twisting and the pain is around it, then it is definitely broken and no medicine or healing balm will help.
And in these Persian blisters there is no cure except for work, and the vain efforts of foolish physicians who interfere.
In those that are not Persian nor old, for the hope of healing by iron, as I have experienced.
and the patient lies between your hands on his back; and raise the legs up to his thighs, and have his thighs inclined toward his belly. Then insert a tent of reed or plank if there is curvature, as long as you know where the dislocation comes from.
If the patient feels it around the foundation, then you must insert your index finger there.
if it feels pierced then you must find out what is inside, whether flesh or bone, then you know that it is penetrated; Do not work on it if it cannot be healed.
One should know that it can be well healed for some, but this happens seldom;
and the aid that one gives, it is that one heats the subtle cautery according to the width of the fistula, as mentioned before; and push it all hot into the fistula until it comes out from the base; and do this 2 or 3 times, as long as you know that these charred pieces should be burned, which are like a bird feather;
And then cure the wound with softened tent (or bandage) soaked in butter, until the pain subsides, then apply a healing salve of warm and soothing oil.
If it heals like that, it is good. But if it cannot heal otherwise,
and if it enters, but does not pierce to the depth of the wound, place a thick covering of oil or syrup between your hand and the tent, and you will see the abscess under the cover of the bed. If the head of the fistula begins to emerge, push it immediately in front of the tent, and then apply the cautery afterwards, until it reaches the tip of the tent.
The tent will be delivered, and it will shrink; then take out those charred items that seem like a feather of a bird, leaving nothing behind.
And if the flesh is cut open by itself and there is no exit, cauterize it with fire or medicinal ointment.
Fire cauterization has two good effects: the burning of these charred items and the stopping of bleeding and removal of moisture.
Then treat the wound of moistened tents filled with butter or chopped herbs until the flesh is cooked in the butter;
Treat the wound with hard dry charcoal and dry medicine.
For when it is restored, it will heal and not return.
And if a fistula comes out to the full depth of the foundation and is separated from the body, push your finger or a probe into it and inquire about it.
If you feel the temptation and there is the cloth or leather or skin between two (2), where it is almost to pierce, have no fear except for the way of faith and hope through the administration of one of the three methods:
or you cauterize it as we have said, or you press it until it is deep, or if it breaks open, you apply poultice and cure it as first.
and do not go too deep, cover the thing that holds the foundation, and let the pus come out by its own will. Then heal, as we have said;
Then heal, as we have said; In case it becomes healthy, you remove that covering and clean it when it is cut away from the foundation, either by pulling or with some other instrument pointed. Then clean that festering sore in the wound as much as you can;
Then study to heal the wound and to keep the fistula in the part away from the foundation; it will be easier for the patient.
And sometimes fistulas occur in this manner: and it is when you bite the tent (?) into the fistula, and it is where it touches the foundation below the skin surface. Take a tent (?) pierced through in this shape: Then insert one thread twisted into two, and push the tent into the fistula to its full length (?) at the end of the thread.    --> Then insert one thread twisted together, and push the tent all the way into the fistula up to the end of the thread.
If it is perforated along the foundation inside, then draw out the thread of that one, so that you push your finger or foundation.
And draw the head with the thread, and join together the two shoulders together, and hold one to another, and leave it for one day or two;
And keep it fixed until the threads bind these charms that are between them, and they close.
then heal the wound until it is healed and healthy.
If the fistula does not pierce, make it pierce in all ways that you can, if it is not too deep.   Car il est doulent et grant peril por li laisser ouvir et non percier.
It is not advisable to cover the wound while it is still gaping, and then cure it, as we have said, until it is healed.
The shape of the spurred thorn from which they make the fistula is very sharp at one end and then it splits. and not on the other side, because it should not be covered where it should not be covered, as you see here.
Emorydes (embouchures) are in two ways: they are inside the foundation, like a grain of resin, and there are small and large ones, and on the outside there is blood, immediately. and sometimes there is one or several of them, and they are displaced from the foundation and the head of the foundation; but those that are displaced have little moisture.
and they may still have some aqueous citron or some blood, and have the color of the body.
And the cure for those who have it within the foundation, it is that you command the patient to stretch out for going into bedrooms, until the foundations heal, and the children appear. Then hasten, and hold it with pliers or hold it with your nail, then strike it at its roots;
and if the snakes cannot be held by their moisture, then take it with a cloth or cotton, or with a piece of chamois leather; And bind them to your wrists, then strike them, and sprinkle hot powders on top in place of cautery. Or you can cauterize it as the chapter on cautery says, and then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
And if the foundation cannot come out, then fumigate the patient with biting and harsh clysters to clean the area where the foundation is located, so that it can come out openly.
The patient should not prepare himself, and if his veins are forced from their foundation, the cure is easy; and you take hold of them with your nail or tweezers, and strike them, then cure as we have said, until they are healthy, and fear the incision with iron.
The suture should be made in this manner: take one twisted thread, put it on a needle, then pull the thread above and pierce the needle from the other side, and turn the two ends of the thread under the needle. and if it is wide; pull out the thread first, then the cord, and draw out the needle, and do the same with all the others, and leave one for draining excess blood;
then place a damp linen cloth soaked in rose oil or wax on the foundation and place it there, and instruct the patient to rest;
and then leave it until it stops bleeding, and when it has stopped, treat the wound with ointment and other remedies until it heals;
The drying of fires or foundations Often happens the drying of fires in the intestines, and by constriction of nature, and when the disease is old and medicine has no effect.
You must scrape off the surface with a spatula or your nail so it does not get wet;   Ou cautere de fer comande au malaide qu’il s’estrengne les poiz euz, et espoze les en une corde lisser, et li fist chaussez autour des membres ou il est dolens. Then cure it until it heals as necessary;
And if it cannot heal, then repeat the shaving stronger than before, until it heals and is scorched; Then cure it until it heals.
the trembling Fumigations are small infestations around the body, and move much forward;
And sometimes the fever strikes, and one feels it like death shivering, and it comes upon the whole body, more in the hands than elsewhere.
And the cure is that you take a cane of an ostrich feather or a strong bird's feather and place it on the shivering, so that the circles around the shivering are warmed. Then turn your hand along the entire cane so that you cover it all around the shivering, and immerse it in it, and warm the shivering from its roots.
And if you wish to do so, make it like a catapult of tar or iron in this form, and let it be subtle within and traverse above:
Do not pierce, for fear of causing pain, and press gently; And if you wish to cauterize the trembling (of a wound), as is explained in the chapter on cauterization.
of the shape of the clyster (enema) Sometimes they make an enema of silver or arsenic, or melted tar or honey; and sometimes they make small and large instruments according to the ones brought in.
Therefore, when treating children who are weak and suffering, they are small.
The form of the cluster is both small and large; it should be placed over a wide area where the belly is tied in this manner:
and there should be an opening where the belly is tied, as you see, and the cheeks should be pierced within; and at one side have two holes, and in the other one.
and the belly where medicine is placed from the bladder or parchment should be pierced all around with small holes.
and place between each wound, that is to say, a space must be left, then push into these wounds, fill them with strong thread, twist it tightly around ten or twelve times, and bind the belly as if it were a goat's pouch; and when the medicine is inside, tie it with a strong thread to the instrument in front, then apply the plaster (clister); this is the form of a circle:
Let the medicine neither be too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the plaster with oil or egg yolk, or similar substance, then gently push it in;
Then the ministers press the patient with both hands together until he is completely visible, then remove the plaster, and wash the patient's legs at the opening.
If the medicine is to be applied, burn it as much as possible; and if it makes him sleep all night, it will be more effective aid.
And if you plaster him in case of intestinal disease and the medicine hastens to heal, continue to apply it until he is cured.
And if the hemorrhoids or abscesses are deep, the plaster should be as delicate as for a child;
And this is the form of the subtle suppository on which the skin is stretched:
for wounds
We have already said in the division about the treatment of wounds; now I will tell you about the care of hands and medicines, according to the completion.
I say that wounds are various according to how they were made, and according to the places where the wounds were made, and because of what they were caused.
The things by which wounds are caused are by the thrusting of a spear, cutting with a sword and knife, or by a lance, arrow or dart, or similar things;
or according to the places in the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or the head, or the chest, or the belly, or the liver, and similar limbs;
And I shall tell you the treatment for each wound, and I will begin with wounds of the head, for the reminder will come in its chapter.
If the wound comes on or in the head, and the bone is not broken, beware if it is a result of an arrow or similar things, and the skin is completely torn open and the wound is large. and you doubt the rise of an abscess: if it becomes hot, make it drain as soon as possible from the head itself, even if a little blood comes out of the wound, or it drains against the part injured.
And the sick person evacuate (empties) of wine and heavy foods.
And if he does not want to purge, let his food be reduced, and he should drink no wine, nor eat meat.
And place on the wound, when an abscess develops there, cotton soaked in rose oil or only in stypic wine.
And if there is no abscess, place [something] on the wound, if it is fresh with all its blood, and it is not moved by air or powder, I shall say a little more about that shortly.
And if the fire has moved it, place some antiseptics on it until it is healed.
If the wound is large like a sword's size and the lips cannot be brought together by force, bring them together by stitching, as I shall explain in abdominal wounds.
If the wound is exposed of the bone, gaping and does not hold but only a little, press it; then cure the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of skin. Instruct the patient to eat large meats, such as cooked heads and wheat, also pulses and similar things.
And if you find or suspect rotten flesh without touching the bone, press the pus out of it all, and pour vinegar over it, then heal.
And if there is an artery in the wound or vein, which cannot be stopped without cauterization, and it cannot be stopped by medicines, then tie the artery with a thread if you find it dislocated. And if that does not help, cauterize (it).
And if these wounds are small and simple, the cure is easy: and it is that you put this powder which hardens as soon as the arrows have moved.
And the way to make the powder is: take one part of incense; two parts of dragon's blood; four parts of live coal, and grind it finely,   \( \) And press the wound, and hold it shut, until it heals well and is joined with all its blood.
And then tie it up well, and let it heal by itself if it does not swell; because medicine is not applied until it has healed.
And sometimes they do this with only charcoal when there is no incense or the blood of a dragon, but the wound has not healed over yet.
If the wound has healed over, do not put this powder in it.   \] Et lors en est on pris a la poille d'une oye aisnee, et il en faisoit une poille de son cors; et ains que il en fist, li ars ne avoit mueit la plaie, car le poi de l'aigne est sanc remediatif.   \] And then they take the pod from an egg that has been incubated, and make a powder of its shell; and before they do this, the wound has not yet healed, because the point of the needle is a healing medicine.
Place some digestible oil onions or barley flour made with water and honey over it until it boils. then heal it with other treatments until it heals.
And if a bone fracture comes with the wound and it is small, extract it with subtle tweezers.
And I will tell you next about the fractures of the head (skull).
of the wound of the neck
If there is a wound in the neck and it is simple (uncomplicated), there is no difference between this and one in the head, but if the nerve of the neck or the artery is cut.
If it is the nerve, there is no other remedy but to let it heal and not put any restraint, because it harms the nerves and causes them to retreat; And do not place anything cold on the wound, for the substance of nerves is cold, and the continuation of them is with the brain, which is the highest member.
but let the medicine be warm, like boiled water with sweet oil added and boiled again in sweet water. and other stones of similar nature, and always moistened.
And if the wound is large, then wrap it with strips of linen until it is healed.
And if the wounds are deep and swollen and full of pus, pierce it or lower it.
And if the arteries are cut, and blood flows out, stop it, tie it, and cauterize it if necessary.
And if the spine of the neck is cut or the windpipe, and the conduct is kept, so that the meat goes through. sew the windpipe above the neck of the throat, but do not touch the throat, instead place it back according to its natural shape. And then let it come back into place, and leave it for some days, then heal it with hot poultices until it is healed;
If the wound presses against the bone, squeeze it; And if there are bone fragments, pull them all out as you can, and leave those that you cannot get at until the wound heals. Straighten and align the joint.
If the wound is fresh, sprinkle the powder that I have mentioned. And if there is bone in the wound and it has a fistula, treat it as I have said in its chapter.
Of the wound from a spear or knife
If it is a wound from a spear or knife and the wound gushes with gas, then look carefully whether the wound bubbles: know then that the wound is fatal.
and if it is not deep and the wound is fresh with all its blood, do not put any powder on it at first hour or bind it for the blood that clots prematurely, return to the heart, and cut off the patient; But apply attracting ointment, and leave it on for two times per day;
and if you have no ointment, place soft cotton in the wound to draw out moisture.
and make the patient sleep on the wound for two days, or three, or more. if no spasm, nor bad tremor of the heart, nor twinge of the entrails occurs. And when you see good positions, know that the wound is healed. Leave the cauteries and other treatments, as long as he is healthy;
If it cannot heal, and opens again, know that there is a fistula; cure it as appropriate.
And if the wound is from a sword cut or knife, and it is simple (straight), whether deep or not, treat the part that is in front.
if it is large, to sew; and if it is small, to powder; and if it has penetrated into the bone, and there are pieces detached from it, treat the wound and pull out the fragments if they are protruding. and if they are not protruding, let the wound heal by itself, align the extraction.
And for other wounds on various limbs, the judgments are similar as we have said.
the dislocation of the belly
The dislocation of the belly is great and medium-sized and small;
when the large wound occurs once, the entrails or the intestinal nerves are penetrated;
And stitching is more difficult, and sometimes a small wound is worth more than a large one.
Because when repositioning the intestines, they should be inserted gradually rather than all at once. because the intestines swell up quickly and become hard if inserted too forcefully.
and because the midline wound is more important, therefore move the intestines back to their place rather than with the other two.
And know that the hernia of the belly is according to 4 types:
The two common hernias occur in the abdominal wall.
and the hernias of other parts of the body and two other specific hernias are common for other places;
And all these are more suitable with a stitching of the stomach, and I shall say one of them and declare it.
When the wound is small, and nothing from the intestines protrudes, And there are two ways to reattach it: For the smallness of the wound, as we have said, For because the intestines are swollen due to the cold.
And when it is cold, heat it up in this manner: Soak a sponge or one piece of linen cloth only in hot water, And you cook in sharp squill and cyperus and spike, and open the intestines until the inflammation is exposed;
And sometimes this vinegar restraining is made, and it is boiled to disperse.
And when you see swelling spreading out, if possible empty the intestines of water or air and ill-prepared or bad ones should be cooked, for this way the entrance is closed to little thing;
and if it cannot enter, then make a small wound with an instrument for coping with hemorrhoids;
and the first treatment is boiled that should be cut, We should not cut it without great necessity nor have it.
and this is the instrument for splitting:
if you make an incision within the hollow and do not spread it, observe its shape here:
When the wound is expanded and the intestines burst forth, If you reset it according to its natural form in its proper place, if you have the power to do so, for this is necessary.
When the wound is wide, and it is in the area below the belly, you must make the patient lie down on his back, And raise his legs higher than his head; if it is in the part below the belly,
And similarly, if the rupture of the abdomen is in one of the two parts if the broken part is higher than the other;
and thus one must treat as I say in large and small wounds.
for small wounds, use what is appropriate;
Then have a pious minister who anoints the entire wound with his hand, And press the lips; and this is the common way of stitching (or suturing);
and this is the common way of stitching (or suturing); and you take a needle or more, according to the size of the wound; then leave one inch from the edge of the wound and sew with a needle and strong thread. And pierce the two joints of the skin with the two sharp bones (or needles).
Then tighten a double thread around the needle on each side, Then assemble the two heads of the wound facing each other,
and leave one finger's width space, and insert another needle; then tie the thread as you did with the first needle, and continue doing this according to what you need for the needles, As long as the entire wound is held closed;
and the needles be medium-sized, between thin and thick. because thin needles pierce through the entire skin, and very thick ones cannot enter easily; because they should be medium-sized.
And it is not advisable to push the needles too deep into the flesh and skin,
so as not to open the wound before the suture.
and then close the tips of the needles, so they do not prick the patient while sleeping, and wrap silk or fabric around the tips of the needles to hold them in place. And let it heal as the wound is healed;
and this method of stitching with needles is more suitable for small wounds. because there is a needle or two there.
The second stitch is common and that you join the two shoulder bones and the two shin bones together with a needle and thread of strong, medium thickness. and when you have pierced all four of them together,
and when you have pierced all four of them together, if you draw the needle back to the part where you began, in the manner of drawing draughts (= pulling the thread through the fabric)
And put space between each stitch the thickness of a small egg.
this stitching shall be for the man.
and I sew a wound with one who had or stomach,
which had been wounded by a knife, And the wound was more than one palm wide, and the intestines were two palm lengths wide,
and the wound was in the abdomen. I brought back the intestines after it had been out for 24 hours,
And the wound was stitched for fifteen days, and healed, and became healthy.
And they had judged that he would die, and it was a miracle;
and did not care for ointment because I was in a place where there was none found, nor any medicine; and I put old cotton on the wound two times a day, and washed it with water of honey until it healed.
And now I will tell you the two proper methods of sewing:
Take the needle and thrust it from the outside part towards the inside up to that place.
when it has pierced the skin in a straight line, place the end of the thread or sewing where you have put the needle:
and make it pierce from the inside part towards the outside up to that place.
And the understanding of this stitch is that you sew it like a weaver weaves fur. And leave the gap once from one side and return it from the other until the stitch is completely finished.
The second method of stitching, which Galen specifically refers to as:
is like someone who assembles the two parts naturally without using stitches: And apply one of the cheeks to the other cheek, in this manner:
Stick an awl or the next cheek, and pierce only that spot, leave the two cheeks of the mirror. then turn the awl and pierce it from the outer part to the inner one, 2 heads of the shoulder
then pierce one and the other in the outer part, up to that which is inside, in 2 heads of the mirror that are opposite each other on the same side.
and this is the most common way of stitching and healing.
Galen said this word, and no one testifies against it.
One must sew the belly with two needles, where there is thread in each.
and one should insert one needle from one side, and the other from the other side, in the manner of those who sew sutures.
and know that when the hernia is within the belly, the stitching is more difficult than in other parts of the belly.
The judgement of the wound is similar to the judgements of other wounds:
and it is that when you probe the fresh wound with all its blood, just as the surgeon has moved it, if you put back the intestines, and sew it up; then place powder reinforcing the flesh on top.
if you put back the intestines, and sew it up; then place powder reinforcing the flesh on top. And if the arm has moved it, place any ointment that is present upon it until the wound heals. Cut the thread, and tie the stitches, and seal them with wax. then heal the wound as others, until it is healed.
if you do not have medicine, put cotton on it as soon as it starts to heal, And move it twice a day as long as it heals.
For you do not need any other medicine in many cases when the wounds are simple;
and if you doubt that the wound causes commonality with the main members, It is necessary that you soften linen lightly in warm oil or rose oil, and place it around the swellings, and under the sores.
and if there is pain or pus in the belly, and this happens repeatedly, If the laxatives made from black wine are weak, especially if the pus comes up to the intestines;
And pierce within, and know that when it is the large intestines, it is easier to heal than the small ones.
The intestine called "yew" cannot heal when it is perforated, and it is because of the inflammation of the veins that are there, and because of the subtlety of the whole body, and the closeness of its nature to nerves.
And if the suture jumps out from the wound, replace it as with the intestine, while it is fresh;
And if it is old and turned or black, you must tie the black part where blood does not flow. For there are veins and arteries.
Then cut what is between the ligament. And hang the two heads (shoulders) below the part of the wound so that it aligns for the extraction when the blades fall and the wound bows.
of the boil rupture
When the intestines are torn, and the wound is small, If one can restore it in some men,
because I have seen that a man was pierced or stabbed with a lance;
and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became swollen and turned into a fistula, and in it there were emissions and windiness;
I treat it according to what I know, and I did not stop refining until it healed, and the wounds closed.
And when I saw the wounds heal, I feared that the patient had an illness in his belly; and he did not have any sickness, but improved with better nutrition and drinks.
and the experienced said that if there is a small wound in the intestines, it should be tied in this manner: Take large tweezers, then gather the lips of the wound. and when the tweezers have opened the mouth, put it on the two lips,
then place another force after in that manner as before, until the wound is completely seized;
then dress the wound. If the head (of a part of the body) becomes swollen inside (the body), it brings no harm to the patient.
and one can tie the intestine with a fine thread cut from the intestine of an animal.
in such a way: take the head (of the intestinal thread) and make it quite blunt. And then tie this thread around the neck of it, that is to say, fine linen thread twisted. Then put the thread on a needle and sew the intestine, and remove it through the incision;
And this method of stitching up wounds is not stronger than by faith and hope.
If the wound is great and wide, especially if it is in one of the large intestines, there will be no help nor health, unless by subtlety.
of a fistula or... All wounds or abscesses that heal are universally called "fistulas", and likewise when it is closed and healed.
And a fistula, according to the truth, is a hard and white knot that does not cause pain, And it is as swollen as a feather of a bird;
sometimes it jumps clearly in a bow, and at other times it becomes thickened; sometimes small, and at other times enough;
I have spoken about it in the section on wounds, that any wound that is not healed and there is no flesh; It is beyond doubt due to one of the 8 causes:
this means, by an excess or deficiency of blood or humor: or because of a disease: For because there is hard flesh within, under the lips, do not let it grow (hair). for there is too much phlegm. when the loins are swollen and the matter is of bad quality. for the medicine is not good in the treatment. Because corruption is a form of pestilence; because in the region the digestion is slow and health sluggish, and it tends to swell by nature; there are veins or bones there;
and I have already shown all these causes, signs, and cures of medicine in the division.
Now I shall tell you the cure for a fistula made by handwork.
Know that fistulas occur in all members of the body; because there are fistulas that come from large veins, arteries, and nerves, or in the intestines, bladder, kidneys, or any other part of the body. For the spine of the back, or for any joint of the hands or feet;
And all the fistulas that are of this kind are of grave healing, and there is nothing but labor and ignorance to cure them.
And if there is any fistula that does not come up to the level I have said, and you have confidence in its cure, And you recognize it, take a tent of honey or iron, if its opening is straight, pierce it.
And if its opening is twisted, look for a fine tent of lead... because lead bends with the twisting.
and if its opening has been damaged and you cannot find it with tents, If the incision is made through one of the wounds,
for moisture cuts from one wound to another, and it cleanses (it);
then bind it with hemostatic power as you can, so that you know if there is bone or nerve, and it is completely closed,
and ask the patient carefully about the pain they feel when pressed by your hand, and the location where they feel it;
And when you truly know where it is located, and if it is far from a joint, or a nerve, or an artery, or a vein, or in any of the locations that I have told you, if the arm is positioned according to what I have told you,
or in any of the locations that I have told you, if the arm is positioned according to what I have told you, and cut out the false flesh and corrupt cartilage that are inside. and then heal it when it is healed,
And if the fistula is properly penetrated straight through, it is necessary that you cut it all the way, as much as you can, then put wet bandages soaked in medicine on it, and push them up to the head of the fistula.
then put wet bandages soaked in medicine on it, and push them up to the head of the fistula. until the medicine dissolves the superfluidity that remains at the bottom;
then put warm ointments on the healthy flesh, until it heals;
And if it is not healthy by this [method], cauterize it as we have said,
And if the bone is rotten from the wound, break it. If a vein or nerve does not obstruct or affect the main limbs, as we have said;
And if the bone is exposed, and there is decay and blackness, cut it off while the decay is completely removed, Then heal the things that are harmful to the bone while it is healthy.
and if it is not healthy, then bind it as before, know that you are not going as far as the fountainhead:
If you uncover [something] and want to go as deep as possible, and remove all the corruption, then reset the joint.
and if it is thus healed, that is good. But if not, know that the corruption is too deep that you can't reach it. If there is no other remedy than natural rest.
and if there is a little bone corrupted, and you can draw it with pliers, if it is drawn out with one instrument convenient for this.
and if there are several bones, draw them all out, do not leave any of them.
And if moisture opposes you, and there is no mistake or fear, If flesh and moisture bind the bones together, then release the bones.
And if you cannot remove them within an hour, place something irritating purgative on the wound, And let the muscles be swollen around the bones,
And then they will have more easily moveable bones;
and if it is a large bone such as the thigh or the leg, if you press only the corruption until all the blackness disappears, Then restore the wound;
And if there is much rotten part in it, reaching down to the bone. it must be cut and covered up to the corruption, and then let it heal until it is healed.
And I will tell you about a fistula that happened to one man in his leg, If you take an example and help in your work.
There was a young man around thirty years old who had pain in his leg due to a cause that came from within the body.
The matters kept coming to the leg and a large abscess erupted, and there was no other reason for it to open.
but the fools opened them too much so that the abscesses burst open, And they corrupt much matter, and it becomes a fistula, and much pus comes out that all flow and moisture from the body.
And they put many cures around it for two years, but there was no healer in the art of hands.
as long as I was called to him, and I saw his leg and the medicines that they were treating it with. and the one who walked with great swelling of the body due to pus. And the bodies of the young ones become red, and they have a yellowish tint.
I pitched a tent in one of these wounds, then I searched for all the wounds,
And I found that he was coming towards another from all parts of the leg.
I then hastened, and made an incision in one of the boils until I uncovered a part of the bone, and found it rotten and pierced, and the rot came up to the bone within;
I was the one who appeared to be the rotten bone, and thought that there was no other rot except what I left;
and began to heal the wound with salves for a long time, but could not suture (it).
And then examine (or inspect) and discover the bone as before,
and I found the continuous corruption in the bone, and burned it out, and then left it open, and then tried to mend the joint;
but I could not as I covered around a palm of the bone, and drove it back in entirely; then I returned it to medicines; and it healed and mended quickly,
and it is not necessary to continue the work except due to the feebleness of the patient who could not endure, and because of the fear of death that I had for him. For the blood evacuation occurred often, but he was completely healthy.
For the blood evacuation occurred often, but he was completely healthy. and a hard cyst grew on the bone, and he had a good constitution and did not have any harm or damage in all things, nor to his air or coming.
Extend the head (the affected area), so that you pull out the corrupt flesh beneath. and uncover the skin on the place where you wish to be, so that the skin does not prick the flesh. and put a splint or a board under the bone to cover the corrupt flesh. And it is necessary to see and feel the corruption as much as possible, and also to examine it again.
If the bone is corrupt, but does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or a part of it, If you expose the whole flesh; then put one splint under it,
If the corruption is found in one part of the bone and is long enough for a thumb (one inch),
And if the corruption is at the joint, strike the corrupted joint, and be the bone or part it contains on the other side.
And if the corruption extends through two joints, there is no other remedy than to cover (it).
And if the corruption is at the hand or foot, it is a very serious matter. However, you must investigate this corruption, how it arises. And clean it in every way you can, but do not harm the vein or nerve.
and know that the saw and files for cutting these bones are many, according to the position of the bones and their appearance. and their thickness and subtlety, and their size and smallness, and their hardness. And for each kind of work, it is necessary to prepare the instrument accordingly.
And know that the work will show you the instrument you need, according to the knowledge of this art. and the testimony of the symptoms of diseases. if you think about the instrument that is needed, according to what is required.
hot fire The heads can burst from within, or from outside.
and when you have applied this corrosive medicine through the treatment of medicines, and it does not help at all, it is necessary to cover that limb up to the level where the corrosion occurs, If the patient is scorched by this [cautery], he shall let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
If the patient is scorched by this [cautery], he shall let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow. and if the signs are that the member becomes black, as though it were burned by fire, and afterwards it turns black, then goes this corruption of the member to member. And take hold of the entire body; hasten to cover it.
If it is due to the sting of some venomous animals such as a sea scorpion or viper and similar creatures,
If the corruption is at the top of the tooth, strike it and do not give it room to reach the hand.
And if it reaches up to the hand, strike at the joint, so that corruption does not reach up to the arm.
and if it reaches past the elbow, strike at the bone; if it passes the bone, it is death, and there is no foreign remedy of value but the quantity of its virtue.
And thus do as when corruption comes or pain: if it comes at the first joint, then crush it after the other joint;
If it comes with pain, then crush everything in pain; If it ascends to the leg, then crush at the knee joint;
If it comes above the knee, there is no other remedy but letting the patient die.
And the manner of covering or dressing the limb is such that you bind it above and below. Extend one minister to the lower ligament, and another minister to the upper ligament. And you should cut open the flesh that is between the two ligaments with a spoon-shaped instrument, wide enough to expose the bone.
Then dress or cover it (the exposed bone), and place one linen cloth on each side, to ensure that the dressing does not touch healthy skin. And another injury and abscess comes to the patient.
If bleeding occurs when you work, then cauterize the area immediately. Then place some restraining powders on it; return to your medicine until it is completed,
Then tie the limb with a convenient ligature, and heal it until it is sound.
And I will tell you what happened to one man in a pit:
a man fell into a pit where there was darkness that seemed to be on fire:
the corrosion came first in his mouth from the pit, until it had filled the whole pit;
And when the body sees corruption, it pierces copper with its (the body's) lance, and becomes healthy.
and long afterwards the corruption or pain returns from the hand, and it came to me,
and I placed remedies that were repelling after the cleansing of the body, but the corruption could not cease.
and you command me to bandage the hand, but I do not want, as I had hope to repel the matter; And he also fears if I cut his hand, that he will die. because the virtue of the man was weak; and he gave up all hope, and returned to his land. and struck his hand with a copper sword, and recovered.
and I have not told this story for any other reason than to show what should be done if it is necessary.
An abscess sometimes comes in a charred place and remains for so long that it causes a great accumulation of pus. Then they run and pierce, and the pus jumps out, and the place remains open like a wound of a warrior. and the skin that is above it becomes as thin as one layer of unspun linen cloth. and they will not go down to the bone or nerve, and such a disease is called "sain".
but if it is so long that it reaches the bone in full, then it is called "fistula";
The cook should be such that you cover the entire hide, and also when it is thin, like a cloth. and do not leave it because of its rotting.
And if you have a suspicion that the flesh hardens, and the corruption is not complete, and the flesh becomes thick, treat it with clysterism (enema) in this way:
examine if the breasts are large, and the swelling within them is foul-smelling, Then give him an Egyptian enema made in this way: Take asafetida, oil, and litharge equally, and cook them together in one vessel over fire. until the medicine turns red and becomes as thick as honey;
and then take from it according to your need, and make it into water and honey. and apply it as a poultice on the breast, and press the wound; And leave the medication on for two hours, then draw it out while pulling on it;
Do this several times until the breast is healed and the pus is discharged;
And once is cleansed with ashes water; when this medicine is not present, take vine ash and pour water over it,
Then bleed, and in ointmenting (applying an ointment), as long as you know that the breast is well healed;
and if the patient cannot bear it, or Egyptian medicine (?) nor the ash of embers, if the ointmenting (ointment) has water and honey or a little litharge powdered; Or you will anoint it with honey and sweet wine, where the honey has properties to cleanse and wash. And the wine will heal the wound.
Then, when you have done this and are sure that the wound is clean, if the anointing causes pus to form in them,
And you take plaster of definition, make it with rose oil and wine. You anoint it with some medicines and ointments, of which I have mentioned the properties for treating sores.
if the sore on the breast is small, and the bandage cannot enter it, if it is a wound from a small spear and you put on it an Egyptian ointment in a tent. And the ointment of basilicon, as it is diluted;
and if the wound is too wide, leave it at least one fingerbreadth or a clisterium can enter.
and if the wound that pours out blood is on top, press or lower it to where it is. For when the wound is deep, do not allow anything to fill it with flesh. And if you cannot cover the chest below as you see, then prepare everything in such a manner that the belly protrudes as much as it can towards the lowest level.
and if you cannot cover the chest below as you see, If it appears in this manner: that the arm moves slightly downwards, without letting anything from the arm. and take medicines to strengthen for placing on the breast.
and stretch over one linen cloth that covers the entire breast; then hold the pressure towards the wound on the breast, a bit larger than the first. The wound is to be anointed with oil or another cloth according to the quantity of the injury, and place it on the injured breast to align the bone, and do not remove the large cloth except after many days once.
and he who is on the injured breast, removes often to remove the bone, and know that it runs from the bone, whether it is poisoned or infected, or digested, or undigested.
And take care if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not,
And when your medicine has been applied in this manner and you see the nature that rises above the sore on the breast, If you know that the breast is already infected, approach the healthy ones;
And then dislocate it in the morning or the third day, and when you dislocate the wound, Change one bandage, and renew the salve (or dressing).
And if the breasts swell improperly after many days, know that the breasts do not heal. If subtle poisons run after a long time, do not despair of health,
For the health approaches. There are men whose wounds heal slowly due to cold, and those who do the contrary;
and if the stomach swells excessively without reason after many days, know that the breasts are not affected;
and if the breast delays in increasing, and it is swollen, let him apply dry and moist medicines that are moist in substance but dry in effect. As an eggshell defined, for it has a great part of vitreous [material], and it is the last remedy;
take eggshell defined, and make it with rose oil, and mix with old wine equal in substance;
then cook and use it; this same thing is better when boiled and thickened, when eggshells defined are not present,
or you take myrrh and aloe and incense, grind them together, and sprinkle the powder on honey when it is over the fire; and then place one cloth, and lay it on the chest, and sometimes an Aristotle long-winded is administered; and root of celestial lily, which is like flour from many times and chalk.
and root of celestial lily, which is like flour from many times and chalk. and use of simple or compound remedies: grind them, make powder, and put on the honey that I said, and use it. And if the cure is prolonged, and not treated by this treatment.
And if the cure is prolonged, and not treated by this treatment. Therefore, know that corruption begins in full, and presses on the bone or hard members, or ligaments. if the treatment for the fistula, as we have said before.
of the abscess on the nail
Pancreatisis is an abscess that arises beneath the nail of the finger. or under the toe, or perhaps it appears in other places;
and when it becomes inflamed, and no care is taken, one abscess may develop. and they will boil and discharge pus until it reaches the root of the nail, and by chance it may break off completely.
And comes the corruption up to the bone, until it brings pain that smells bad, and the shoulders are wide apart, and the flesh is discolored.
When you treat it as we have said in the previous section, but the treatment does not help at all. Then you must cut away any excess that remains from the nail. Next, cauterize the wound afterwards. The cautery is very great help if the bone is healthy, and the nail is sound.
and if the nail beneath the skin starts to push upwards and begins to swell, and blisters, you must place the rod under the nail so as not to pierce the skin. And strike it from above, and gently and lightly hit the flesh. And place on top of the remaining flesh the medicine with burning and corrosive properties to remove all.
If the corruption is in the bone, strike and draw it out, for as much as the bone is corrupted, it cannot heal.
And if you see the thigh to correct, strike it with a cupping glass as previously said, then heal it until it is healed;
and if it is wounded, bled, and causes great pain, then you must let it bleed first; then strike the nail with a sharp spatula from above in a crosswise manner,
And keep the tip of the incision not to reach the flesh that is beneath the nail, for the patient would feel too great pain.
If it happens, place something on it to soothe.
The patient who is born with tumors in his hands by accident is all fleshly. And by accident there may be a part where there are bones, and sometimes there is a nail.
And none of these are born in the root of the joint, but rather they are born on some of our fingers. The one born in any of the finger's knuckles does not move, And he who is born at the joint of the thumb, by chance remains silent;
The weight of one who is fat is light, in this manner: weight him by his root with a broad spatula.
He who is born at the root of the joint is difficult to cure; cover it.
In one who is born or about to die, it is necessary that you cut round the flesh up to the bone, then cut the bone with an appropriate saw, and cure it until it heals.
Fractures come together in the joints due to birth, injury, burns, or similar things.
It is necessary that you cut the fracture so that it can heal in its natural shape; Then place between two tents or dampened cloths oiled with rose oil, so that they do not stick together. And you put thin wooden pieces between them until the joints are fastened as required.
If one of his hands comes with the palm towards the joint, you strike that joint as needed.
Peasants
Veins are large, swollen veins filled with melancholic excesses, which come in many members of the body.
And more often occurs in legs of those who walk and work and carry loads, than in others.
Therefore, you must administer purges of bile on occasion, and then heal with the basilica.
The iron cure is according to two methods: one is by hitting, and black blood is drawn out. And another way is that you open the vein, and pull it all out.
The cutting is done in this manner: cut the leg open with hot sharp knife, until the flesh becomes thin. Then hold the patient's leg from above the knee down to the part below the knee. Then open the vein in one place, or two or three, of a large size,
Then slice and draw out the black blood from the vein to your hand, from one end to another, as much blood as the disease's strength can withstand.
and then tie it up, and instruct him to bind himself with black coloured meat for food.
and repeat the evacuation and the healing when the veins are full, and it is beneficial for the patient.
The swelling of it (the limb) is in this manner: raise the leg of the patient, if there is much hair on it, then put it in water and raise the leg of hot water until it becomes red and swells the veins;
and if you don't have water, then heat it with fire, and apply it to the vein along the thigh for a long time or in the part below the knee.
then scrape the skin with an awl and open the vein on both sides, until it appears when you feel it.
And one sees it red and black, and when it enters or skin it seems like a white cord;
then push the rod beneath [the dislocation], as long as it is raised from the skin, and then gently bend it to the point;
then hit it in one other place about three fingers away; then cut open the skin over the vein as far as it appears, Then sharpen the iron [instrument], as you have done, and bend it to another angle, as you did before.
Then take another shape, or various [shapes] if needed, then sharpen, and bend it to the point of the shoulder,
Then draw out and sharpen until the second shape; then cut it lengthwise, until it breaks completely, then bend it.
And if you cannot draw it out and lift it, push an awl with a thick, double thread into it. And tie and pull it out, then push under a rod, and turn your hand back and forth until it comes out; And be careful that it does not break, for if it breaks, you cannot draw or lift it out, which causes harm to the patient.
And when you have treated it completely, place over the wound a damp cloth soaked in vinegar and rose oil, and let it heal until it is healed.
And if the face is contracted, twisted, and swollen together, and it is not straight, as we have said, Then you must cut it painfully, but do not cover it; and pull it as we have previously said.
Then you must cut it painfully, but do not cover it; and pull it as we have previously said. The shape of the iron used to pierce the face is curved, but does not cut, that it should not pierce the vein.
and is of large curve, because if it is delicate, it would pierce the vein; but be thick as we have said, and here is its shape:
Of the civil vein
This vein is incised in the legs, in warm places where no grass or trees grow, and in land that has no moisture.
And in some cases it may arise elsewhere than the legs, which happens due to corruption that comes beneath the skin,
When a snake comes inside the body and goes forward, pierce between skin and flesh.
And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are that a very large inflammation comes in the leg, Then the limb changes, and the vein begins to come out like the root of a plant.
When the shoulder is open, you should wrap around it a piece of wood from 1 to 1.5 cubits long and bind it.
and leave the wood on the leg, and every time it is pushed out of place, you should wrap it around the wood, and bind it. and if it is too long, you should cut a part of it, wrap the remaining part around it, but do not cover the root while it is still coming out. because if you cut it, it returns into the flesh and causes abscesses, pus, or illness in that area.
Because of this thing it must be treated little by little until the head, and nothing remains on the body.
and sometimes this vein when it is treated from five fingers' length, or ten, and once a man came to me, whose it was ten fingers' length, and when you cut it, if you press one egg or pear, and pierce it to the bottom,
Empty everything within it; and let the material inside be voided, and bring in medicines that promote healing for three days, then heal as with an abscess.
And sometimes, many times to this vein, it opens at the joint of the foot or arm, And it comes much of blood loss, and often bursts open; then heal it as we have said before.
Worms that are born between skin and flesh
This disease is called "cattle disease" in our land, because it often happens to cattle,
and it is a small worm that is born between skin and flesh, and goes throughout the body spreading and multiplying, and it can be felt moving from member to member until it breaks through the skin or disappears.
And is an inflammation due to rottenness of some fluids, as worms, snakes, and tapeworms or belly ones come.
Doubt is about its nature, for when it goes through the body, and it rises to the head, and comes to the oil, By chance, enters, and destroys the oil; and this happens many times.
When you wish to cure and drain it, one can do so only when he goes:
then you must lie the limb above and below with a strong ligature tightly bound.
then cut across it and drain it forcefully, and if the wound is deep into the flesh, and you do not touch it, if you cauterize it with fire until it dies;
And the greatest harm it does is that it runs oil, as we have said;
and if you see it coming or near the oil, hold the scournel under it, then strike above and pull it out;
and the patient should be cleansed of the body with soluble medicines to remove harmful humors.
And it bursts from the rotten flesh of meats.
Of the pain that comes from windiness This disease is called "wakirir" on our land, and it is pain that comes in some members, And then it moves from member to member; I have seen what I am telling you.
I was called upon a sick woman, and she showed me her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm;
And after that, it began to rise like a worm at the shoulder, As soon as nothing, just as sharp silver when it cuts from one place to another;
The pain spreads from that place and penetrates into the shoulder.
And shortly after it runs through the entire body until it reaches the other arm.
Then it was told to me that it would return again around the body, as I saw it.
I marveled greatly how it moved from limb to limb, for I had never seen this disease in such a manner before. Moreover, I had heard of pain moving from place to place. but I had never seen it in a woman;
And I thought it was because the woman had a dry body, and the veins exposed. and for this reason that condition appears constricted.
and it does not appear accordingly to those who are delicate, and have moist bodies and veins covered.
And when you see treating this disease, and the patient feels that pain as we have said, If the joint above and below is pressed hard, then press on it until the windiness (swelling or inflammation) is forced back to its place. and cauterize the affected area; if you do not see it with your eyes,
use the remedy for those who swell up, such as pills made from pennyroyal or snakeweed, and similar remedies.
Arrows
Arrows are various, according to their shapes and according to the places in the body where they strike.
The diversity among them is that some have large points, and small, and blunt, and solid ones. and of those with two points, and of those with tongues, and of those where there are fragments. and when an arrow strikes any member, it does so in two ways: either in the principal part (where it pierces),
Like a brain, heart, liver, spleen, lungs, intestines, bladder, and similar organs. When it falls out of place in any of these organs, and the signs of death that I will tell you afterwards will indicate: If you must perform the extraction of this arrow, because death comes in many ways afterward. And when this bad sign does not appear, and the arrow is not completely out, pull it out and treat the wound.
And when the head of the skull is pierced by an arrow and passes through it, a blow that is above the skull should be applied. When there is a cataract and scalding and hemorrhaging and inflammation of the tongue, and convulsions and confusion of mind, and vomiting of bile; And perhaps without force from the nostrils, or ears; and perhaps loses speech and voice; Jumps out of the wound white moisture like pus, and also jumps like burned charcoal.
If this sign appears to you, refrain from treatment, and draw the arrow if it is not embedded.
The sign of the arrow when it falls or pierces, is that it is near the left breast, and feels like it has been driven into something hard, not empty. And by chance, the patient becomes mute like the hair, and in a black cold blood comes sweating, and coldness and faintness follow. Then it is clear that death is imminent.
The sign of the arrow that has pierced the flesh is without bubbles jumping from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient turns pale, and breathes heavily and seeks for the cold air.
And if the arrow falls into the bed of hay, it is buried in the ribs; and it emits a great groan and great pain and breaths heavily; and all the members of the shoulder move.
And if an arrow or food remains stuck in the wound, by chance anything from undigested meat may jump out of the wound.
And if an arrow or stomach, and something from the undigested intestines jumps out of the wound, there is no hope for the cure, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
And if an arrow strikes the bladder and urine jumps out and escapes, and the patient feels great pain: know that the wound is deadly.
The other members such as the face and neck, shoulder and back, chest and arms, spine of the back, pelvis and legs, and similar limbs are safe according to various conditions. When the arrow is in the nerve or artery, and it is not poisonous, as I will tell you what happened to me, for this reason you should do something else.
It happened to one man that an arrow fell or pierced the root of his nose: I pulled it out from the other side under the fat of the ear and it came out painlessly.
And drew another arrow that fell in the fat of the oil under the paper below, And the arrow was reinserted, and it could not be drawn out except by the tip towards the flesh, And the arrow was big like a Turkish bow, with all one iron head slightly curved towards the ears; the patient was healthy, and no bad accident happened to him.
And it passed through an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and the arrow had ears (feathers) on it:
I was bearded, and sharpened it so much that I passed it through, and the Christian remained healthy.
And take out an arrow from a person who was shot or stabbed, thinking he would die;
and after thirty days, his condition did not change; I cut across the arrow, removed it carefully, and there was no adverse consequence.
And if a person has an arrow lodged in his back, and the wound is sutured;
And the arrow remained inside [the body], and did not change its natural position, nor did it cause any harm in any of its natural functions.
And saw another man who was wounded by an arrow in his body, and the wound was sewn up;
and remained thus with great pain for a long time; and many other similar things happened.
And draw an arrow from a knight of the king who was struck within the neck, and it was slightly tilted to the right side; and the arrowhead was fully embedded
I was called to attend to the wound after it had been three days. I found the wound very narrow.
I pierced it with a thin needle and felt no pain at all; He feels prickling and pain below his right ear. I thought it was the tip of the arrow.
I placed a plaster compressing and digestive medicine on the injured area since it did not swell. The tip of the arrow appeared.
The tip of the arrow appeared. I place the plaster on the wound daily, and straighten the injury right away, and keep it in that condition for a long time.
until it feels the arrow within its neck for an entire day; and he tells me this. I place the medicine on the wound that is corrosive by hand until it is open
and I tried, and felt the head of the arrow that was fitting to the place; Then align in the opening of the wound with that astringent medicine, until the head of the arrow becomes visible.
and passed beyond the limits for four months.
Then I cut open the wound where I had inserted the pincers, from one side and the other, but it could not be closed.
Then I did not cease to refine and devise means with various instruments until I took [the arrow] with well-made pincers for one day. According to its shape that will come at the end of this chapter, as long as I hold it, and return the wound.
And they judge that the nasal cartilage cannot be restored: I shall restore it then, and the wound was healed, and the patient was entirely well.
I have told you about the extraction of certain arrows, if you apply your treatment to this (thing) which I am not saying, for books cannot fully grasp it.
but wise masters can compare themselves on very little things and on what is present and failing. three works (or nine) are necessary, and nine tools, for the reduction of strange things that happen in this art.
I say that arrows do not come out of limbs where they are inserted except in two ways: Through which part they enter, or from another side;
and that which is thrust through there where it enters, it is an arrow entering into the flesh, and at times it may pierce suddenly.
And if it does not pierce suddenly, let it remain until the flesh is swollen around it and the opening is closed;
And similarly, if it [the dislocation] is driven into the bone and cannot come out, leave it for some days and move it every day.
Then it jumps and if it does not jump, perforate around with a sharp needle everywhere the joint is enlarged, and then pull it.
And if the arrow is lodged inside the body and cannot be seen, search for it with all your strength; And if you feel (it), pull it with any suitable instrument.
If the pain prevents you from pulling (it) due to the narrowness of the wound and the depth of the arrow, And if there is no bone, nerve or vein, open (the wound) as much as the pain allows. And pull out the arrow if possible, and if there are ears on the arrow (to hold it in place),
And pull out the arrow if possible, and if there are ears on the arrow (to hold it in place), If the bone which is pierced by two parts through the muscle that you can feel, and then break or bend the arrowhead, as much as you can pull it out;
and then break or bend the arrowhead, as much as you can pull it out; and be careful not to break the arrow, but pull it out more gently.
And if you cannot do it at once, press the arrowhead against the bones around it, then pull it out, as extraction will be easier. And if the flow of blood obstructs [the process], bring forth what we have said in the chapter regarding its treatment;
and beware of incising the nerve and the vein, and put device as you can pull out the arrow safely,
quickly or slowly, firmly or gently; place the patient according to the shape he was in when the arrow hit him, because it is the greatest help that can be, and if you cannot do so, leave him according to what the signs indicate to you.
The arrow that comes from elsewhere, opens any part of it, or the leather is swollen in one place as we can see or feel apparently:
Then cut across [the arrow], until the tongs can grasp it, and then pull it out; if it jumps now.
And if it is held in the bone, turn your hand round as much as it enters the bone, and widen the bone, then pull it out.
And if it cannot come out, leave it still, and then continue the extraction until it issues forth.
If it is of the arrow shaft, push it all the way through.
And if it is fallen, and you see a remedy for it, administer it. If there is one, apply a hair-based remedy. so that the point of the arrow enters the hair of the remedy; and then push it through.
And if the arrowhead is pointed, push an instrument with a sharp point entering, to facilitate extraction.
And if the arrowhead is touched, it is necessary that you cut all the flesh around where the poison is, if you can. then treat the wound as required.
And if the arrow pierces or penetrates the abdomen or bladder or side, and it is close, and you can cover over it, then cover it.
And be careful not to cut the vein and the nerve, then pull it out, and then make an incision, if necessary. Cure it until it is healed.
The shape of the pliers used to extract arrows are similar to an owl's beak, and here is its shape:
And they come in many sizes: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
openings of the body's common veins openings from which one bleeds are 31, of which there is a main artery 16.
This means: there are two bands that are after the ears, which are called "the double 'herbech'" And the two arteries which are in the two temples appear; And the two veins that are in the two eyelids, called "aspirates"; And the vein that is on the forehead; and the vein that is at the neck of the nose; and the two tendons that are in the neck; And the two veins which are above the lips, on the mouth, are called "augeherich". And the two veins that are below the tongue.
The veins, which are commonly bled, are five in each arm:
The first is the cephalic, which lies on the left side, and common people call it "vein of the head". And the middle part is called "fast," and is composed of the cephalic and the basilic. And the common people call it "vein of the heart"; and the basilic is on the right side, And the common people call it "vein of the belly," and it is above the liver. And it is that one bleeds from, which opens clearly above the groin.
And the little vein is the one that is between the auriculare and anularis, and it has two rain(s).
And in the leg and foot are four veins: one is beneath the shinbone of the left thigh, and the second shinbone that is at the wrist of the right arm; and the vein called "ness", which is in the wrist of the other arm.
And in the other leg are four veins underneath those.
The evacuation of veins located behind the ears helps with old-style purgatives and emigration. and the qualities of the bloodletting, as I tell you, are that you raise the patient's head.
and the qualities of the bloodletting, as I tell you, are that you raise the patient's head. and rub the place where the veins are with a rough cloth; then tighten the patient's neck with a screw. until two veins appear behind the ears in two places dependent on the head: Whenever you feel a lump under your skin, and where you sense the pulse beneath your skin, press it firmly.
then take the lancet and push it through under the vein up to the bone, then pull your hand all along the vein. and cut and the skin and the vein about two fingers deep, and make the blood come out as you see fit.
then bind it and let it heal.
And I have already said incision and cautery in the first book.
The ligation of the two arteries that are in the temples is equivalent to migraine treatment in ancient times. and softening, and common ophthalmia, and in the chest of the eyes with watery discharge.
The qualities of ligature are as follows: And it is that the patient stretches his neck, until the two veins appear openly; and feel the pulsation beneath your throat, and then press down on it;
then lift the cure (or dressing) over the vein to the top of your throat indicator, and push the lancet under it; lift the vein up, and tie it off, as you have done with the other veins, and make a knot in the blood according to your need;
Then release the patient, and put your hand on the vein for an hour, then put cotton on top of it.
Then form the wound and let it heal; and we have spoken about its covering and its extraction, where the book begins.
The healing of the vein in the forehead is worth as much as the healing of the head in the ancient diseases of the face and migration and redness.
And the quality is that the patient tilts his neck, twisting it until the vein appears. Then take the instrument called "fosseur", which has this shape:
And place the point on the vein, and press with your hand or something else, and allow blood to flow according to the amount you see. Then loosen the patient's neck, and tie the vein when it is healthy and never use a wide flame.
Furthermore, the flames should not be too sharp, and it is better to proceed obliquely because the bone is close, and there is danger of breaking the flame when it is narrow.
The salve of the two veins which are in the two armholes helps with swelling, inflammation, redness, and the diseases of the face.
and the qualities of its salve are that the patient stretches their neck by twisting it with some rope, as previously mentioned;
then place the salve, and let the salve be made from across [the neck], a piece of flax about a foot long and wide, for there is no heat in it.
And if the flames are subtle, perhaps they break; then make a tourniquet of blood, as much as you need, and then tie it up with linen, and bind it well.
The venous vein of the neck is beneficial for agues, scrofula, and febrile diseases. as in migraines and redness that comes with fever, especially when it is old.
and the quality of the vein is such that the patient compresses his neck, then compresses his neck with your left hand, And take the subtle flame long, and thrust it into the space between the two nostrils, For if the vein does not open well in that, and the wound begins to fester now;
do not go too far in, and make the bleeding according to your necessity, then let it rest for a night, for it is soon restored;
The first joints of the two knees aid in the straightening of the shinbone, and at the beginning of swelling, and in many diseases, and in impetigo, and in corrosion, and in herpes, and in inflammations.
and the qualities of the joint are such that the patient draws his neck under one and the other, as we have said; and let the master stand on top of the patient's head, and the patient sit on one seat,
Then open the vein along its length with a small gap, then drain the blood gently, as needed.
then repair the damage on the other vein, then cut the ligament, and press and tighten the veins moderately. do not let the patient strangle (the wound); and leave it until morning, so that the wound heals.
On Curing Swords (wounds) The saliva from the veins of the lips above helps to clot in the mouth and contributes to the corruption of gums, fissures in lips, and tooth and surrounding issues.
And the qualities of the saliva are to make the patient sit before you and hold his neck as I have said; then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one on the right lip and the other on the left, And they (the dislocations) are recognized by the fact that they are black, and by the fact that there are small black veins around them: examine them carefully and if you do not recognize them or have doubts,
examine them carefully and if you do not recognize them or have doubts, press the larger one (of the two), and do the same for the two veins that are above and below, because it is the same method.
From under the tongue: The first aid for veins located under the tongue assists after the cephalic (head) wound, and it is in the constriction of the throat, and for diseases of the eye, and diseases of the mouth.
and the qualities of the siphon are that the patient must sit between your hands in front of the sun, and lift the tongue, and look under each side to find a black vein:
therefore, one and the other, but do not go too deep, because beneath are the arteries.
The veins from which we commonly heal are healed according to two methods:
or in pricking with all one large flame, or olive oil subtle as you know to cauterize, and it is called "anesil"; and they are wide and thin according to the width and narrowness of the veins. The form of the flame mirrhine is very famous, and it is wide as you can see:
And it must be used to open the veins with large amounts of obvious blood, which contain much blood and turbulence. And this is the form of the olive oil flame:
and it is pointed more precisely, and is for thinning the subtle veins where there is fine yellow blood.
The sanctuary vein, which is one of those veins, helps with the diseases that are located under the throat, neck, and abdomen.
And it is necessary for the lord to bleed profusely, and to let blood from the artery that is below. And if it touches the artery, bleeding occurs, which must be stopped as I have said; And it should not be pricked with fire, but cut as with a surgical instrument.
And if the basilica does not open clearly, then you must open it, and change another one. (In context of medical treatment, likely referring to opening a bone to treat an injury) or if you wish any relief from it, or if you are sick in the place of it, the vein opens clearly in the arm. (In context of treating an injury, likely referring to finding a vein) and apply the fire cautery as we have said before. (In the context of medical treatment, possibly referring to using heat therapy for various ailments)
And if you want to find the place of the vein, then it is necessary that you dislocate the arm and touch the place until you recognize the pulse. (In context of medical treatment, likely referring to locating a vein for bloodletting) Then sign the joint with ink, then tie the arm, and burn the vein with a hot iron.
And be careful not to cut into the artery when you see the joint swollen, for it is an artery; then avoid it.
If you see it rising high like a child's urine, and the blood is red and thin, know that it is not from an artery: Then take your finger and hold it long over the place, then cut your finger until it stops bleeding, which often happens.
Let the arm remain still, and do not move it; let the patient not move it until he is healthy and free from fear.
If the wound is not cauterized and it starts to bleed, and there is no medicine present, then seize the artery if it opens up, as it can be stopped by compressing it; stop the bleeding of the wound.
Take a piece of fig bark and cut it in half, and take one of the halves and place it on top until the next day.
If it (the wound) does not stop bleeding, that's good; if it does not, treat it as we have said with powders that stop blood.
And the stopping of bleeding is not always effective in many positions due to the small size of the wound and the slender nature of the ligament of the arm.
The bleeding from a vein in the middle helps to treat blood in the head above and in the body below, because it is composed of the basilic and the cephalic, as we have said.
And it is necessary for the lord [physician] to bore through [make an incision] along the nerve that lies beneath, and if he pierces too deep, and finds the nerve, and it swells and the patient becomes sickly, and possibly cannot heal.
and this nerve opens frequently, and if it does not open in any man due to its subtlety, you must use the instrument cautery to burn it; strip away the nerve as best you can.
And if there is a vein between the two nerves, make an incision along its length.
The bleeding of the head, if it draws blood from the head, helps the eyes;
and it is necessary to cauterize with olive oil or myrtle fire, because it is the safest of all veins, since there is no nerve or artery beneath it.
Furthermore, it is necessary to seek the easier joint, and not harm anything if it must be done for the first time, and one repeats. Moreover, sometimes the joints swell in some men, when it must be done for the first time, but one should not harm anything. The quality of the wound, according to your thinking.
The first thing you should know about healing wounds is that healing them is not done except for the sake of health.
and to avoid future diseases. and let the healing be made in one of the four veins that are called: cephalic, femoral, or basilic. And one should bleed at the beginning of spring, and in autumn and winter after eating, when signs of fullness appear;
And one should bleed every third or fourth day, two hours after or three days afterwards.
The bleeding given for diseases is not assigned an hour limit, but when it is needed, either during the day or at night, in all hours and every moment.
And one should not bleed children under the age of twelve or pregnant women during the first four months up to the seventh. The patient who have passed sixty years, should not heal themselves.
And when some wish to heal themselves in any way, it is necessary that their intestines be cleansed with a light enema. if there are many worms retained within, so that the veins do not carry away the waste products from the principal members;
The patient who are too salted in meats, or drunk, to such an extent that they vomit, or have dropsy:
And if there is a surgeon after colic suffering, vomiting, abdominal disorder, excessive intercourse with women, labor, watching, and praying, or any weakness caused by the weapon or the body,
Then purify the humors, if it is fat, with food and drinks and medicines, if you have that power;
then in a bath, without anything preventing, to purify the blood,
And heal the vein with the pit (cautery) as we have said.
And keep him that day from labor, and from pricking, and from lust, and similar things;
Be bound and cheerful, and let the healer be higher than him who is being healed, and rub the arm twice or thrice.
Then remove the ligature gently, for if it is too tight or loose, it cannot heal correctly.
And then rub the place with hands until the veins swell, and feel it.
Then moisten the warmers with a little old oil, then place your thumb of your left hand over that vein under the place where you want to heat, that the vein does not burst and break when cutting it. For there are veins which run like cords in a sieve, and some of these are filled with windiness. if when heat is applied, it draws back from the fire, and cannot open the vein, and thus it is one of these.
if it opens the vein, then the wound is too narrow, for which reason the surgeons should be advised in these matters.
And if the vein is opened for the first time, it's good; but if not, start again a little below or above that place where it is not swollen.
And if the limb is swollen and the patient fears, let it rest for one or two days and do not bind the arm. In case pusules come up, do not enter or take a bath, then start the healing process if it pleases the patient.
If the wound is small or if you doubt that it will not bleed much as you see, pour hot water directly into the wound itself.
And it is worked a little hastily, so that the joint is inflamed; for this happens often when the wound is small.
If you see the joint inflamed, do not begin healing immediately, but put a little oil on it, for the blood is cooled and the oil heals in this place.
And administer the oil in this manner in every bleeding that you heal the veins, to stop the flow of blood.
And this same thing causes a triple fracture and a dislocation of the joint, when it is put back in its place; if it is too subtle, it separates again when it is too large.
And if there comes a large abscess, which often happens, especially when the opening of the vein is small. If you hurry, put a wet sponge in hot oil and hold it for an hour.
And it is necessary that you do this after the evacuation of blood from the vein, and if it remains in its place after some days without any blackness or greenness, it does not matter. and if you see, place something of aloes or myrrh below the wound, on a poultice or similar.
And many times an abscess and appearance occur in the church's sanctuary: place your hand on it then, and if you find it soft under the pressure of your hand, this is a bad sign. Then do not place anything above what has been said, for in court without the artery; but make one dry plaster to harden it, then treat with other treatment until it heals.
And draw blood from each according to the amount of its power and the color of the blood.
For if the wound is black, let it bleed until it becomes red; and if you see it large, let it become thin; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
And it is necessary for those who are filled and hollowed out, and have need of bloodletting, to make a larger wound, and let the veins be wide.
And for those who are weak, do the opposite, and it is necessary to let them bleed little by little, and it should be done by making small incisions across, not by pricking.
And this method of bloodletting is safe from displacement of blood and damage to nerves, and it is more beneficial than long bloodletting or wide bloodletting.
And for the one whose body requires healing, it is necessary to give soft bread below grape-like fruits; if it is boiled, bleed three or four times.
If it is of cold complexion, eat soft bread in syrup sweetened with honey or aromatic syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, cloves and a pleasant smelling syrup before the healing process.
If it is bleeding from a wound during the healing process, after the flow of blood, it is necessary that he drinks broth of meat and subtle-smelling syrup.
And use other things as we have said in the division or chapter of syncope, for the evacuation of blood.
If one wants to burst open his arm or bleed elsewhere when weakened by repeated bleeding, it should be done little by little, according to the amount of its strength continuously.
If one wishes to burst open his arm after the first bleeding and has a strong heart, he should wait 6 hours following the first bleeding or the ninth hour.
If one wishes to bleed elsewhere, it should be done on the second or third day.
For there is much blood within the body that is already heated and causes fever; therefore, it is necessary to draw a large quantity of it and widen the opening until it can pass through easily. then you reward all the conditions of health, and place your hand over the thumb when it heals, so that death does not come in its place. and this happens many times when healers are negligent;
And it is not appropriate when you see to dislocate the arm, and make blood come out a second time, and the wound has closed, that you press firmly. And if it is curved, that you extend the arm forcefully, for it would be bad.
but leave it until the blood comes out a second time; or you prick at the tip of the flame, so that the frozen blood from the vein flows away. and put on it one piece of fresh linen dipped in vinegar and press gently.
And if the vein is open, do not restrain it but let it be until the abscess is appeased.
And if you need to draw blood a second time, do it in the same place where it was drawn before, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
The vein in the arm is connected to the vein of the head because they are composed of the same material.
And the way to draw blood is that the patient pushes their hand into hot water until the flesh becomes red.
Then it shall be tied moderately, so that the vein appears clearly, then press gently through across, neither too wide nor too long.
and let the wounds be opened widely, and press firmly near the joint of the hand, and if it cannot be drawn out, place the hand in hot water, and let the blood flow out into the hot water, until you have enough.
and if it is hot, do not strike the hand with hot water, for one places more in winter than in summer.
And the vein of this [specific] vessel is safer than all other vessels, as there are no artery nor nerve in it.
The vein of the cephalic vein on the right hand is useful for all liver diseases, and this is the method:
Hold the hand and push into sharp hot, until the vein is emptied, if you see it. And if the wound is transverse, and if you close it completely, it causes no harm.
And do not go too deep, for nerves are all beneath the skin exposed.
Then place the hand in hot water, so that it does not freeze in the wound and cannot come out.
And when you have let the blood as needed, put oil and linen on the wound to heal quickly, and do the same for each wound.
The purgation of the left hand's skin is beneficial for the disease of the mice, and do as I told you regarding the right.
The purge of the sofflene is useful for all the diseases that are under the body. such as the diseases of the belly, and retention of flowers, and diseases of the genitals, and the thighs and old legs, and similar diseases.
And the qualities of its purge are that the patient puts his foot in hot water and scratches on the vein until it bursts, And lay it above the joint of the foot; and if the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot there are many streams flowing.
Close it then with a larger vein, or at the ankle, since that is more effective.
If you close it above the foot, beware of the nerves that are beneath, and close it through as in cutting; and let the flames be still.
If the wound does not heal, immerse the foot in water, and let the vein drain well.
And if lancing is required for the first time, begin the second one a little above, since the area is salty. Do not be afraid of nerves, as we have said, and proceed similarly with the tendon of the other side equally.
The area of the sciatic vein is at the ankle joint, and lancing it relieves the pain of the heel when it is hot with blood.
The quality of its lancing is that the patient immerses themselves in water and pulls upwards on the ankle four fingers' width while twisting it.
For otherwise the vein will not open; and if it opens, heal it in all ways that you can, and crosswise. It is more suitable that you cauterize it, for the wound is exposed, and it is very difficult to treat by hand.
It is more suitable that you cauterize it, for the wound is exposed, and it is very difficult to treat by hand. And if you do not cauterize it, there will be no healing of the wound that opens or its edge, and towards the little finger, and guard against nerves.
And make as much correction to the blood as you see, then undo the ligature and put on cotton and bind it; the wound is now healed.
From the blisters (of ventouse)
Blisters (of ventouse) are made of horns, or hog's bristles, or glass; and ventosation is done according to two methods: either by wounding and drawing blood, or without wounding.
And this ventosation which is done without wounding has two methods: either it is heated over all fire, or with fire;
And the two others on both sides of the neck; and the abscesses under the chin; And the abscesses in the armpits, and the abscesses on the knees; And boils appear on both arms; and boils on both legs; and the blisters of the wrists; and blistering does not treat blood, except for small veins that are scattered on the flesh.
and for this reason you should not lance them at all, as done with venesection of veins; and it should not be administered in any disease that comes from repletion, until the entire body is emptied.
And if necessary due to illness it is required to bleed, or as custom dictates, we will administer it every hour at the beginning or end of the month, and in between and at any time;
for there are those who, when they need to bleed, have a heavy head;
and if there are those who find swelling and reddening in their face, head, neck, and darkness of the eyes;
And those who find a drop of blood in their mouth, and have bitten their tongue, and swallow blood. And if there are such people who think and see signs such as numbness, loss of sensation, fainting, and death-like symptoms.
And when we see these signs, especially during the month, we order to have them bled after 4 hours of the day.
The bloodletting from the menses helps with headaches that come from the eyes, and it is not necessary to do so after the evacuation of the entire body;
And this ventosation is in the position of the head of the cervical.
and it must not be used by someone with a cold constitution or who has catarrh, because it causes them much harm.
and therefore, the elderly should not use it, nor those with a cold head diseases.
And if one heals often from it, they become numb, and therefore, the ventosation must be placed a little lower due to the fear of numbness.
The ventosation (a procedure or condition) is located at the neck and base of the skull, and for this reason it is suitable for traction of the neck. and to cut the canal of the vertebrae, and immediately, and to fill (it).
and it should be pushed gently, for if it holds too firmly, it may cause obstruction of the intestines or stomach.
The ventosations at the two ribs of the neck are good for headaches, migraines, strangulations, and pain in the roots of the teeth.
And it is in the position of the basilica's sanctuary; you must command the lord to extend his hand to place it, not to strike the artery, and there should be no bleeding.
Wind-tunnels under the chin are useful for mouth diseases, tooth decay, and similar mouth illnesses; they are in the position of the sinuses of the two lips.
Wind-tunnels in the shoulders are useful for diseases that come from heat and fullness.
The ventosations of the sides are worth as much as three veins of the arm. because it draws blood from these large veins;
and instruct the Lord not to draw too deeply because the limb is naked of flesh, and it knows nerves and arteries beneath.
The ventosation on the buttocks is worth as much as the emorroid operations at their foundation, and for diseases below, and it must be large and made of horsehair, which needs to be drawn well, and if it were too thin, it would break and cause great wounds.
The swellings of the legs open widely because they attract blood from all over the body, and they are similar to ancient pains in the sides, hips, and bladder, and they reduce the flow of fluids; they are located at the junctions of the shins and ankles, and they weaken the body after a long time, and bring pus into various conditions.
The way to treat the swelling is that you first evacuate it and immediately apply a warm substance, press it quickly, move it evenly, and do not stop doing so until you see the redness and swelling subside, and the redness of the blood appears; then bandage it, and take care in the position of the body, because there are some who have hard flesh and clear pores: it is necessary to wound only once, and it is necessary to make wide incisions, but not too deep; and evacuate gently.
And if the wound is large, it is necessary to make two incisions: the first one to refine the path of the thick blood.
And if the bone is very thick, it must be struck three times; and when we want to draw blood drop by drop, we should prick only once.
If we want a lot of blood, we should repeat frequently; and if the bone is thick, we strike to the end, and it should be done so that the veins are pricked suddenly,
and it is necessary for those with thick and hard skin, and with narrow pores, to anoint the joints of the fingers with sharp and dissolving oil. If it is to be anointed, use violet oil, almond oil, or oil made from the seeds of a squash.
And if it is to be applied with grease, use watercress oil, lily oil, chamomile oil, or any similar oil.
And if the excess is thick and cold, take amaranth oil or balsam oil, anise oil, and any similar oil.
And if the person to be healed has thin skin and large pores, no oil should be applied.
But it is necessary to wash after the dislocation with rose water, or cold water, or water of morello cherries, or water of gourds, or water of porcelain, or any similar thing.
And those who have much moisture, if they rise from ashes or water of myrtle, and sumac, and similar things.
And those who have large excesses should rise from old wine, or vinegar water, or a decoction of fennel or chamomile, or similar things.
And it is not advisable to bleed with a cupping glass before the bath or in the bath, but after the bath for an hour or two; and do not sleep after cupping.
And it is necessary that he urinate, when he should be cupped and when he has been cupped. Watch out for the one who bleeds is bilious, and he without is too sharp and inflamed. He should take cold things, such as pomegranates, endives, and lettuces to cool, and similar things.
And piglets, and beef from a cask, and moist meats.
And he who has a cold constitution, may take syrup made from honey and aromatic wine diluted between old and new, and eat porridge, and piglets, and small birds and young birds.
and the day he purges himself, he should drink more than eat;
it is necessary to give some men three times triacet or muscat before purging, or after, to strengthen the main limbs; And let the drink be made subtle, but it should not be drunk by those who are hot.
The blisters that are placed to wound are those placed on the liver, and on the spleen, and podagra, and on the abdomen and the flank and the legs and the hips, because these limbs cannot bear to be wounded there.
and it should not be done to draw blood from one member to another, as we do with the testicles when they are swollen; to remove the viscosity that is in the member, just as we place blisters on the abdomen and the flank to reduce the member.
And remove the pain when there is an obstruction or arrow, it removes by chance the obstruction or displaces the arrow from its place with its virtue.
And thus it acts when put on the liver and spleen when there is retained wind.
and these winds are administered empty to suck only; sometimes they are administered with fire, and sometimes filled with cold water.
As in diseases of the eyes, and in such a way that the wind tube is filled with hot water or water in which herbs such as comfrey have been cooked.
The form of the blister to be treated with fire is as follows:
It should be two fingers wide and half a palm in depth, and it should have one small hole around the middle, just like pushing an awl.
and be made of linen, soft in front so as not to burn the patient when placed on the member.
and in the middle have a rod of iron or linen, to put a plaster bandage around it.
And they are great and small according to the diseases and age of those who suffer from them.
For the boils of children are different than those of the old, and those of the thin than those of the fat.
And this boil should be placed upon the member in such a way:
Apply the wax candle or linen thread, and place it through the cork of the syringe that is inside the syringe. so that the light is within the cork of the syringe so as not to burn the patient.
and then place it on the member, and your fingers should be above the wound as we have said, so that when one looks at it, if the vapor is there, remove the syringe.
and apply the linen thread again as before, repeating it as often as needed.
In the blister given in the disease of pleurisy, there is neither rod nor puncture, and it is not applied except when it is full of water, and is placed on the member only.
and this is the form:
Blisters are not applied except in members where it is not possible to place a blister due to their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar places. and in the bare skin of the eye, such as eyelid or nose, and other similar places.
And the qualities of the patient are such that when you find wounds clean, in sweet clear waters without putrefaction, take them.
and immerse them in a clean fresh water until they become familiar, and have nothing in their bellies. Then it should be purged with vein and blisters, then rub the member until it turns red, and place the wounds on top.
And when they become swollen and hot, if it is possible to apply a bladder (ventouse), do so, as it works well.
If not, raise the limb above ground level and then immerse in warm water, then apply a poultice.
If the limbs remain too long without blood flow, immerse one linen cloth in cold water and place it on top until the blood returns.
And if there are no bones (sans) multiplied (multipliez), place it on broken glass or plaster, and similar things, until it is heated (estenchiez).
Or you place half of boiled beans on the affected area and leave them until they harden (s'aerdent) to the affected area, it will stop now.
And if you need more, take other beans.
And if the beans do not want to be taken, rub the affected area with fresh blood, or you pierce it with a needle until the bones come out. And then place them on top (of each other), and as soon as they feel the blood, they will harden;
And when you see that they are bleeding, sprinkle some powder of aloe and of linen (or ash), or charcoal on them, then they will stop now.
Here begins the book of fractures
This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it deals with the treatment of fractures and dislocations.
Inform the dear boy that foolish men fall from this chapter, who have never seen any old books or read a single letter of them.
And for this reason, the science is estranged in our land, for I have never found anyone good at it.
and I know nothing of it, except by the science of the old books, where I have studied the science so much that I have treated it, and by experience, and by the habit of my life.
and I have described for you in this chapter what is contained within it, and have summarized it at the end, and shown clearly the forms of the instruments that are brought, just as I have done in these two chapters beforehand.
Therefore, it is necessary that we say the prologue of this book the number of words and the chapters where wise men put their understanding, and dwell on truth, so that those who are experienced may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
When fracture, dislocation, twisting or curvature comes to anyone, it is necessary that you straighten the patient from one side and the other, unless something prevents you, such as weakness of body, infants, or old age;
or if the time is not very urgent or too cold; and avoid cold joints, that is to say cold fingers and wrists, and do not drink wine, nor consume any greasy meat, and do not fill oneself too much with foods that fill the veins with blood, until you have doubt about hot abscess or spreading of matter in the member; if the patient returns to its former state of health as it has used.
And when broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary to nourish the patient with foods that cause thick mucus, such as cooked wheat in water and broth, meat, heads, feet, beef, eggs, fresh fish, strong wine, and similar things. For thick nourishment strengthens and heals the broken bones more quickly.
Know that the broken bones of old and weak people cannot be easily healed or mended according to their nature due to the looseness of the members, nor those that are too tender, such as the bones of small children;
However, it has no cure, reset on the broken bone, that is large splints which tighten and join the limb together, until it heals as before; and do not apply any other treatment, and for this reason feed him with large meats, as we have said.
And know that the fractures are various in many ways.
For the break of the head is other than the break of the foot, or leg; and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures. For there is a break that goes to the joint, and another growing sharper, like the tip of a pen for writing.
For there is a break that goes to the joint, and another growing sharper, like the tip of a pen for writing. And if it is a break with a wound, then it is a break with a small split.
And in every way has its tool and instrument for restoration, according to what memory comes to mind.
And it is known as the fracture of the bone by this: the joint is twisted and opens widely through breaking, and sounds on pressure from the hand.
And if there is no twisting nor touching, and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no fracture.
But it may have twisting, splitting, or a small fracture. You should not move the hand yourself, but put on the medicines that come after this, and then gently tighten it now.
And know that the fractures that go to the joints, and are the two parts disjoined, it is necessary now to set them equally, in this way abscesses will grow well.
and if abscesses come, let it be left for some day, until the abscess is soothed; then set it equally in the position that you can easily and wisely move, and know that the restoration of it is easier than the restoration of one where there are fragments; then tighten it as needed hereafter.
And if the bone is broken into pieces and it breaks in two, whether it's a hand or foot, or to your hand when it is a small member, or two cords, or one cord and your hand;
and set the limb according to its natural shape, so that when the parts of the broken limb are separated, you reset with all tools possible the additions in their places as much as you can, and be careful not to cause injury or pain to the patient.
align well the two shoulder bones according to the best shapes.
And feel it with your hand if it seems not well to you: straighten it properly, and do not strain it too much, nor press as those who bring it by their work abscess heat and contraction to the member, as we have often seen.
When the limb is set, correctly keep the patient from moving it, neither watching nor sleeping, nor turning, nor in any other way; And ensure that the limb is so secure that it feels no pain. For when it feels no pain, it is not in the correct position, it must be put into such a position that it feels no pain.
For when it feels no pain, it is not in the correct position, it must be put into such a position that it feels no pain. and ensure that it is set right, that twisting does not come when it is restored.
and the qualities of the broken limb are as I am telling you.
Know that broken limbs can be of various kinds, large or small, and in shape.
For there are small members, such as arms and fingers etc.; it is necessary to wrap them in soft and fine linen cloths.
and those which are thick, such as the thigh and leg: it is necessary to wrap them with a wide and hard linen, for the large linens embrace the whole large member and tighten all parts equally, so that there is no pain.
then wrap light poultices around it, 3 or 4 times according to the member, and tighten your hand a little on the entire linen, then go above the break and tighten less than the break, then move away from the break.
And soften the ligament bit by bit and bit by bit, until you take a large part of the healthy flesh, then take another ligament and turn it right around the broken bone.
then go to the part below the break, and tighten it moderately, neither too strong nor too loose, as we have said in the first lesson above.
Then place dampened linen or cloth strips between the ligaments until they are all even, then bind everything with a bandage on top, and then put well-made splints on if there is no abscess or swelling.
And if there is swelling or abscess, place hot soothing things on it to ease the abscess, and wait several days for it to heal.
Then hold your arms straight, with the elbows forming half the length of a thick cane, or from a club used for splitting logs, or with palm-sized branches, and in this shape:
but the arm that you put on the fracture should be slightly larger and wider than the others.
and it should be as long as is required for a member, whether large or small.
Then hold above the shoulders, just like you did at the first stage, then tie on a thread coming from above, as in the first stage on the fracture.
Then bind it closer, but not too tight; and it should be of medium thickness, neither too thick nor too thin, and made of flax.
for if the thread is thick, as I have seen in the works of fools who make their bindings with twisted flax ropes, and this is a great error, because the binding cannot be even if it is too thin, and it should not have less than two fingers' space between each shoulder.
And if the patient is wounded by the heads of arrows after resetting the shoulder in a healthy state, place linen or linen bandages under them so they do not fester.
When the wound is with the fracture, and the veins are broken, I will tell the cure afterwards.
Know this: it is not necessary to bind all broken limbs tightly on the first day. For when the limbs are large, it is not necessary to put hot irons on them before 5 or 7 days, or more according to your certainty of the abscess healing.
and here is the manner of old plasters for restoring fractures, dislocations, and twists: and it is that you take flour that is kept near the mill walls, and mix it with a lot of egg, and put this mixture, not too clear nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common method of the plaster restoring the fracture in many ways, and equally for women and small children, as it is neither too hot nor too cold.
Another way of plaster for restoring fractures and dislocations and twists: take aloes, linseed oil, turpentine, balm of Gilead, mastic, in equal amounts; myrrh and aloeswood, 5 times the amount; and seven times as much alum; make powder from them, mix with enough egg; if the complexion of the man is hot, use this plaster, as it has a good composition, and restores broken bones quickly, and it benefits many men.
Another method of plaster that is effective for twisting: take mugwort and mastic, mix together 10 parts; add mirrh and aloes, mix together 8 parts; add acacia wood, 6 parts; Armenian bole, 10 parts, grind well and infuse with vinegar or abundant egg white, administer it.
Another method for joints and dislocated bones: take new linen, soak it in vinegar and cooked oil, apply it on the affected area. This plaster does not restore [the damage], but it is good for easing hot abscess pain, and proper treatment for bone pain.
Another method of plaster for broken bones: take dried fig leaves and earthy parsley, grind them together to make a plaster.
Another method of plaster for the restoration of bone fracture and for improving abscess healing. Take root of comfrey, chamomile, flowers of violets, flour of beans, of each one part; grind them and mix with wine, and if the members are scalded, mix it with moist coriander water or vinegar and use it.
Another stronger method of plaster for the restoration of the limb when a hard abscess comes up. Take roots of comfrey, flax seed, balm of Gilead, lentil, and wormwood, and flowers of violets and chamomile, all one part; grind them and mix with salty water, sweet water, or vinegar, according to the heat of the member, and its rest.
Hippocrates says in his book that nothing but a beeswax and oil ointment should be put on the broken member for restoration, and no other thing more, and says it should be neither too soft nor too hard.
And Galen seems to say that one should place warm, slightly dry things on the broken limb to restore it, such as myrrh, aloes, incense and similar substances, as we have said.
Another way to treat a wound and pain: take ground mugwort and horse hooves that have been boiled, or feathers of birds, and sow thistle, equal amounts, grind them and make a poultice out of it.
And then wait a little while, and make sure the patient feels no pain, nor has the bone moved from its place. If not, do not dislocate it by hand for many days.
And if pain or itching comes to the joint, or there is no rest or swelling, then hurry and dislocate it, and remove the plaster immediately; and take a light cloth, and a damp sea sponge, and dip in water, and raise the joint until the itching stops, and the pain is eased. Then let the limb rest for an hour, then put dry linen on it, dampened in water or rose oil, and tie it up tightly until you are sure of stopping the abscess from heating.
Let the inflammation of the limb rest, and let the pain cease, then begin to tie it up gently, and a little plaster, and do not strain it too much as before; and tie it up finely until it is healed.
And if you see that an abscess swells and reddens and hurts, and it needs to be lanced and sutured, proceed as you did the first time equally.
And if nothing comes to the limb of what we have said, do not undress it before 3 or 4 or 5 or 7 days; and sometimes leave it for 20 days as one sees fit, until the swelling subsides and the abscess approaches the skin.
Then keep it more tightly bound than the first time, and let the meat swell, as I have said before; and if you see the wound dry out more than necessary, know that pus cannot come. Arise then from hot moist heat, every time you dislocate it, and for each third day, wet a little the joint.
By this work then cut the nerves in the limb, and correct immediately those that are crooked by the foolish doctor, who leave it twisted: this is harmful, and it is a dangerous procedure; I see nothing but laziness and working incorrectly.
of various ways of breaking Many kinds of fractures are, and they have various shapes, and their causes are intended.
because there are fractures made by sword impact, and the collar bone breaks the entire bone up to the shaft which is under the bone, as happens with a hacksaw or fist; this type of fracture is called "hack-fracture".
when the sword strikes the bone from above it pierces through, and this type of fracture is called "absolute"; and these two types of fractures are either large or small wounds.
And if there is percussion filled, or cut, or from wounds of stone, or falling on stone, or other similar things.
And if the break penetrates through to the membrane under the bone, or it is on top of the bone, and this wound is either large or small.
And if the wound is sunk into the bone as fine as a hair and the cut is small, and because of this it is called this break "capillary".
and if the wound is made by hitting with stone, or falling, or similar things, and drives the bone piece inward, and the pieces of the bone are closely packed together like a potter when he puts them into pots; if the stone goes inside.
And this happens more often in those who have a moist skull bone, such as an infant's head;
Also, it happens with all these types of breaks that small fragments are dislocated, as is the case here. I shall speak about it in its place.
And we know all types of breaks through dissection above them, and the examination by probing, and the corruption of the flesh that is above.
The hair-like appearance is known to those who, when the bone has been exposed and rubbed inward, if it opens the black crack will appear.
In the treatment of a fracture, be careful about the patient's condition, and if you see any harmful symptoms like vomiting of blood, loss of consciousness, swelling, fainting, high fever, hairs falling out and turning red, and other similar signs in various conditions, it cannot heal without doubt.
And if you do not see any doubtful symptoms and hope for salvation, begin the treatment.
And when the wound first comes to you in winter, it is necessary to remove the bone before the fourteenth moon within which you can.
And if it is in this state, hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the tissue beneath the bone is corrupted, and come the events we have mentioned.
And if the bone fracture reaches the tissue that covers the brain, you must cut the broken part in such a way: it is that you take hold of the patient's head firmly, and peel off the skin over the bone in every possible way, and above the wound more gently than you can.
And if the discharge of blood comes to uncover the bone or an abscess forms, use whatever is necessary and fill the area with damp linen soaked in rose oil. And let the wound rest until the abscess subsides and you are assured of the stopping of blood flow; then begin around the bone to remove, and it is done according to two ways of work: one way is that you cut narrowly in front, and this is the form:
And then make another incision larger than the first.
And the second way is that you have various incisions, some narrow and others wide, pointed and made with iron instruments; and work lightly, so that you do not wound the bone.
And if the bone is protruding and hard, you must pierce around it, so that you administer incisions with drills, not cutting through the bone of the head, but having a margin or circle above the point to prevent the drill from passing through the bone; and you must have several, so that each one comes in its place along the length of the bone, so that you have drills for all sides; and this is the shape of the four types of drills.
The qualities for drilling around the broken bone are that you place one drill on the bone and turn it with your hands until you feel that the bone is pierced; then move the drill to another part a little afterwards, and do this all around, then remove the chips of the bone that are between the holes, and do this as delicately and lightly as possible, as we have said, until you pull out the bone or any of the instruments you have such as pliers or forceps; and be careful not to touch the brain or the marrow.
And when you have drilled the bone and treated it, it is necessary that you remove the splinter left in the bone with another instrument resembling an incisor, but it should be thinner and more delicate than the other incisors.
And if there remains something of small bones or no scales, lightly cut them with an instrument; then heal the wound with dressings and salves as we have said.
And another method of work is that which the Greeks call (it), which is more reliable; and it is highly praised, and this is its statement. Firstly, you must expose part of the bone where the fracture is visible, so that when you have exposed that part, place it under the tip of the chisel-like instrument as shown in this form:
And do not cut it from one side, and the part is in two edges, so that the cutting is towards the bone; then hit with a small hammer on top, so that you lightly cut the bone all around, and be careful of the cloth that is underneath;
If it is gouged into the bone, then cut it gently, because one cuts bones unnecessarily and with fear.
If the fracture does not pierce through to the cloth and the bone is only chopped from above, and there are small pieces, then it is necessary to smooth that roughness, and remove scales with a sharp scraper of various sizes, in order to provide the most suitable amount, according to the work and the shape of the fracture.
The patient should shave his head completely first with a large razor, then with finer ones afterwards, and continue to do so until it is well done.
In each other kind of haircut and subtle break, you must bring the instrument according to his discretion; and this is not a matter that can be answered by one who has not studied this art.
And if the wound is open, you must take one linen cloth, according to the size of the wound, wet it in rose oil and place it on the wound; Then take another cloth doubled in 1 or 3 layers, and moisten it with wine and rose oil, and place it on the first cloth; and do this as lightly as possible, so as not to weigh it down, then administer another thread over it, but don't pull it tight more than needed just to cover the wound.
And leave it for 1 or 2 days, until the abscesses have subsided, then remove the thread, and administer medicines such as lily roots, flour, incense powder, aristolochia, and similar things; and make a powder from these things, and place it on the wound, and administer immediate medicines without biting.
And watch that the wound remains clean, do not leave any ointment or allow pus to collect, for when pus collects on the fabric of the cloth, it corrupts and rots, causing great harm to the patient; for when something biting is placed over the wound, it causes further harm.
Take care then, if any bad accident happens to the patient, as we have said, this is cause for doubt.
And if it comes from anything other than the medicine we have placed on it, which has this virtue, you must take a part of honey, and 3 parts of rose oil and in a linen cloth dipped in it, and apply it to the wound. then treat the wound as necessary, until it heals.
Know that sometimes the two parts of the nose are broken, or one part alone, because there are two bones; and the one beneath is cartilage, which does not break, but only bends or twists, and then heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, you should insert your little finger or thumb into the nostril, and place the break equidistant from your index finger and the corner of the mouth, pushing it out as the nose returns to its natural shape. And do this gently, and watch that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
And if the break is in the upper part of the nose and the finger cannot reach it, you should place a small stick equal to the height of the root of the finger there.
And if the break is of two parts, do so again, and hurry to restore it in the first day, if you can;
If not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscess has settled down, then apply the linen bandage to the head of the neck where the break is in one part.
Or you place another on the other side if there is a break there; and let the bandages be as thick as they fill the neck openings.
And they said that any restorer should moist the bandages with butter and change them every day. I do not think it is good, but it is necessary for them to be moistened in an ointment made of egg yolk and flour, and then leave the bandage until the bone has hardened and the cartilages have become hard.
And sometimes feathers from an owl are put in place of tents, and if it is covered with a thin cloth, and the opening is held closed, breath the patient through; then do as you see fit.
And if an abscess comes out while you are working on it, put beeswax or cotton wool soaked in rose oil, or a pinch of sulphur there.
If the abscess does not come out, put a plaster on the outside, made of wheat flour and incense powder, mixed with egg white, then place light stops on top but do not tie it down.
And if the break in the neck is small, and it is broken into many pieces, extract them with suitable instruments, then make the incision, and cure the injuries with charms, salves, and ointments suitable for the case.
And if there is no wound within the neck, cure it with linen and apply plasters until it heals.
on the fracture of the jawbone
When the mandible is dislocated beneath [something], and there is no wound outside, and the break is only outside, but not broken through, unless hollow inside, it can be recognized easily.
If the break is on the right side, you must insert your index finger into the patient's mouth; if the break is in the left mandible, insert your index finger of the right hand and gently push it inside, then adjust it evenly with the other hand from outside.
And if the break in the mandible is dislocated at two joints, then you must administer extension of two parts until it is equal.
And if movements of the teeth occur, or rupture, hold them with a thread of gold, silver, or silk, then place a bandage on the broken jaw and place .i. double cloth over it; and place over the cloth a large well-made splint, or an equal piece of leather, long and wide according to the jaw, and attach it above the muzzle that you can, and command the patient to rest, and nourish light foods.
If you see that the figure changes, dislocate it on the third day and then reposition what has changed; place a plaster over it with flour from the mill mixed with egg or flour from a sieve, after you have removed the bandage; and place light linen over the plaster, and if the position of the patient does not change, leave it until it is healed; many times it heals within four weeks.
And if abscesses come up, bring what we have said before.
And if there is a fracture and wound together, observe that no piece of the bone has been removed; it requires subtle instruments suitable for this purpose.
If the wound is narrowed, expand (it) with fire according to your necessity.
When you have removed all the pieces and none remain, then stitch (the) wound if it is wide, and place on it one plaster suitable for this purpose to promote healing until it heals.
of the forceps The force breaks multiple times towards the shoulder, and the fracture occurs in three ways: either it is broken and dislocated in two places, and it is the lightest to restore; or there is a fracture with an open wound.
And the work is when there is a fracture with an open wound, that you have two attendants, one holding the shoulder where the force breaks, and the other stretches the neck towards the affected area; then place the dislocation in your hands so that the form is as it should be, and there is no appearance or displacement.
If you need to extend further, place a round ball of fabric or linen over the patient's shoulder, as thick as necessary; stretch and tie the force (the fracture), hold the ball with your hand, and align the dislocation as it should be.
And if you cannot draw the head of the shoulder outwards due to it being fully closed, then the patient must lie on their affected side and place one hand under the shoulder; and push the shoulder downwards, until the bones of the socket are raised.
Then direct the fracture to your fingers, and if you find debris, then it is necessary that you cut across [the bone]; and draw out the pieces gently, and if the bones cannot join due to any hindrance, then crush it at one of the incisions you have made; but place this instrument under the socket to hold it in place.
and resemble a spoon, but not concave, and be of such width as is necessary, according to the size of the bone and the strength of your hand; and have two prongs, as you see, and one wide and the other narrow, as is the opening of the wound that you made when treating the bones.
And when you are certain of the abscess being hot, if it opens up, and the wound is small, or you doubt that it is a hot abscess, then use linen cloths and bandages on the wound, according to its size.
And if it is hot abscesses that come, soak one linen cloth in rose oil, asafetida and wine, and place it on top.
The straining of the bone, when it has wounds and is cut open, is that you place the bandage of milled powder and egg yolk on the bone, and put light stops under it, and put a spear beneath the strain, if necessary. Then take a very large bandage, one palm wide, then put a double cloth dampened on it, and wrap it; then take a thin stick three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around the bandage so that the end of the bandage is hanging. and place the stick on the fracture, and turn the bandage around the neck, and under the wound, and under the patient's healthy side; and tighten it from both sides, and when you see that the fracture aligns properly, and you can clearly see that the stick does not move over the broken bone, then keep it in place every day, and whenever the swelling lessens, hold it firmly.
and make the patient lie on his back, and place a small pillow under his wound to lift the shoulder up; this will align the fracture by moving the shoulder blade together, or tie the arm to the neck, and do not untie it except in case of bad accident, for 20 days.
Then perform the traction, if necessary, and hold it in place until it is restored; and it is usually restored within 28 days, and less for some men.
of the shoulder fracture
It often happens that the broken or dislocated shoulder does not heal without treatment; it should only be approached through touch (surgery). The shoulder should be arranged according to the shape of the fracture and reset in its natural form, in every possible way; then apply powder from the mill with egg whites and light plasters, and place two layers of cloth over it; then place a wide and thin stick, slightly larger than the shoulder, under the shoulder (or where the shoulder was before); if there are no bones protruding, use flaxen plasters to cushion the stick so that it fits evenly. Then tightly bind the shoulder with a long bandage so that the stick does not move from its place, and watch it every day; whenever it swells, rebind it, and adjust the stick if it is out of place, and have the patient lie on his side. The shoulder will heal in 20 or 25 days, and when this number is reached, loosen it, but be careful as it is not bone that becomes dislocated easily.
And if a bone part protrudes in front and not under the skin, lift it up and cut it, and do as we have said to treat an abscess using hot cautery.
of the fracture (the) thigh
The thigh is sometimes fractured in the middle, but it happens rarely; however, it often breaks at the sides. And when it is fractured internally, it slips downwards, causing the patient great pain, and lack of nourishment, and soon vomiting blood, and the wounds open in the fractured bone, and he feels nothing well.
And the restoration is that the patient lies down on their back, and one places a cushion between the shoulders, then presses the shoulders, and assembles the ribs of the two costal arches with both hands, subtlety adjusting it to be even in all ways possible, until the figure of the bone is as required; then put pressure bandages and poultices made of salt or a lighter material, and wrap it in one cloth, and tie it to the broken bone so that it does not move; and turn the limb round repeatedly, and tighten it gently, and examine every hour if it softens, if it becomes soft then tighten it again; and if it requires dislocation due to corrosion or itching at the location, or pain or abscess, hurry up, and dislocate it, remove the pressure bandage, and treat the one who has come with remedies of cures; then reset the pressure bandage and tighten it until it is healed.
of the ribs fracture
Note that the fracture of the ribs occurs only in large ones posterior to the back and at the neck inside, and they bend only because they are slippery; and it is well felt in the examination of the hands.
And the re-setting is that you equalize the fracture, as it should be. Then place a splint, and hold it in place with a stick, if necessary.
If the rib fracture is inclined inside, the patient feels very great pain and shortness of breath, like pleurisy, for the bone pierces the flesh; the armpits swell, and they immediately vomit a large amount of blood, which is a serious illness, and the ancients have made many efforts to cure it.
And if there are those who say that it is necessary to administer foods that swell the stomach, in order to push the fracture outwards.
We do not allow hot irons to come if they have not come. If they have come, make it healthy.
And they said one of us puts blisters on the limb to ripen it, which seems reasonable; however, there is doubt that the blisters attract excessive fluid to the limb due to its weak condition.
And they said one should cover the limb with damp linen dipped in hot oil and place poultices between the ribs to make the swelling equal around it, then let it be treated with the cure of pleurisy, meat, and medicine.
And if the patient feels intense pain that he cannot endure due to the broken bone and there is fear in the patient, then you must make an incision over the broken rib, and put an instrument under it for support; and then you should cut the bone lightly, and draw it out gently, and then sew the two sides of the wound, if it is large, and treat with healing ointment until it heals. And if an abscess comes, place wet cloths soaked in rose oil on it, and put it there; and cure the rib as much as necessary to deal with the abscess, and lie him down with his body on the side where it is broken until it heals.
of the break in the neck
Sometimes breaks occur in the bones of the neck, and sometimes it bends; and similarly with the spine in the back. And when this happens to anyone, and you wish to know if they will recover or not, if you see their hands becoming soft, swollen, and dead, and unable to move or stretch, and when you prick them with a needle, they do not feel it. Know that they are mortal in various positions, and if they cannot speak and feel well when you press and prick, know that the jointure of the bone is saved, and that the patient can be cured if treatment is given.
And when a similar thing happens to the spine in the back, and you wish to know if it will recover or not, beware if the feet are swollen, and injuries have occurred in the hands, and sudden movement and pain occur in the back without volition; and when it is provoked on the stomach, it occurs suddenly and without volition. And when it is prodded on the back and wishes to sit, it cannot. Know that it is mortal: do not labor at its cure.
If this accident does not happen, then it is a lighter matter.
And the cure is that you reward [the patient] if there is an abscess that is hot, you place on it rose oil or egg yolk oil until it is soothed; then put one of the soothing and drying plasters on top, bind it with a string, and command the patient to rest; and let him not sleep on that part where he feels pain, until he recovers. If any bone dislocates, you must cover it with oil; then remove the bone, join the two edges of the wound together with a stitch, if it is large, until it heals; and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called "the head of the cow," put your left thumb in its place and hold it equal to your right hand, then apply the plaster and splint, if necessary; then tighten it, and if any bone dislocates again, you must fix it, remove the bone, and heal the wound until it is healed.
of the break of the thighbone
It happens that the bone of the thigh is broken, and if it occurs, there is only a little lessening at the head; it becomes long, bends towards the groin, and comes to the patient pain at the place where it is broken.
And the restoration is that you extend your hand above, as long as you are over the break; and recognize what the break is and the shape of it; and if the break is only at the head, then make the break equal to its natural shape.
And if the break is long or it bends inside, then make the patient lie on his stomach until the restoration of that break is presented to you. And when you have set it even, place the splint on it, then place a stick or a yew branch on top and hold the fracture so it does not move; and press the joint beneath the ribs until they are equal.
Instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy side or back.
If an abscess has broken out, do not touch it until it is soothed, and place what we have previously mentioned on top of it; then return to treatment, and hold it as needed, if there is no bad event; and this is the method.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
the shoulder blade is that which is between the ribs and the neck of the upper arm, and if it is broken, it should be restored according to one of two manners: one of which is that you take a rod thicker than your little finger, according to this form:
And tie the two heads together with two rods, and pass them over the top, and place the patient on one seat; then lower his broken arm onto the rod, until it reaches the shoulder joint, and attach a splint of rod in the middle, then raise it above some heavy object or have the ministers extend it below; then place the mirrors the breaker's hands together, until the breaker returns as required.
And another way it is that one binds the patient on his bed, and ties his hand to his neck, then commands two assistants that one holds where it is above the break with his hands, and the others hold below all the way, and each extends to their respective parts.
And if the extraction is stronger, bind one rope below the break, and above the break, and each assistant extends to their respective parts. And if the break is near the neck of the shoulder, you must place a middle rope below the buttock, and another towards the cost, below the break; and in the same way, if the break is towards the cost, you must place a light rope without effort, such that the break is even on its level, and on the cost; then make it even, as needed, and hold it, unless an abscess does not come.
And if an abscess does come, do not hold it for more than 7 days, and put soft linen with rose oil on it until the abscess is soothed; then hold it, and the method of holding it is that you place a plaster on the break, then raise the arm on the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or chest; and hold the cloth, and hold it on the shoulder, and on the arm, such that the arm is in a straight line, if nothing prevents it, or if the bone is not moved.
And if you doubt that the bone is moving, use splints, and place a larger and stronger splint above the fracture, with one inch of space between each splint, and let each splint be large enough to pass over the fracture by two inches on each side; then hold the splints as I have said at the beginning of the chapter regarding the fracture, more firmly and less in loosening.
And if you see the position of the splints and the tightening, as we have said, during the time you are setting the broken limb, and you doubt the abscess has healed, let it remain bound for seven days, as we have said; then look every three days at the binding, to ensure no pus or inflammation appears at the site, nor can the blood circulation reach the limb because it is too tight. If it swells, as we have said.
If no such accident occurs, do not remove the binding before four or more days have passed, and let the patient lie on their back with their hands on their stomach; place one evenly woven cloth cushion under the shoulder, and watch every hour of the day or night that the fracture site does not move or become softened, or loosens the bindings. If it swells due to the power of medicine, give them the meat that we have mentioned before, in such a way that the meat is first finely ground; and when it begins to heal, let it grow thicker. It is customary for the shoulder and arm to be repositioned within 40 days of the injury; and then they should be released and given warm baths and medicines with onions to further improve the site. If the wound is ugly and filled, wait one day or two months before removing the binding.
Of the break of the arm
The arm consists of two bones which are called the "forearm," of which one is small and it's the one that forms the wrist; and the other is large, and it's the one that is below, towards the little finger; by chance, only the large forearm can break, or only the small one, or both together.
When the small forearm is broken, restoration and healing are easy; but when the large one is broken, healing is difficult, and more troublesome than when both are broken together. If it's only the small forearm that breaks, then it should be slightly extended lightly and set straight.
And if it's the large forearm that breaks, then it should be pulled stronger; and extend it by one inch and raise the wrist of the hand higher than the others, and the small finger lower than the others, and cross the patient over himself, and a splint in front of him higher than the patient does not suffer any pain; then the ministers stretch their arms above the broken part to the underside or to one link, and another minister on the other side. And then set it straight by the surgeon according to its best shape.
And if it is a fracture in several pieces, put each one back into its place; and if there is any displacement that pierces the skin which you cannot restore to its place, cut off and remove the bone as we have said before.
And if it is with the break causing an open wound, I have spoken of it in the singular chapter; take care for its treatment.
And if in the beginning of the restoration there appear abscesses covered by pus, apply one piece of cloth made of rose oil and white beeswax that is neither too hard nor too soft; and cover it subtly with one cloth. Then remove the ointment, and apply the plaster made from the powder of the mill along with egg white. Afterwards put on the splints, and the splints for the break should be more prominent at the break than elsewhere, and a little larger than the others; and know that it must have 7 splints or more according to the different positions: whether the break is in one bone or two; and bind more tightly above the break than elsewhere, but less when aligning, as I have said at the beginning of the chapter; and let the cloths covering the break be soft and moist, not too hard or abrasive; and let the threads that hold it be made of flax, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said. And check the limb and the ligament afterwards after some days. And if any bad accidents happen to the limb, such as itching that happens to the limb, then you must soak the limb in warm water until the itching is eased; and let the limb not rest. Then start the binding again, and if the ligaments are damaged and the bones dislocated, and similar things, advise accordingly.
If the urine cannot reach the limb because it is too narrow, then you must soften it for a short while and let it be for some days until the urine flows through it, and then bind it.
If none of the things that we have mentioned come to the patient, then do not release him until twenty days have passed. Or if inquiries are made about it during this time, then tie his hands to his neck and make his necks even, and keep him from movement and turning over, and let him sleep on his back; know that this fracture is healed in thirty or thirty-five days, and possibly in twenty days according to the compositions and complexions of the virtues.
of the break of the hand
In the back of the hand and at the knuckles there are few breaks, and they occur many times.
And when the sole of the hand is broken or fractured, the patient should lie flat on his back and stretch out straight in front of him equally; then place his hand above a cloth and extend the broken bones, aligning them with mirrors, until they are well joined; apply a plaster and wadding if an abscess does not appear, then apply a splint according to the size of the fracture; and it should be wrapped in one linen cloth.
And if the fracture is around the back of the sole near the belly of the foot, make a splint from cloths and instruct the patient to strap his broken foot to it; then fasten a long cloth, and the splint should be as large as the palm of the hand, and strain it as needed.
And if the fracture is open, then you should place a splint above and another one below in the sole, so that the hand is open and straight, then bind it all around the hand, and compress the ligament between the fingers.
If a fracture occurs in any of the fingers, if it is the thumb, you should make it even as necessary; and hold it with the sole, and if you see that you place a straight small splint to lift the fracture, and do not move; and if the fracture is in the other fingers, such as the index or one of the others, you should make them even, and bind it with the healthy finger that follows; or tie all of them in one place, which is better, or place a splint on it, as for the thumb; and take care in the restoration and placement of the abscess heat, and treat those who come, as I have said.
fractured shin
The bones of the shin are often broken, and it is easily seen when they twist forward and backward; and the restoration [of the bone] is that one tie [a splint] is placed above the break, and another below. And the patient lies on his back, then each minister extends their tie evenly to their respective parts; and this is when the break is at the bone.
If the break is near the root of the shin, one of the ties should be towards the ankle, and the other ties below the break. And if it is near the knee, then the ties should be beside the knee, and the extension should be downwards; then have the ministers align the bone with their two hands, according to its natural shape, and then apply the splint and bind, as long as there is no abscess present.
And if there is an abscess heated (treated with heat), let it be allowed to cool down before returning to your work and treatment; the procedure is carried out in this manner. You should wrap above the fracture (the broken bone), that is, a thick bandage doubled in two or three layers, and let the superfluous parts remain; then turn the leg so the heels come to the root of the thigh, and insert one long thread between the thigh and the leg, under the knee, and bring the end of the thread above; then turn the leg and the bandage upwards on the thigh and the calf, then place a splint over the fracture and place a splint on the bone of the leg; then fill the space between the leg and the thigh with soft cloth to keep the alignment straight, then begin to bind firmly for four or five turns above the splint; and as you go up above the splint, loosen it; then take the two threads that you inserted between the leg and the thigh, and tie four splints above them, then go under the thread below, so that you come to the foot; tighten it, so that the bone does not move from its place, then leave it thus, so that no abscess or swelling or similar thing appears.
If there is a swelling or any piece of the bone that protrudes, you should cut it off if possible; and if not, you should break the area and draw out the pus; and treat it as we have said before until it heals completely.
And sometimes the leg is broken in such a way as if one sets a splint, as in the shoulder or arm; however, during restoration, it does not harm the patient.
Know that the leg is restored within one day, or a little more or less, according to the differences in complexion.
of the leg (genuine)
Know that in the leg (genuine) there is little breakage, but it bends frequently. And if it breaks, it is not a complete fracture, but rather a crack or puncture, and it causes all pain, and pain everywhere, and this is felt by everyone.
And the restoration is this: When equalizing the bone that is broken to its place, it should be assembled as much as possible; then put the splint, and place a round stick there if needed, and hold it in place as necessary, then check all the arrangements that we have said in other fractures, such as abscess heat and similar things; apply to each accident what is required, until it heals.
of the broken leg
Know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is called "shinbone" and the others are called "fibula"; and it happens just like a fracture comes to the arm, and for this reason, the restoration is the same as that of the arm, and the work is all the same.
And if the two bones are broken together, then the leg turns in all directions.
And if the fine bone is broken, it bends forward.
And if the large bone is broken, it causes great pain and can be seen; then it bends under. Bring extension to it, make it even, and tie the edges equally; however, if the break is misaligned and there are multiple pieces, the extension should be smaller and lighter; align it according to your ability.
And when you have completed your work, take two handfuls of straw that cover the leg from one side and the other, and be as long as the leg from the knee to below; then wrap it in two layers, one on top and one underneath, and tie it in the middle so that the leg cannot tilt to the right or left, and this is good; and no one should place one bandage of the length of the leg, and it should be of straw, and place the leg for protection against movement, and do this at the break where there is pain; move the leg every day to see if there is abscess or other accident; cure it until it is healed.
of the break of bones of the foot
At the ankle, there is no break of bones, but at times there is a break in the foot and toes, and it does not occur often except in various positions.
And if there is a break in the foot bones, and you see these bones rising one above the other, put the patient on his back on the ground, as if he wants to go, then place your foot on top of the injured one where the bones have risen, then press it until they return to their place; then apply a splint and bandage, and put a small plank under the foot with two flat pieces, then tighten the bandage around the foot in the usual way, after you have wrapped fabric around it, and other things that are needed.
And when three or four days have passed, remove the bandage as you will find the bones even, whether broken or dislocated.
And if any of the two bones are broken, restore them as we have said about the hand bones; then set a splint on the broken bone according to the length of the bone, and it should be slightly larger, then place a table beneath the splinted area as I have said, and apply pressure as needed; and if there are more than 2, or 3, or more broken bones, set a splint on each one according to their quantity, wrapped in one linen cloth, and hold the table beneath the splinted area; and it should be positioned so that it covers the belly of the bone, so that it touches well.
And you must not neglect the other things I have said about other fractures, after what has been said; and treat each case according to its need.
of the fracture of the wrist bone
When the bone of the female nature is broken, make her sit upright, then incline her towards the part of the back and hold her from behind; then fill the hollow with cotton, and put in it as big a stone as one can; then turn the woman over, and draw down the small of her back bit by bit, and when the cotton comes to the entrance of the nature, the bone returns with the stone; and when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has urinated, replace it, and do this for 7 days or more: the break will be restored. If you see, take a bladder of brambles, tie one end to the perineum, and push the entire bladder into the nature; then blow forcefully into the tube until the bladder is inflated within: the break will return to its place; then fill it with cotton, and leave it for some days until it heals.
And when the bone of the thumb joint of either man or woman is broken, restore it in the same way as we have said for the bone of the forearm; and these breaks should not be hidden from him who applies his study and skill to them, and pays attention to my book. For the breaks indicate a variety of ways for restoration: therefore, take note of this.
In the case of a broken penis, take a goose's gullet and insert the penis into it; then wrap cloths around it, and leave it for 3 or more days, and it will heal quickly.
of breakage with wound
For that one who has breakage with wound, especially if it is large, such as the bone of the leg or shoulder or something similar, he must be bandaged now, so that the bandages that we have said bear witness to this.
And if the wound is healthy, then anoint it with vinegar, if you do not have anything else, then proceed to restore the breakage in that same hour, or on that day, if abscesses do not come.
And if abscesses come, then leave the restoration until the ninth day, as long as the abscess is calmed, and do not touch it on the third or fourth day, because you would cause a bad event to happen.
And if the bone breaks and appears exposed at the edge of the wound, you must gently set it in place with slight extension.
And if the fractured bone pieces do not align themselves to be set in place by your hands, you must use this instrument which is made of iron, about 7 or 8 inches long, and as wide as the size of the wound; and for this reason, the mirror should grasp 3 or 4 (depending on what is required in each case of fracture), and it should be round and somewhat large but not too thin so that it does not bend during your work on the limb, and it should be sharp at the front end and thick from the middle to the tip, like this:
This instrument is called "palainche", so you should place the curved pieces of bone on top of the exposed bone; and press it once until it lines up, ensuring they are equal in length. If the fracture is fine and the instrument cannot grasp the bone properly, you must cut the edge of the bone to give the instrument enough grip.
And if you cannot reset the bone, as we have said, strike it with an appropriate instrument, either chisel or saw, to your power; then remove that which is left in the bone by sharp cutting and small scrapes.
And when the bone has been reset and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place. Make it so that it is in its natural position, then moisten a clean cloth with black stiptic wine, if available; and do not put any oil or other substance over the wound where there is an ulcer, as it will cause pus and corruption; then apply splints when you have restored the bone, leave the wound open, cover the edges all around, according to the size of the wound, and take good care that the wound is not compressed with a fracture; and many times this has been done by foolish surgeons, causing harm or death to the patient, or causing some infection sometimes; and the splints should be softer and more flexible than other fractures.
If the wound is bad or large, and you fear that some mishap may come from it, as we have said, and you feel pain at the site, do not put splints on; instead wrap around, in place of splints, hard cloths, and bind them. And when you see after one day or two days swelling at the wound, remove what you have put over it with all vinegar, and apply ointment for healing wounds, such as ointment for festering sores and similar ones.
And it is necessary that you dislocate the member twice a day, at morning and evening, as long as it is healed and sound.
And the limb should be placed so that the bone moves down gently towards the inside.
And if it passes many days and the bone cannot heal but goes down again, since there are small fragments of bones, you must try to cure the wound and remove all those loose fragments that cause pain.
And if an ulcer or any other kind of corruption comes to the place, you must cure it, according to what he said in his previous chapter. And when a bone is broken and open on the limb, such as the bones of the thigh or shoulder, and similar large limbs, do not drain it, for many times death comes, but leave it until it can heal; perhaps it will heal by itself after twenty days or thirty, then cure the wound if possible; and if you cannot, leave it.
The arriving blisters on the sores
There are often many times after the healing of the break, especially when it is near the joint, and it is an unpleasant sight to see the shape of the limb; and unfortunately, the limbs cannot perform their natural work.
Therefore, be careful if we are sick: administer medicines such as aloes, incense, myrrh, and saracocola, acacia, and similar ones; so take any of these things or all together, and grind them with a sharp vinegar or with enough egg white or oil; then place it on the wound in poultices, and hold it tightly and do not remove it for many days; and then open it, and start another one, until the node is removed; or you can apply a well-made wooden plank, because the properties of wood are that it removes all inflammations from limbs. If the node has turned into hardness like stone, and it needs to be removed, then you chop it off with a knife, and make the excess apparent; or you scrape it with any rasp, until it is removed, and cure it until it is healed.
When the broken bone is restored and remains weak and fragile afterwards, this happens for many reasons: one of them being that it was tied too tightly, not as it should have been; or because there were too many ligaments, preventing the nourishment from reaching the limb; or due to excessive swelling; or due to excessive movement, not in its hour; or due to a lack of blood in the body, causing it to be weak.
And the cure is that you make the patient eat, and make the body lean until the blood is multiplied in him; administer a bath, give joy and comfort; then put wax on the limb so that the wax attracts great nourishment to it, and let the swelling be often reduced with cold water, until the nourishment reaches the limb; and return it to its natural shape.
twisted limb after health
When a limb is twisted after restoration and the bones are broken open, and the shape of the limb is disfigured, yet it does not lose its natural function; do not believe the foolish who say that one should break the limb anew, and many foolish people have done this in our land; and this practice is blamed, and great harm comes from it, and possibly death. Yet, if the swelling and pain are fresh, they must be treated with hot, cooling water or softening herbs such as comfrey leaves, roots, medicks, etc.; make one poultice made of a mollifying substance like daisy, and take the musk of comfrey, mix it with gelatin oil or sesame oil, and make a poultice. Or you can make a poultice from ripe figs ground with wheat bran, etc., and similar medicines that alleviate the pain.
And sometimes the dislocation is removed by continuously and repeatedly rubbing with moist hands. Bring motion to the limb every hour.
And if the twisting is swollen and hardened, like stone, and it requires to be cut with iron, it should be covered up to the bone, at the subtle incision gently made; and apply cushion and study in the treatment.
Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation occurs in anyone, it must now be reset carefully.
If one waits, the joint swells, and if it is reset too soon, there is danger of setting it at an incorrect angle; therefore, one should not move it until it has subsided: many times this results in pus formation and other pains.
However, when this happens, first clean the patient, then let the abscess subside; then wash the limb with hot water and oil, then gently manipulate it, and heal each member as appropriate in its place.
And I have ordered the chapters on shoulder dislocations from head to foot.
of jaws
It happens that the jaws are dislocated in several ways; and the dislocations of both are according to two manners: either they are slightly dislocated from their places, becoming somewhat softened; or they are completely dislocated, hanging towards the chin, and the saliva flows out of the mouth that it cannot hold, nor can it close its mouth, and wraps its tongue with speech.
When a dislocation is small, it returns through multiple positions.
And if it is whole and complete, you must reset it quickly without delay.
and in such a way that the assistant holds the head of the patient, and places his thumb of one hand at the root of the dislocation of the jaw within the mouth, if the dislocation is two parts; and the other hand must be turned away, to make it even; and instruct the patient to soften their jaws and move them from all sides.
And the mirror (or instrument) should make it even until it returns to its place.
And if the jaws (or broken bones) are dislocated, apply hot water and oil to them, moving them gently until they are reset; do not force it to return, as we have said.
And when they are reset evenly and the mouth of the patient is closed well, apply a soft cloth soaked in a paste made of rose oil and wax, then tie it gently with few bandages.
And let the patient lie on his back, with his arms between two cushions, so that he does not move either to the right or to the left and do not make any effort to increase pressure. Instead, take light food until the pain is relieved and the jaws are healed;
And then, one should gently nourish it, and not work at all on opening the mouth to eat or drink, until the mandible is well knit and healed.
And if the two mandibles cannot be set right within an hour and are not turned to their places, fevers and accustomed sweats occur, and possibly the rupture of the stomach, and by chance, the vomiting of clear bile.
And when you see this, then know that it is a disaster; and many times he who experiences it dies within eight days.
of the collarbone
The collarbone cannot dislocate towards the chest or the hip, and it dislocates sometimes outwards, and one can feel this happening.
And the restoration is that the patient lies on his back and extends his arms; then presses the joint firmly with your palm, and it will return; then place the splint and bind it.    In this sentence, "emplaustre" can be translated as splint and "bendeil" means to bind or fasten it.
And the joint that is towards the chest cannot dislocate; if it does, reset it to its place as we have said earlier; then put the splint and bind it, and keep the patient resting until he is healed.    The phrase "com nos avons dit" means "as we have said earlier", in this context referring to the previous sentence about resetting the dislocation.
And likewise, the head of the spine is reset when it is dislocated from its place.
dislocation of the shoulder
Know that the shoulder is dislocated only in four ways: one way it is dislocated at the upper part, below the shoulder joint; and the second way is at the hip portion; and sometimes it can be dislocated above, but this happens rarely.
and it does not dislocate behind the shoulder nor within the nerves; and it often dislocates below towards the joint, especially in those with little flesh, because it can jump out quickly; but in those with enough flesh, it jumps out only slightly and returns quickly.
And by chance happens to some men percussion or fracture, and inflames the shoulder with an abscess hot, and thinks that it is dislocated by this.
Then you must check, as long as you are sure; and then begin the treatment.
Dislocation is known when it moves towards the inside, and you should distinguish between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find a clear difference between them. And you will find in the shoulder blade a hollow, and under it press on the head of the shoulder as if it were an egg; and the patient cannot return his hand to its place, nor can he make any movements.
And if it is dislocated upwards, do not cover it, for you will find it clearly by touching.
And this kind of dislocation is not difficult to fix when it is new, or if the patient is healthy.
And the method is that the minister lifts the patient's hand upwards, then places his thumb under the joint, and forcibly bends the joint upward to its place; the minister then lifts the hand and extends it upwards, then places it back; it will come back quickly.
If it does not come as we have said in hands for several days, then the patient should be bathed in hot water; and comforting, soothing remedies should be provided, such as a concoction of althea and fenugreek in water, and it should be given to them.
Then the patient should be made to lean on their back, and under the joint, put a piece of equal linen, neither too soft nor too hard, then the minister places his heel on the linen, and lifts the head of the shoulder properly, and pulls the hand of the patient.
And another minister ties down the patient's head so that it does not move forward; this shoulder immediately returns to its place, and if you wish to reset it in this manner:
and let a man who is bigger than the patient be present; he should be straight toward the side, and push the shoulder of the patient underneath the patient's armpit, and lift the armpit upward so that the patient hangs from it; And another minister pulls the patient's hand downward towards the stomach. If the patient is too light, give him something heavy to hold onto, and the dislocation will return immediately.
And it is also reset in another way: and this is done by inserting one long needle into the ground, so that the head is as round as a pea, and not too thick nor too thin. Then it is placed under the patient but with soft cloth over it, and the patient stands with one arm extended to the other side; then the joint will return to its place quickly.
and if it does not return as a result of all the things we have said, then perform this cure: take one needle that is two arms long and four fingers wide, which has a round head for penetrating fully into the joint, in the following form:
Then lay the rod on top of the head covered with the cloth so that it does not prick the patient, then place him under the patient's ass; extend one arm over the rod and fasten the shoulder to the rod, and hold the hand at the end of the arm, then place the arm on one side of a wide yoke, and extend the other hand below; leave the body hanging from the other side: the joint will return to its place.
And when it is in its place, in whatever way that may be, you must put a equal length of wool under the ass; then apply a plaster made from mill powder, with incense and egg white, all over the shoulder and around, then bind it under the ass accordingly, and turn the string around the plaster, and embrace the hand at its neck, and let the hands remain in this position.
And it is necessary that he eats little food, until the limb is comforted, because it will heal faster; and then eat more after 5 or 7 days, and move it; and if it becomes hard and is not softened, it is healed.
And if the joint is dislocated due to moisture or for another reason, then you must administer three fire cauterizations as described in the chapter on cauteries.
If you do all this and it dislocates again after 7 days, and the joint cannot stay in place or lift the arm above, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is pinched or stretched or weakened; and know that the joint will never be set in its place.
A dislocation that is towards the hip or backside is caused by an impact and stretching of hands, and other methods are applied for its treatment; it should be treated until it heals.
And if afterwards, when the member is healed, there comes swelling and slow movement, the patient should use baths many times until the swelling subsides and returns to its original state.
The cost of dislocation is...
Know that the joint is dislocated at the point, and it returns to the point; and if it has dislocated from all sides, both in front and behind, and the dislocation is not repaired, because it can be seen well and felt well; and it dislocates according to each figure. And when you join the sick man's arm with the bone, if you can see it clearly. For the joint is dislocated, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch the shoulder at all.
And you must reset it as soon as the abscess comes to be open, for if the abscess comes to be open, it would be painful to reset; and perhaps it cannot be reset completely, especially when it is at the back; it is worth more than other dislocations, and is of greater pain, and perhaps there comes death.
And the restoration is such that you extend your two hands to it; its arms should be spread out, and its hands according to the bone all around, above and below, and push the joint back to its places together, or at the root of its palm, until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is at the front, it returns when it doubles its hand to its hand, and bites the root of the palm that has been dislocated. (Translated line-by-line)
And if it does not return to its place, administer strong extension; and it is that two assistants stretch the arm, and burn the arm of two assistants so that it does not move during the extension; then turn the arm from each side, then when you have wrapped a double-length and wide cloth around it;
and when the master joins the joint to the hand, he should apply some oil to soften the joint, then push the joint together firmly, until it returns. (Translated line-by-line)
And when it is in place, put dry plaster made with egg white on it and press it down, then hold the arm of the patient at the neck, and leave it for some days, then release it.
If the joint is closed in its place, remove the bandage and leave it as it is; if you see that the joint does not bind well, reapply the plaster and the bandage, and leave it like this for some days until it is firmly set; then remove the bandage.
If it feels sore after the reset of the joint, and it swells, wash and rub it well, and press until it is soothed; or put a piece of fat sheep's wool on the joint, then leave it for one day and one night, then remove it, and have the patient enter warm water. And when it swells, gently rub the joint, then place the arm back, and then immerse [it]; and do this 2 or 3 times until it is healed; if you see, place warm moistened cloth on it and hold it in place; it will return to its position.
Dislocations of the hand
The joint of the hand is dislocated, and it returns easily, more than other joints. Nevertheless, it must be returned to its place as quickly as possible, immediately when it is dislocated, unless the muscles are swollen or there is hot abscess.
And the repositioning (of a dislocated joint) is such that you place the affected limb on a table, and extend the helper's hand, and hold the diseased limb steady, so that it is aligned; then put your palm on the appearance of the jointure and push until it returns to its original position.
Moreover, you must ensure that it is in the correct place (the limb); then place the affected arm on a table for extension and repositioning. If the dislocation is at the back of the hand, place the affected arm on the table, and hold your hand over the appearance of the jointure. If it returns to its original position, then that is good.
If not, if it (the dislocation) is soothed by pressing on swellings and abscesses, let it remain in this state.
And if it cannot tolerate it and you cannot set it back in place after any days, then the dislocated joint remains.
And the patient should not be forced for too long as long as his hands are paralyzed and cannot grasp anything: therefore know that the nerves or arteries have been cut; there is no other remedy but to stretch by fire cautery in this case, and perhaps nothing else works.
And when the hand is at its place, put the plaster as we have said on it, then hold it and leave for 5 days, then remove it and leave in this manner.
If it cannot move well and there is no pain, apply warm moist cloth and rub until it heals.
of the dislocation of fingers in the hand
Sometimes the fingers of the hand are dislocated on one side, sometimes at the back of the palm or the belly.
Then extend the thumb, and push the dislocation back towards your palms until it returns, then hold the head of the thumb and direct it to the part where it is dislocated.
and let it rest for 2 days, then make it even on the second day; tie it as we have said, untie it from day to day, make it move, and bind it again; do this frequently, until it becomes narrow.
and do the same for a dislocation of the wrist, and do as you have done before until it is healed, and do the same when it is dislocated from another part.
The displacement of the vertebra of the back
When the vertebra of the back or neck is dislocated, or when there are multiple dislocations without treatment, the patient quickly dies.
And the signs are that excretions leap out involuntarily, without control, and multiple members are often weakened or paralyzed (either two legs or both arms or one).
And multiple times, the vertebra (of the back) becomes paralyzed in four parts. The one that becomes paralyzed at the rear is called "hunchback".
The cure is that you should verify if the swellings are from childhood; if there is no cure or healing from it at all.
And that which comes from falling or blows or similar things, the ancient methods of cure spoke in great words, but it does not have much benefit in all cases;
but I have shortened it according to my intention, and I have formed instruments in various ways.
I say that in the swelling which comes before, there is no instrument or healing;
And likewise that which comes directly between the two sides, cannot be cured except by him specifically who comes from behind, as I said;
And the patient should be extended on one even surface and have something pressed beneath him to prevent bleeding;
Then insert a stick into the head of the patient on the ground and another at the feet, and tie a rope around the ankles, hips, thighs, and knees of the patient;
and two ministers hold the ropes, one at the head and the others at the feet, between the two sticks;
And let them be well closed, the embers as we have said, and the mirror places its palms on the spine until it returns.
And if it does not return through this treatment, take a board that is three spans long, shaped like a wedge, and the patient should be on their side. Push the head of the board underneath the side, then place the edge of the board on the spine. And place the mirror's feet on the other end of the board and press hard until it returns to its place. If you see that it does not work, use the lathe that rotates by hand.
And it is that you stick two thorns into the patient's head on one arm large, and toward the feet two other ones, and between each thorn, underneath and under, a palm's space in length.
and in each thorn have one wire or turner, and the thorns be firmly in the earth so they do not move; and between every two thorns have one turning thorn, so as the wire turns, and in the two turners have two small thorns of a palm's length, to turn the turner.
and then tie the wire that is among the ankles to the turner toward the head, and the other wire toward the feet to the other turner, and each of the ministers turns the turner with the entire length of the wire, and the master sets the spine equal as we have said.
And when it is even, place a plaster with desiccative consisting of egg on top, then apply a hot poultice, and then place the bone of a rod of 3 fingers length, which penetrates the swelling and the healthy part of the spine, then tie it with a cord as we have said, and use the patient with gentle heat until it is healed.
If anything comes at the end of healing, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines with the bone as mentioned before; and sometimes they administer a piece of wood.
And sometimes the appearance comes at the lower part of the spine, and they believe that it is dislocation; but it is the bone that opens, so one should not have any presumptions as it might bring death.
Of the dislocations of the neck
Know that the dislocations of the neck and shoulder come from nothing but dislocations solely, not otherwise as in other joints; and the joint of the neck is dislocated along four parts: inside and outside, front and back, more inside than otherwise, and less so in front and back.
And the knowledge of its dislocation within is that when the sick joint is joined with the healthy one, it is longer, and the sick knees are wider apart than the healthy ones, and the sick cannot bend their knee in fire. And it is the joint that is dislocated swollen with abscess heat, because the head of the thighbone comes there.
And the sign of this coming outward, it is that this accident is contrary to those before.
And the signs of this happening in front are that his leg is well positioned according to the completion; however, do not double the knee due to pain, and if you want him to walk, he cannot move forward, and retains urine, and inflames the ankle, and when he walks, he passes over the heel.
And the signs of this happening behind are that he cannot extend his knee nor bend it, and the leg is twisted more than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the head of the thighbone is in its place below the ribs.
The re-alignments of this kind of dislocation are as follows: you should verify if the dislocations are old and remain according to their position without any treatment; there is no need for presumptions.
And for those whose dislocation is fresh and it is of the four kinds of dislocation, you should hasten to turn the joint, pushing it inward and outward, and moving it from right to left; possibly it will return, and no other treatment is necessary.
If it does not return in this manner, then you should call for one strong assistant and hold the leg firmly with both hands or tie a cord above the knee; and another assistant extends his hand over it in such a way that he pushes his hands beneath the armpits, then tightens a soft rope around the thigh; and another grasps the head of the rope;
and all pull up and down at once, only lifting the patient off the ground once, and hanging him for a while;
This method of extension is common in four similar cases, and if the dislocation returns as we have said, it is good;
If the joint is not dislocated, it requires treatment for its appearance. When dislocation is at the shoulder, you must remember to place the patient on his healthy side, then tie a rope around the thigh and the root of the hip, and pull it upward towards the angle (shoulder) and towards the forceps (arm).
Then take another assistant with his arms and embrace the swollen thigh of the affected hip and extend it outwards in this manner: it will return to its place now, and this method of dislocation is easier than others.
And if you cannot fix it in this manner as we have said, then you must tie the two feet of the patient together with a strong rope around both ankles and knees, and the affected leg should be extended two feet further than the others.
Then let him be hanged by the neck from a post, and let there be two long arms (supports) above the ground; then instruct one minister to embrace the thigh of the patient, and let another minister hold onto the patient who will embrace the thigh, as the joint will return quickly now.
When the dislocation is at the back (reverse), let the patient lie as we have said in the one who has sciatica, and draw a thread (strap) around the affected leg properly and around the body as well.
Then insert two rods, one at the neck and one at the feet, then pierce one rod between the thighs in the patient who is lying down in this manner; And plant the moistened cloths around him so that it doesn't burn the patient, then extend each minister towards him, and the mirror place his hand equal to the dislocation.
If it returns, that's good. If not, place him on a table and press as we have said in the inflammation, and let the patient lie on the healthy side.
When the dislocation is in front, it's necessary to extend the affected leg immediately, and as I have said; place the mirror on the opposite side of the dislocation, then press with the other hand, and stretch it downward towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is towards the exterior, it is not advisable to extend the patient downwards, nor raise him up on the ground, but rather it should be as if the hip were dislocated towards the exterior, as we have said in the lying-down position on the two hips. and be on his backside, and the limb extended as we have said before, and press upon the joint against the table.
and when the patient extends his legs, and they are even, then align the thighs and place a cushion, and tie one end of a bandage so that the hip does not move.
And let it rest for three or four days, then dislocate it, and place a plaster on it; and if you see that they are even, hold them together as before, and leave it. Three days; then dislocate it, and make it walk well, until the limb is comfortable.
of the dislocation of the knee
The knee is dislocated in four ways: inside and outwards, backwards, but not forwards.
And the signs are that you command the patient to bend his leg at his knee, and if it does not bend at his knee, know that it is dislocated.
and the restoration of all (the limb) is that you make the patient sit upright, extend his leg if he can, and place your back against his face, and place his foot on your feet.
then take his knee in your palms, pull it back between your hands, and bend the two sides of the knee joint. Another servant extends his foot until the knees return to their place, and the signs are that they straighten easily at the knee joint.
And apply the poultice on it, and make the leg straight from the knee, and tie them together firmly for three or four days, then release it; and do not let the patient walk, until the limb is comfortable.
And if it's not straightened, administer strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the hernia, until it is healed.
of the ankle dislocation
The heels are sometimes crushed, and sometimes completely dislocated, from within and out of place.
And the signs that the ankle is swollen, and bent towards the part where it is dislocated:
The reduction is easy, and it must be done gently when it is only crushed.
And when it is dislocated entirely, you should make the patient sit straight, and tie four ministers (supporters) above the ankle.
Then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, then to your left hand twice, then lift it up and push the foot up forcefully;
and do this twice, as we have said, pushing and pulling the foot; if it returns, that is good; if not, repeat the process, for it will return.
and if it cannot return in this way, lay the patient on his back on the ground, and make a firm pass (incision) in the ground between his thighs, and tie cloths around it so that the patient does not feel pain.
Then the ministers bind the leg, and another minister extends the foot to his hands or to a cord, so that he lifts the foot above the neck of the leg. Then each minister equally stretches it and passes through the legs of the patient to hold him when lifting.
Then the healer equalizes the dislocation in his hands, and another minister binds the healthy leg below, and the dislocation will return quickly.
And when it is set in place, place the plaster and compress on it, form it, bind the foot to the leg, and watch the nerves that are behind the ankle, so that the straps are not too tight.
Let it rest for 2 or 3 days, and if the ligament weakens, tighten it again; then loosen it on the third or fourth day, and tell the patient to walk for 4 days. and if he goes before this term, it is not certain that he will not dislocate again.
And if an abscess comes up, you must treat it as we have said elsewhere until it is healed.
of the two
When the two [parts] are dislocated, they should be stretched gently without strain, and it is an easy thing.
And if the dislocation is in any part of the back or foot, you should make the patient sit on a flat surface or table straight, and put your foot on the opening of these joints, then press your foot firmly, until it returns.
And when it is level and there is no opening, put a table with two legs under the ball of the foot, then press firmly, and leave for four hours, then release it; and make it rest until it is healed.
Of wounds and dislocations together
When a wound comes with dislocation and it is to be restored, many times the patient dies.
If you are not presumptuous in the treatment, if you are not skilled in the art and have not practiced it for a long time, and if you are not compassionate and merciful, do not be bold.
and use the beginning of soothing abscesses with hot cautery, and leave the patient in the hands of God if you do not see hope for healing. And when you see hope, then reset the limb to its place, so that the abscess grows there.
And when the limb is in place, administer things to soothe the abscess and treat the wound, as required, with remedies that are highly drying.
And if with dislocation there is a fracture and small bones are displaced, set them, and do as we have said in simple diseases.
And keep away from fearful pathways, as I have said, for it is harmful to you according to your Creator, and by the wisdom of your weapon and body. Amen
