To you, dear son, I have completed this book which is the end of the science of medicine together with its content, and I have brought it to an end by its explanations and declarations. And it came to me in a vision that I should complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
And because the work of hands is corrupted in our region and is alien to everything everywhere, the science and art are destroyed, and nothing remains of it but small descriptions in books of the ancients that the hands have changed. And because of this (dislocation), errors and vanities have arisen, and intentions are closed off, and knowledge is dismissed.
It seems to me that I will describe the process of this treatise together with its arrangement according to the way of exposition and declaration, and abbreviation; and I will also come together with the forms of cautery instruments and other tools of work accompanied by the explanation and preparation for their use as necessary.
And because there are no good masters of hands in our time, the art of medicine has become distant. And one who undertakes [this task] should be knowledgeable in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, to know the judgment of limbs, their shapes and connections and separations thereof, and have knowledge of bones and nerves and marrow, and the number of joints, and the moving and resting veins and the reposing ones, and where they originate.
And for this reason Hippocrates said that the hand with the thumb is not much, but with work it is enough; and similarly in the art of surgery.
We advise you in the beginning of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the matters previously mentioned, be careful not to make mistakes and not to operate on people; thus, I have seen many who engage in this science and abandon both their knowledge and experience.
For I saw a foolish man who cut open one abscess of scrofula or the neck of a woman, and cut the arteries of the neck; therefore so much blood came out that the woman died in her hands.
And I saw another man who extracted a stone from an old man, and the stone was large; he carried away a piece of the bladder with it, and the man died within 4 days.
And I had already been called for him to extract it, and I saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and knew well that if he cut it he would die.
And there was another man who took care of a duke of our land who had his leg broken, and with the breakage he had an open wound; and the ignorant man pulled the broken part over the wound with great force, and did not leave any skin at the wound, and left it in that state; and he commanded that it should not be released; and it remained like this until the leg became completely swollen and the toes and came to destruction.
I was called to come to him and hurried to release the leg; and when I released it, he was at peace and felt no pain.
But the corruption was already confirmed in the member, and he could not heal it; and the corruption continued to spread through the member until the entire member was destroyed.
And (there is) another mirror which will cause an abscess to collapse, and then inflame it due to the evil of its power.
For when the chancre is pure of black bile, it should not be touched by iron if it is not in its place where everything corrupted can be completely removed.
And therefore, dear son, it is necessary that you know that the work of hands is divided into two categories: one in which there is danger in many dispositions; and I will show you in each section of this book where there is fear and danger.
Because it is necessary for you to protect yourself so that foolish people cannot speak ill of you.
Take your weapons in custody, and approach your patients gently yet firmly, and use the best way so by the grace of God you may come to salvation and be praised; and leave aside diseases of despairing health; and remove your weapons from that which makes you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you can pass from this world to the other of glory.
Galen said in some of his admonitions: "Do not take care of bad diseases, lest you be called a foolish person."
I have designed this treatment according to three chapters.
The first chapter is about fire cauteries and cold medicine cauteries, and the chapters are arranged from head to feet; and the forms of instruments, and iron implements for cautery, and everything that is necessary in this work.
The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and about ventouses (sucking cups) and wounds, and extraction of arrows, and similar things; and the chapters are arranged and the forms of instruments.
The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and it is arranged from head to feet, and the forms of instruments.
Therefore, as we remember the work, it is necessary that I tell the quality of aid and the harm of each complexion.
I say that the qualities of aid and harm are lengthy and subtle words and secret responses, and many wise people spoke about it, and they agreed with this; however, their words were not enough for me because I will shorten them.
I say that the fire cautery helps universally with every complexion where there is matter, whether it be two complexions: namely, the hot complexion with matter, and the dry complexion with matter.
In hot and dry conditions, some said that the fire cautery is great aid; while others said the opposite: that the fire cautery is not beneficial for illness caused by heat and dryness.
For the nature of fire is hot, and should not be used to cure hot illnesses by heat or dryness; and those who said the opposite stated that the fire cautery provides great aid for hot and dry illnesses that come from human bodies. For when you understand the body and its moisture in relation to the nature of fire, you will find the body to be cold.
And I agree to this statement. For I have found it once by experience.
And every way, let no one interfere except those who have tested it and who know through long practice the chapter of cauterizations, and the variety of complexions of men, and their dispositions and causes of their illnesses, and the occurrences and duration of time; we do not fear others' complexions, especially in cold and moist illnesses. And all the sick will conform to and agree with the cautery.
And know, son, that cautery combined with fire is one of the secrets of healing, and of greater goodness than cautery of burning medicine.
For fire is simple, and it affects only the member that is burned, and harms no other member unless by name.
Burning medicines come from one member to another through transmission, and bring great illnesses of difficult healing to the affected member; and by chance, they may kill the patient.
Fire, because of its strength and the goodness of its substance, does not do this if there is no excess.
And I have found this for you by experiment and through the length of service and study that I have put into the art, and it is true concerning things; and therefore I excuse myself for the length of the words, because I do not like to withhold from you the secret which is revealed by fire, and the quality of the work, how it drives diseases from bodies, as the philosopher says in demonstration; now receive it in your thoughts.
And know, my son, that they agreed on when the cauteries should be done, and chose companions.
And I say that the cautery is fitting in all times, because the harm occurring below is aided by the cautery; and likewise, if the cauteries are for necessary pain other than one that can wait for a time when greater damage will not come to the member.
And never think about it, dear child, as foolish people do; because a sickness cured by cautery has no return; and they say so; but it is not as they believe, because cauteries are not medicine that changes the complexion, and dries the humors which cause pain, and is more effective than medicine due to the speed of its action, and because of the virtue of its work and power.
And sometimes the illness comes according to the complexion of the patient and the nature of the disease and its power; and superfluidities are gathered in him through the consumption of foods and similar things, unless cauteries are administered in that place where there is little superfluity and moisture, as with cauterization for pain, and similar things; and the pain does not return; but this happens rarely.
And many people do not understand why cauteries are called the rear of medicine, and this is to see; but they do not believe that cauteries are worth more than medicine after it, but their intentions are false, and cauteries are the rear of medicine because when we administer ways of cures in any disease and they are not effective, then we administer the cautery, and it is effective. Then it is clearly stated that cauteries are at the rear of medicine, not according to the intentions of foolish healers.
The ancients said that gold cauteries were melted rather than iron ones, and they spoke untruthfully because of the quality of gold and the nobility of its substance; and they said that the head of a cautery does not cause pus, but this is not true because I have tested it, and found that it is true in some cases; and gold cauteries are more effective than iron ones, as they say.
And yet when you heat an instrument of gold, you do not know if it is heated by the color of the gold, and it may sometimes cool down; and if you heat it too much, it will burn; thus there are enough obstacles to this method.
And therefore, we use fire cautery which has been adapted to our work.
I have ordered you this chapter about the head from neck to feet, because the veins are easier to find in this way.
olive oil cautery
This cautery is useful for both moist and cold conditions of the brain, and it is used due to a disease called "soda," and because of many humors that descend from the head to the eyes and ears, and because of numerous dreams and pain in the teeth and throat, and especially for all diseases that come from coldness such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar diseases.
The form of this cautery is that the patient should be purged by a medicinal solution, cleansing the head four times or twice, depending on what the properties and age and custom of the patient can endure; and then, after the head of the patient, proceed.
Then make him sit cross-legged between your hands, and place his hands on a soft surface; afterward, put the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his eyes; and where your thumb will come, it will bleed slightly, then heat the cautery called "olivare", which is its shape:
And place it on the swollen area marked with ink, and make a downward and pulling motion with your thumb and thumb, slowly turning it; then remove your thumb immediately, and return the area if you see the bone slightly protruding; and if you do not see it, continue to apply the cautery as I told you until you see the bone; afterwards, take a small amount of fat, put it in soft cotton and place it on the area, leave it for three days; afterwards, place moistened linen on it; and leave it until the burn is healed; afterwards, treat the wound with an ointment called "tetrafarmaçon", until it is healed.
And as the ancients said, when a wound remains open longer, it drains more; and for this reason, if it is covered, it heals faster.
And some said that the fire cautery should burn part of the bone, and then heal the one who is burned from the bone, and be cured.
And others say that the cautery should be burned above, and push so hard that it depresses the bone as much as a walnut shell, because women use these to expel fluids from their wounds; afterwards, one must let the wound remain open for a long time, and then heal and cure.
And these two kinds of cauteries do not seem good to me altogether, except in some men where there is fear; and it seems to me that I should leave them; for the head becomes weakened by continuous solutions of nature, as we have witnessed in other members; and likewise when the head of the patient is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cautery seems safer and more effective to me, and from this use I work with assurance for salvation.
of the ancient pain in the head
When there is chronic and long-lasting pain in the head, the patient should use wormwood and pills called "cochie", and of purges for the head and oils and plasters; and if they do the cautery that we have said before, it is not worth it.
Take care if the patient's shoulder is strong in nature and not too cold; then cauterize below that cautery a little as we have said above.
After performing the cautery on each horn of the head up to the bone, as we said before, and perform one cautery called "vasselz"; it is one place where ventouses are placed; hold your hand so that you do not see up to the bone: the patient feels more intense pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak about it later; and the cauterizations of the horns should be subtler than those with which the middle part of the head is cauterized, and here is its shape:
head cautery When sudden pain comes to a part of the head, and the disease extends to the eye, and the head is purged with universal medicines, and other treatments have been performed as I said in the division of diseases, and nothing helps; then cauteries are applied according to two methods: medicine of cold and fire.
The cautery of the cold medicine is that you take a hot coal and peel off its bark, place one piece on each of the two heads (eyes), then make an incision where the pain is located in such a way that you can place the hot coal under the skin; when it has been placed, press and hold it firmly for twelve hours; then release and treat the coal with vinegar and leave the wound for two or three days; afterwards cover it with linen soaked in butter.
After the ointment treatment until it is healed; and if you see that this does not work, use one of the medications I have written or treat with the twelfth treatment of combustive medicines.
The cautery of fire is as follows. Heat the cauterizer according to this form:
And it is called "clos" because the tip resembles a keyhole with one inch of curvature and a small appearance; place it on the painful area, hold your hand steady, and slightly touch the iron, allowing the middle part of the iron to burn until half its thickness is burnt; remove your hand from the fire so that only the artery does not burn, and let blood flow abundantly.
After placing cotton in alum water, place it on the area for four days; then put damp cotton in butter, and then treat the area with ointment until it is healed; and if you wish to cauterize this inflammation with the cautery called "cultellare", prick it at the tip, but be careful not to cut the artery in this inflammation which is not old.
From migraine
When treating migraine, as we have previously said in the divisions of diseases, and it does not improve, and you see that fire cauteries as mentioned before in medicine and iron do not help, then you must heat the cautere called "cultellare" until it is white; and hold steady on the spot a line of half a finger's length, and press your hand once, and hold so as not to hit the artery or reach the bone; beware of the jaw that becomes motionless when eating, and let nerves have no regard but for the motionless one and for spasms not to come upon the patient, and beware of bleeding from the artery when it is cut, or when cutting it there should be great fear, especially in those who do not know it and are not experienced; leave the operation in progress; but I will tell you how to stop bleeding when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it is mentioned in this book.
And if you see that this cautery does not help the disease and the patient is suffering, cauterize him on the head as we have said, and cure the wound until it heals. If you find a vein, administer the cautere mentioned earlier or in the chapter of artery extraction with a cautere having two blades; this cautery is better than that one and more helpful.
From the pain of the ears on one side due to coldness
When pain in the ear comes from coldness and it has been treated with medicinal remedies and other cures as we have said in the division, but the pain does not subside, then heat this cautery called "poins," which is as follows:
After heating the entire ear around the sick area, or in both places where the pain is located, move away from the root of the ear about an inch since you have identified its location; and have 10 heated cauteries around each ear; after healing the wound until it is healed.
of the torment of the mouth
The torment that should be cured by cautery is not other than those that move due to phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of diseases; and do not perform cauterization on similar things that come from scab or nerve spasm.
When you treat this type of torment that moves due to phlegm from eyes and purges of the head and gargarism, it is not worthwhile, therefore you must cauterize the patient with four cauteries: one in the root of the ear, another a little way beyond the temple, and the third on the cheekbone; place the cautery in the open healthy part, and make it cauterize towards the top of the ear a little below the horn, and another in the temple as long as a thumb; leave the cautery in place until half of the charcoal is burned; this is the shape of the cautery:
And the appearance of the surgeon's instrument we have mentioned is similar, but it is slightly more subtle and the knife should be a little larger; after curing the wound as I have previously said, let it remain clean when it is healed.
When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, but it does not benefit, and the patient does not have fever, then administer four cauteries: two on the two horns of the head, one in the head itself, and one at the site called "basin" as we have previously said, and the last cautery on the mouth of the stomach; let them be treated as we have said before.
diarrhea (in Old French)
For this disease, give the patient large ears and round pills filled with cerebrum; afterwards, anoint the head of the patient completely, and place the plaster of mustard (sinapi) on the occiput which is written or treated as plasters; and this is the method for cautery: do it as I have said.
If it is healthy in this way, it is good; if not, make four cauteries of oil on the head from neck to collar, with two spaces between each cautery and one inch wide; and cure it as others, and if you see it is needed and the patient is enduring, make one cautery in the middle; and if necessary, another two on the two horns, and cure it until it is healthy; and may the cauteries called "olive oil" be like I have said before.
of the chill of the head It is required that the head be cleansed with years and what was said before; after washing the patient's head, then make a fire cautery on the patient's head and on each horn, and one behind and three above the spine of the neck; and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the illness is severe, make four cauteries on the spine of the back; leave it until the deeper part is burned, lift your hand; after healing it, let it become healthy again, and heal the cautery that is called "olivare" as was said before.
In addition to what has been said previously, for epilepsy:
For epilepsy, the use of a fire cautery should only be used for those who are suffering from inflammation, and it is necessary first to cleanse the brain with years and other cures as was said in the division when the patient is large and suffering from thinking about medicine.
And if it is an infant who cannot endure it, give him gargling and frequent chewing of the cereal, softening it with good foods; afterward place the head on a cushion, and make one cautery as we have said before, and one cautery on the navel, and one on each horn; and if the patient is outside and enduring, make cauteries as I have said to him who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spinal cord of the back and neck, and let the cauteries be olive oil as I have said.
If the patient is an infant, make a subtle cautery in this manner:
When due to melancholy there are superfluidities or corrupted and thick phlegm, then cauterize with such cauteries as we have said for him who has paralysis.
And if due to melancholy the superfluities are declining into melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then you should give him to drink something that purifies the brain, according to what was mentioned earlier in the division.
Afterwards, take the patient's head; afterwards make a linen bandage, like a circle, place it around his head; cross the patient, and keep him tightly bound on all sides; then apply the liniment, which is made of old cow butter; heat it gently so that it can be poured without causing discomfort; after emptying the circle inside the head, let it cool; do this to the patient once a week with good governance until he is well.
Or, if you wish to perform cauterization, make many more points on the entire cautery. This method of cauterization strengthens the brain greatly; and then place dampened cotton soaked in butter and linseed oil on top.
Of the eyes When the water comes first to the eyes with the signs that I have mentioned in the division, then start and give the patient something purifying the head, and keep it away from all moisture, and make him sweat or bathe more than once while fasting.
After that, command him to lower his head, and make a fire cautery on the head, and make two cauterizations on the temples where the discharge of water is in both eyes or one eye; and burn all the veins and arteries beneath the skull, and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple; and watch for the discharge of blood, and if you see too much blood coming out, stop it with your power as you have.
And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and the incision the caution as to how you will stop it; and sometimes a fire cautery or hatereil is done beneath the two bones behind.
The body weeps tears
If the eyes are old and accustomed to weep and they are above the veins or along the arteries that appear on the outside of the head; and one sees that it is due to cold, phlegmatic superfluities, then make the cautery I said at the beginning of this work for the eyelids: namely, a cautery for the forehead, two cauteries above the temples, two cauteries or scissors under the eyebrows; and if necessary, cauterize it carefully below the eyelid.
The body weeps tears from within the eyes
When you treat the patient according to what we have said in the division, and it is of no benefit, then give the sick person three cups of warm wine; after this, burn the chief and make a cautery or olive oil cautery; also make two cauteries called "clavilis" on top of the two sores, one under the hair; and beware of the artery that you do not cover. And this is the form of the cautery called "clavilis":
When the paper of oil is softened by disease and moisture, then make this cautery called "olive oil". Here is its form:
And if you wish to perform two cauterizations on the two witches, as long as they are; and do not leave your hand except until the third part of the paper is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
the hair that pricks the oil Sometimes the hairs of the oils are converted into a piercing state and prick oil, and then cauterization is performed according to two methods: either with fire, or with a burning medicine.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they are grown and even, then put the patient in a safe position; next, on top of the hairs, draw a figure that is like the fennel seed pod, and make the start of the sign to be at the base of the hairs; then put moistened cotton soaked with egg white and musk oil on the oil, then heat the cautery in the shape described:
Then cauterize on the figure you have drawn multiple times, so that the hairs are burned in that spot; and the signs of the healing of the work are that you see the paper withdrawn, and the hairs raised at the point of the oil; then lift your hand, and leave it for three days, then put moistened cotton in butter so that the burn is removed; afterwards, treat with ointment until it is healed.
And if later the hairs grow and the skin becomes soft, then resume the fire cautery on that same spot as you did before; and if the hairs curl, cauterize until the skin rises to its natural level, is even, and does not prick the oil.
The medicinal hot cautery is to instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then take parchment in the shape of a myrtle leaf; next take French soap and hot iron, each one .З., and grind them together well; make it quickly so it does not cool, spread it over the parchment as with the myrtle leaf, and place it on the skin; if the patient holds oil in only one spot, you should work only on that one spot, and if on both spots; put cotton soaked in egg white beneath the oil; and the patient's joint should be healthy, and hold your hand showing over the medicine, and press a little pouch and move it all the times when the patient feels the burning sensation of the medicine, for he will feel burning sensations as from fire. When you have done this for a long time, remove the medicine from your hand. And when the bite has passed, lift up the affected limb and examine if it rises in the same way as when it was raised by fire or incision; and if it does so, then it is good. If not, apply more medicine to the limb, or if no medicine has worked yet, continue with your treatments until they are even, and place the fingers at their correct positions; then place cotton moistened in butter over the burned area until the blisters have healed, then treat the limb with a salve called "dyafenis" and others until it is healed.
And if you need to be careful with your treatment because the medicine is pricking at the eyes, and if the skin becomes soft after that, and the hairs start to prick in the oil, then repeat the medicine on that limb which has been properly cleaned as before; afterwards treat it until it heals; this is the form of the mirte leaf.
And know that the human hair is of various sizes and according to this, your treatments should be adjusted; do not deviate from the correct path for those who study this art.
Treatment of a fistula by cautery
When treating a fistula as we have said in the description of diseases, and your treatment does not help, then you must cauterize it according to this method.
Instruct the patient to place his head in a basin or shallow dish filled with warm water; then take a piece of wool soaked in egg white or linen dipped in oil and lay it over the fistula; after that, heat the cautery to a red-hot state like the tip of a bird's feather, pointed from one end to the other, but it should also be round if necessary.
After pressing the fistula if it is open, remove the pus and dry it; and if it is closed, open it, remove the worms; afterwards place the hot cautery on it, and hold your hand on the cautery at the part of the nail to avoid burns; and place the cautery in the oil fat, and rot it.
If you begin the cautery up to the bone, it would be good. If not, start again with the cautery once more, and another if needed, and let it rest for three days; afterwards put soft cotton soaked in butter on it, and the ointment drying treatment until it is healed, and if forty days pass without healing, apply corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed; and the king according to what he writes in his chapter.
And here is a method of cauterizing a fistula that the ancients did not say. Understand a fistula, and split the side of it; afterwards put one subtle camphor capsule in the incision: And they make the quantity of a .Z. of plug; hold your hand firmly and let the patient not move at all, so that the melted lead does not spill onto him; and it is necessary that you place oil on top of the patient's cotton soaked in egg or awen: the plug will direct the flow of the fistula, and the healthy part heals marvelously through wonderful health.
If the fistula is healed by the cautery we have mentioned, that is good. If not, it is necessary to administer fumigation to the chest and bring the fistula back into the chest as appropriate in its own place.
cavities in lips Often cavities occur in lips, which are called "hair-like", and equally in children's lips.
When curing these cavities as we have said in the previous sections, and the treatment does not help, then heat a small cautery culet in this shape:
And apply it immediately to these cavities until it comes up to the surface; afterwards, treat the area with lime until it is healed.
Of the abscess of the throat
When the abscess comes in the root of the throat or in the eye, or in the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, after it becomes pus-filled and swollen and turns into a fistula; and you treat it as we have said in divisions, but it does not help at all: then you must have one cautery according to the size of the fistula; after draining or opening the fistula, keep your hand until the iron feels hot at its tip and where it was placed; and do this once or twice, after treating what we have said about treatments, until it is healed; and if it is healed in this way, it is good; but if not, you must find the location and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
of the teeth movement
When the gums become soft due to moisture and the teeth move, and you cure it with medicine but that is of no use, then put the head of the patient in hot water; after scalding the cautery as the method will come later, place a cane on the tooth; and put the hot cautery into it quickly, and hold your hand so that the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; after releasing your hand and repeating the cautery according to your wish; afterwards fill the patient's mouth with saltwater, and keep it there for an hour and rinse thoroughly.
And in this way the moving teeth are stabilized, the softened gums are kept in place, and the corrupting moisture dries up.
of the tooth pain
When pain in the tooth comes from cold or there is either cold or worm, and the medicines have no effect, then it will require cauterization according to two methods: cauterization with a lancet and cauterization with fire.
Cauterization with butter is such that you take butter from a cow, and the tip in an iron or bronze spoon; then take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a tent, and moisten it with hot butter, and place it on the painful tooth as quickly as possible and hold it until it becomes cold; and thus do frequently until its effect reaches the root of the tooth, and if you see that the linen and cotton become cooled in cold butter, then place it on the tooth again, and put a hot iron above it until the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
The cautery with fire is such that you take a cane of iron or bronze, and it should be thick so that the heat does not burn the patient's mouth; then heat the cautery, after which its form will come out, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery cools down; do this frequently, as the pain will disappear that day or the next. And it is necessary for the patient to fill their mouth with good butter in the urgency of this cautery, and then spit it out; and this is the form of the cautery:
When scrofulas are due to cold and damp, and not responsive to medicine for digestion, then heat the fire cautery as follows: make two holes for the smoke to exit from the other side; place the hot cautery on the abscess once, or twice if needed, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess; if the abscess is small, apply the cautery accordingly with the size of the abscess, and leave it for three days; then put cotton soaked in butter over the blister until the sore is healed. Afterward, cure the affected area with ointments and plasters until it is healed.
When the moisture conquers over the channel of the thigh, and especially when it comes from cold complexion, then the patient should first be purged with soluble medicines; afterwards do cautery at the root of the neck, making sure not to come close to the throat, but only a little. Afterwards, do one more cautery at the joint of the neck and the head of the spine, and let it be the cautery that is called "clavile" because we have described its shape before; heal the wound until it is healed.
When the moisture conquers over the thigh channel, and especially when it comes from cold complexion, then the patient should first be purged with soluble medicines. Afterwards, do cautery at the root of the neck, ensuring you do not come near the throat but only a little. Then, perform one more cautery at the joint of the neck and head of the spine, which is called "clavile" because we have described its shape before; heal the wound until it is healed. When all and disease of the thigh are of cold moisture, and the patient does not have fever or heat, and the illness is chronic, do two cauteries on the groin; and perform one more cautery between the hips; let it be the cautery that is called "clavile" according to the shape described before.
And if you wish to do so, apply fire-cautery by pricking all the cauteries that are called "points" for the disease of the ears; and let the points be heated up to 30 or around it. After healing the area as mentioned earlier, the cauteries should be 4 fingers deep in this shape:
And since the cauterization is lighter because you make it fourfold.
of the shoulder dislocation When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. Place the patient on his back and on his side; then take your left hand and probe the cavity that is within the shoulder; if the joint is dislocated inside, heat the cautery in the shape of two nerves that are located here:
and use the cautery to perforate the cavity up to the chest, and bring forth the figure of the cautery along with four cauteries; and for this reason, the cautery is made with the one that has two nerves, because the shape of cauterization consists of several cauteries; and these nerves are located according to the subtlety of a tent and this is the form of the cautery that has two nerves:
And sometimes it is dislocated above this nerve, for which there are eight cauterizations.
After applying the cautery, break it with oil and then let the patient rest, and do not move the limb for a long time until he is comforted.
If it is dislocated above [something], which happens rarely, then make a cautery on the thick part of the large clavicle, or many cauterizations at the prick. For the joint is closed, and the moisture is stopped, and the patient is healed.
the cautery of pleurisy
The ancient ones said that one should make cauterizations for pleurisy with roots of aristolochia, and in this manner: take a long root of aristolochia, the largest that you can find, and let it be dry, and also as large and as long as your thumb; immerse it in oil, and heat it up, then cauterize one cautery between the ribcage and neck, and two small cauterizations a little lower in the area below the beard; two cauterizations between the fifth and sixth costal cartilage, declining slightly behind a bit; one cautery at the side, and another on the stomach, and one between the shoulders, and two at the sides of the side affected by the cautionery that is between the shoulders; do not press hard, but perform it as openly as when smelling.
And said some ancient one that a man should use a cautery like a razor and heat it up and put it between the ribs until it reaches the abscess; then the pain subsides, as we have said in the liver abscess. But in this work there is fear or the patient dies immediately, or fistula comes which cannot be healed.
of the mouse
When you treat the disease of the mice (mouse bite) as we have said in the divisions of treatment, and it does not improve, then there are three ways of cautery that are all good.
The first way is that you make four cauteries in a line according to the length of the mouse, following the figure of the liver cautery as we have said before; and do not press too hard with your hand, and let the patient be aware on his back.
And another way of cautery is that you heat the cautery with two nerves, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift the cavity where the mouse is, or the sore that comes towards the left side of the patient, and the elevations you make on the cavity should be according to the body's cavity, according to the length of the body, and the cautery should be according to the width of the body.
After putting the two inflamed nerves in flame so that the boils are pierced from the other side, and then pull the cautery out, thus there will be four. And if you see, cauterize with the entire cautery on all four nerves. After healing when it has discharged pus for a long time, it is necessary to apply the cure mentioned before.
From hydropsy
The cautery is not effective for hydropsy, except in the manner called "asclytes". When you cure it according to the methods we have mentioned in divisions, and your treatment does not help, then it is necessary that you make four cauteries around the swelling, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the bladder, two behind the back near the spine, and one at the site of pain; and let the cauteries be close to the edge of the boil.
After the fire cautery is opened to expel pus for a long time, do not neglect the care of the patient after the cautery; and healing will be hastened, and the two intentions will come together with the help of God.
The form of the cautery for the belly is the clavicle as shown before; and the one for the back should be olive-shaped, as it has been stated before.
swelling of the feet When the feet are swollen in a person with dropsy, and they are filled with citrus juice, it is required that you cauterize on top of the foot between the little finger and the ring finger; and hold your hand with the cautery without turning. And do not enter too deeply, so as not to burn the citrus juice, and let the cautery be in this form:
After making .2 cauteries on each leg with the tip of the knife; and let the cauteries be long, one under the thigh in front and the other outside, inside the leg; and leave the cauteries above for a long time to heal, as much as possible; after curing the other treatments that we have mentioned.
of the remedy
When the solution of the stomach comes from coldness and moisture, while the digestive and retentive virtues that are in the stomach and the intestine are blocked, and cannot be cured by means of treatments; and you see the patient suffering greatly and having strong symptoms, do .i. large cautery on the stomach as described earlier or cautery of the stomach, around it circulate; and .iiij. subtle cauteries around the navel, each .i. cautery clavile subtle, and .ij. cauteries on the flanks.
And if you see the moisture abundant and the patient suffering, do cautery on the thumb, and .i. cautery on each joint, and .ij. small cauteries on the stomach around the large one, for the cure is beneficial when there is good aid.
of the cure for hemorrhoids
When hemorrhoids are deep-seated, either one or more, and are old and consist of large, cold, moist corrupted humors, and have been treated as we have said in divisions, and it does not help, if cauteries are made: 4 on the spine of the back, the one which is entirely turned outwards below the loins and triangularly, and 1 cautery under the belly. 2 doves.
And if you think that his stomach is chilled and the meat does not cook, and the face swells, then you make one large cautery on the stomach, as before said, and another on the liver, and another on the spleen all over with a long cautery; and leave the cautery open for a long time. Afterwards cure the place until it is healed.
of the flesh-like substance called "thelul"
When you apply althelul (a substance), heat the cautery which resembles a razor, and then place it completely over the althelul-applied area; let your hand remain until the cautery reaches the vein opening, so that it does not burn the skin; do this once or twice, and if there is much althelul, cauterize each area as we have said; afterwards, apply ointments for healing while they are healthy; and if you cauterize a large cautery over an ulcer, it will provide more help.
of an ill-healed wound
If the patient cannot bear incision or opening, we will describe the disease that cannot be healed except by cauterization.
1. When a fistula comes, and it is swollen and infected with corrupt moisture, you must test it entirely with subtle probing, and be aware that you know the extent of the probe completely.
On the disease of the kidneys When cold pain comes to the kidneys and with great swelling, and does not take on a female form, then you must make a cautery over the kidneys on both sides with the cautery clavile as we have previously said; and if we cauterize it in the middle, there will be four cauteries in a row, and they will provide more help.
Of the bladder When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, causing the patient to retain urine, then you make a cautery on the part outside the bladder, where the hairs begin at the tip, one on the right and one on the left, each as long as our thumb; and you make one cautery on the other side of the back if needed, or two if necessary; and the cauteries should be as thick as a nail according to the shape mentioned above.
Of the anus When the anus is cold and moist and does not permit conception, and the flowers are corrupted and their term ends slowly; and when they come, it causes great pain: then you must make four cauteries around the anus, as we have said in the treatment of the bladder, and two cauteries on the other side of the back; and the cauteries should be as thick as a nail, as we have said.
of the swelling
When viscous moisture descends to the swelling's container and thus causes it to move out of its place, and the signs are that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and the joint is found to have moved from its proper place, then you must cauterize the patient on the swelling's container with a cautionery resembling a circle, and sign in front of the joint surrounding the container so that the container is within the circle; and if the cautery is as those who have cauterized the stomach.
And if this cautionery is not present, make four large olive-oil cauteries and let them be as full as all the others; and let it heal until it is healthy.
Of the pain of the hernia When pain comes in the swelling of a hernia, and it is due to coldness or moisture, and the patient is cured of this as we have said in the division, but the cure is not worthwhile; and the disease is ancient: therefore you must purge the patient with foul-smelling pills or other good-looking pills.
After that, you perform the cautery; and the method of the cautery is according to two methods: namely with burning medicines, or cautery by fire. Cautery by fire is according to many methods, one of which is as follows: you cauterize on the swelling of a hernia four triangular cauterizations according to this form (shown below), and make a good depth and width, and have space between each cauterization equal to the thickness of a thumb, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped; sometimes cautionery is performed in the middle on the head of the hernia, for which there are four according to this form:
And if you see, use the round cautery in the circle as we have previously mentioned for the dislocation of the shoulder; but do it in such a way that the circles encompass the entire shoulder, and all the edges should be burned.
And this is the method for sciatica when the pain is in the shoulder and does not reach the thigh or leg. If it reaches the thigh and leg, make 2 cauteries where the patient says the pain is, and one cautery above the ankle .4 fingers, on the left side a little; and let the cauteries be made with a lancet, and burn the edges of the wound; and if the patient feels that the pain extends to the foot or very close to it, cauterize there where he feels the pain 2 or 4 times using the cautery called "poins".
And if necessary, do more; and if you know that the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, make a cautery with a lancet or circular shape, and be careful in all your cauterizations not to let the cautery burn nerves and large arteries, and not to cause the patient any greater harm or contraction.
And I myself have seen many who made a fire cautery on the foot of the ankle, and they left it until the entire leg was swollen, and the feet also, and all the toes were pierced and corrupted. After a belly solution in which he died.
And if the pain is in two places together, make a cautery in one and the other, according to this method. // The wise men will say in the cautery of the heel, here is how it is done, make a nail like iron rod, about as thick as a little finger, or slightly less, and pass it through both from above to below, with a space the size of a nut, and the distance between the holes should be two fingers apart, and they should be round, and it should have one handle of iron well made; and this is the form:
Heat it so that it becomes completely red and roasted, and then place it on the sick heel box, turn it on the healthy side; and cauterize once with one cautery rod and leave for four days; then apply a plaster of butter, and keep the wound open for a long time; after the ointment treatment until it is healed.
Albucasim says that we should use little of this cautery due to its fearsome appearance, and few who use it know how to do so; but nonetheless it is a good cautery which can be borne by those who can endure it, and there where it burns.
of the pain in the back
When pain comes in the back, either from falling or striking or excessive evacuation, or from similar causes of cold matter spreading, none of these symptoms are worth cauterizing except for one who suffers from an infusion of cold matter.
It is required afterwards that the patient be emptied of fetid pills or similar things, which are placed on the back, where the pain occurs, three lines marked with ink, and in each line 5 or more cauteries according to its potency and quantity that the patient can endure; and the cautery should be made according to the cautery called "poins"; and if you see, make 4 cauteries or 4 at the mid-sized cautery according to this form:
This disease often comes to small children, and the signs of its onset are that they have a narrow anus when they defecate, and fear; and you find it in the lower spine of the back and in its appearance which appears above other spines.
When you see this and wish to cure it, cauterize it with the cautery of this form.
The first sentence in the provided Old French text translates to: "The fire cautery increases each part of the spine. If you see it, cauterize around the spine with the cautery pointing 2 or 3 lines and let the tips be close to each other. After healing, cure the area until it is healed according to what has been said, and take care not to apply a cautery in a gland that contains nerve."
"of the pain of joints"
"When the pain of joints is due to moisture that spreads throughout all parts of the body, and when it comes in feet, which people call gout properly, and when it is caused by cold and medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauteries in this manner: make a small amount of cautery around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to this form:"
And if it is necessary for you to prick the face of the foot, make a fire cautery all over the cautery which is called "point". And if pain comes up to the knees and other joints, which happens frequently, make a fire cautery on each knee four times or four on each part, all over the olive oil cautery; and if you need more, do more, but do not hold your hand outside for longer than the fat of the skin is burnt.
If the pain descends to the knees and back, administer the cautery as we have said in its chapter. And if the pain is in the hands, make punctures around the tendons two lines long; and if there remains no pain in the fingers, make punctures on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pain comes up to the elbows or shoulders, cauterize each part, and take good care of the patient and think about medicines. For if you take good care of him and purge the phlegm, he will be healed with God's help.
From the rupture of the sifac
When worms come in wounds, and the belly swells as a result, it is necessary that when you wish to treat it, the patient should not eat anything that day; and that he uses things which relieve the stomach, so that the worms descend from his stomach; afterwards make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his arm straight until the belly recovers, and then press down on the swelling at your sides, and press firmly on top of the wound over the bone of the elbow, and give a sign that resembles half a circle above the chest; then heat the cautery as shown in this figure:
and let the worms come out. Then press down on the worms to their place; and the assistant holds his hand over where they cannot return; and you should work well the patient's thighs, and put one cushion and one sergeant on his thighs, and one other on the side which keeps his hands; then put the cautery on the sign with all your might, and hold it straight and until you reach the bone, and if you do not touch it the first time, try again until you reach the bone; be careful that the worms do not escape when you perform the cautery; that you do not burn them; and that because of this the patient does not die, or any other harm.
And know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing. It is necessary that the cauteries for children be subtle according to their size, and those of large people as large as theirs; after three days cure the wound from the cautery with butter until it is healed; after that cure other medicaments until it is healthy, and make the patient lie on his back for forty days until the wound is well healed; and it is necessary that his wounds be left open long enough, so that the worms do not escape when he goes to his room.
And after 40 days, when he wishes to rise, bring a well-made bandage for him and keep it for another 40 days; let him have good rest, but let him not overwork or be too filled with drinking and eating, and avoid excessive laughter; and if he follows this teaching, he will recover entirely. And I shall say the cure of cutting in its chapter afterwards. Of the hernia from the belly
When hernias appear in other bellies and are recognized as not growing anymore, let one cautery be made according to its size, and it should be burned the third of the skin; afterwards cure as we have said; and no old men have said that it should be cauterized with the cautery at four angles according to this form:
But first, mark the location and make a line above the wound and another below, and take your hand to hold the entire cautery. However, the initial cauteries are lighter and more mobile.
of old pain in any limb When pain occurs in any limb, either from falling or being injured, and that pain lasts a long time and the medicine does not help, then it must be cauterized with the cautery called "poins", and the cautery should be according to the length of the member, its size, its weakness, its virtue, and its location for twisting and its pain. If it is healed by the first cautery, that is good; if not, repeat another cautery on top of it, because it is customary that it should change in the limb that is closest, so you must make the cauteries until the patient is healed.
To mix medications
Mixtures of medications are sometimes helped by cautery with great care, and particularly those patients who come from putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy. When you see them to be cauterized, take care if the disease is at the beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and does not dissolve nor stay, and you doubt that the corruption will affect the entire patient, then perform five cauteries on the head: one on the forehead at the end of the hair; two on the two horns; one behind the ears; and leave your hand until the cautery reaches the bone, and until the scabs come out forcefully so that the vapors of the gross humors can escape; and then cauterize on the cheek according to what is in front.
And if the medication is scattered everywhere, it clearly perishes, then you must cauterize with the cauteries that we have said on the head, and one cautery on the nape of the neck, and two cauteries on the spine of the neck, and six cauteries on the spine of the back, and one large one on the calf and another below it, and two on each shoulder; and two on the sides, and two on the tendons of the legs, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and beware of the veins that are above the last calcament, that you do not burn them; and sometimes make a cautery on the bone of the finger, and one other on the bone of the stomach, and one other on the liver.
And know that the more you perform cautery, the more help it provides and benefits the patient; and know that sick people feel no pain during cauterization as healthy ones do, because the body is already completely corrupted. It is necessary that the cautery be large or small according to the members and joints, as you will find in the ways of iron-working. After cure the wound with wheat flour, honey and other treatments until it heals.
And know that when you use leeches, they help the patient more; and know that sick people do not feel pain from leeches as healthy ones do, because the body is already completely corrupted. It is necessary to apply leeches according to the affected area and severity of the injury. After using leeches, clean the wound with warm water and other treatments until it heals.
When leeches appear in any member and are treated with medicines, oils, and plasters but do not heal, then perform cautery on the affected member according to its size; and if the cauterization is shallow, let it be only a little deep into the flesh. Afterward, treat it with ointments until it heals. Sometimes, cauterization is done on the hand, foot, and back at the nerve endings that cause paralysis in the body, and thus the leech is removed; however, no one should interfere unless they are knowledgeable about the members and the nerves moving the body.
Of bandages
When the disease called "albaras" occurs and the instruments of medicine are of no use, cauterize it with a shallow cautery according to the size of the sore, until the blister is removed and its color changes; then cure it with wheat flour and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and goose blood and almond blood, each in equal parts; mix them all together, tie it up with a cloth, and apply it to the place until it heals.
cure of scrofula by cauterization
When an abscess begins to appear and you wish to stop it, if you cauterize with the cautery that resembles a circle around the edge of the abscess, some wise men would say to cauterize in the middle of the abscess; however, this does not seem good to me, as I fear it will become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have seen this happen before; rather, it should be cauterized around with the cautery called "circular", as we have said regarding cauteries.
the swelling that cannot grow
When a person has a disease called "adubelati", which grows slowly or because of the excess it produces, or due to the age of the patient when they are old (meaning very elderly) and have little blood, or due to the time; and you wish to hasten its growth: then cauterize it with small cauteries all around while pricking; afterwards leave it as is. For it will hasten to grow.
And if you see it pierced completely with fire cautery, heat the fire cautery as follows:
And place your hand in the midst of that disease called "adubelati" while the cautery is piercing it all the way, and make the cautery such that the patient feels it moving outside like this: the pathway of the pustule should be even. Afterwards, cure it until it becomes perfectly healthy.
cure with fire using iron
Another way of disease is called "corrodens", and it is nothing but an eating away of the limb, for it consumes limbs like fire dries up dry things. If you see this disease in a place that can be cauterized with fire, then heat the cautery small and large, according to where the disease is; afterwards, cauterize all around until you have destroyed all corruption, and nothing of it remains, so that all corrupted parts are removed. And then leave it for 3 days, and put soft cauterized powder (made from crushed cauterized areas with oil) on the wounds to remove fire burns and all corruption. After the cure by ointments generates flesh. If after 3 days you see no healthy flesh growing, that is good; if not, start cauterizing again in the place where corrupted parts remain. And this eating away is sometimes cured with medicine ague instead of fire cautery, but nevertheless, fire cautery is of greater aid, and I have already said the cure for medicine ague in the division: take it when you need it.
The growing pains that come to the feet
Often a disease called "clos" affects the feet, which is a large thing swelling and causing pain to the foot. The cauterization of this disease has two methods: fire cauterization, and hot water cauterization. Fire cauterization is when you heat one cautery like a feather from a quill, made of good iron at the size that can pierce the nail all around, and it should have subtle margins; afterwards place it all hot on the nail, and rotate your hand all around the nail until it comes to the root of the nail; and leave it for four days until it starts to emit pus; then make a plaster of malodorous herbs boiled with oil, and leave the plaster on top for the whole night, and remove and will be detached from its roots. Then cure the place with soothing ointment until it is healed.
And if it is converted by the body internally, and often happens in the hands and feet, then you must provide hot water cauterization; and it is done in this manner: take a copper or iron cane, or a feather from a quill, and place it on the nail and apply a plaster of pains (verrues); and place the cane so that it encompasses all around, then put some hot water, and hold your hand firmly, and press your hand while rotating so that the edge of the cane reaches the root of the nail, and may find the hot water penetrates deeply to the root; and let the patient endure a little bit of the pain of the hot water for an hour; then leave it as it is, and it will be detached from all its roots. Do this repeatedly until you have cured all those in the body, then cure them with soothing ointments that soothe skin.
The treatment for shaking (trembling)
When someone shakes due to coldness of the nerves, or fever of four days or other, you should make them 4 or 5 cauterizations on the spine of the back, one between each spine; and one in the pelvis area, and one on the stomach with the olive-oil cautery; this will stop the shaking and hasten recovery from the cold illness.
of putrid sores (pustules)
Sometimes the body is filled with pus-filled sores that come from corrupted matter. It is necessary to make a cautery on each head of the sore as soon as it appears, using either a thin needle of myrtle or long root of aristolochia or cauterizing needle. And sometimes they are cauterized at the beginning when they appear in this way, and they cannot grow further, but the superfluous matter that comes from them is destroyed, and they become healthy; however, it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
When the artery is cut Often there are great displacements of blood from the cut artery at the wound or the abscess incision, or the member's cautery, and similar things; and it is a very bad thing to let it flow out.
However, if it happens to someone, you should hurry and put your finger on the vein wound, and press as hard as possible to stop the blood flowing out below your finger, and let no more come out; then take olive oil-soaked cauteries of various sizes and apply them until they are all red; then take .i., either large or small depending on the wound and the location in which the artery is cut, and place the cautery on the vein where you have your finger, and hold the cautery there until the bleeding stops.
And if a jump occurs when you place your finger on the vein and the cautery is ready, take quickly another one of the cauteries that are near fire.
Keep doing this one after the other until the blood stops flowing; be careful not to burn the nerve that is exposed, and take care that no other harm comes to the patient; know that when the artery bursts, it cannot be properly stopped when the arteries are large, unless it is by one of the four ways we have said: either by cautery, or by extraction if it has not been treated, or by tightly binding with thread, or by medicines placed on it which have the power to stop the blood; and bind and tighten accordingly.
Whoever administers the binding of a tight cloth or places something burning or similar things on it, will not help if it does not work.
And if this happens to anyone and they have no medicine present, you should place your finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and stretch it out until it remains swollen above the wound and the vein; and do not move it, but wet it with cold frequently so that it is very cold until the blood is congealed and thickened and remains swollen; and proceed with the inquiry in front of those from whom you need cauteries and medicines.
We have told you in the first chapter about all diseases that require fire cautery or burning medicine, their causes and instruments and forms of cauteries; I placed that chapter from the head to the feet, and I will proceed with this chapter in the same way for those who find it easier to understand what they are looking for.
And likewise as I begin this, it is necessary, dear son, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of the cauteries, and for this reason greater caution is required.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I advise you not to act foolishly. For many types of people come for treatment. Those who arrive with such illness that they die quickly due to the madness brought about by their disease and the great severity of its malignancy, and from these one should have fear. And of those who give you advice, and say: "Wait, I am cured"; the patient is disrespectful. It is not advisable that you agree with those who come to you who have this manner, but put more consideration in your honor than in your desire, and do not rashly but wisely with regard to what you are certain of, and from which you can profit; and use prophecy and indication in the treatment of your patients so that health is achieved; and this will help you acquire good reputation, glory, and memory of praise.
Dear child, Our Lord grants you good understanding and righteousness, and if you wish to aspire to the holy inspiration of his hand, Amen.
Further, I have organized this chapter by speaking in chapters, following the order of each chapter of cauteries that I have previously described from head to feet, because you will find it easier to understand what you need from these.
The full head is filled with water
This disease often comes to children during childbirth, and sometimes it happens due to reasons unknown.
And I have never seen this disease in anyone other than children, and all that I have seen quickly dies; therefore it seems to me that I should spend less effort on these treatments.
I have seen one child whose head was filled with water, and it grew larger every day until it could no longer support it; and the moisture gathered underneath the skull bone between the brain and the bone, and the treatments are such that if the moisture is between the brain and the bone, and the abscesses are small, you should make a large incision in the head; and let it be as long as two fingers, so that the moisture runs out; and see here the form of the spatula:
If the moisture is more swollen, and the abscess is larger, make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
And if the moisture is under the bone, and the signs you see are the commissures of the head opening from each side, and the pus gushes out when you press it with your hand inside, and it does not return: then you must make four incisions within the head in this manner:
And after the incision, remove all the moisture entirely. Afterwards, strain the incisions with cloth and powders, and put vinegar and oil on it, and leave it like that for five days; then unbind it, and treat the wound with poultices and ointments, and let the head stretch out gradually, and give the patient dry meat of a moist animal until the limb is comforted and healthy.
And another way of incision is that you look where the abscess is at its widest, and join the watery part; because sometimes it is in front, sometimes behind, sometimes on the right, and sometimes on the left.
Then cut there where the abscess opens, and the accumulated part of the watery fluid; and do as you can with it; but be careful not to damage the artery; and make sure that some blood flows out, so that the patient dies a natural death from the loss of blood and evacuation of moisture.
of boil
When there is any disease called "cataract" in the eyes or at its worst, and the disease is old and the medicine's cure does not help, then the last cure is the cautery on the .ij. arteries.
Then, when you are going to cover them, the patient must stand with his head back; afterwards, rub the place of the arteries with a rough cloth until they appear, then hold the patient's neck with one cloth; then look where the veins open, and the left and right are found behind the ears, and they are tied together; then mark the places to be cut, then cut one and the other with a sharp spatula of two parts. The incision should reach as far as the bone, and this should be done through the large part of the neck.
And if you see, push the spatula under the artery and cut it from above, cutting as deep as two fingers together.
And when a vein is cut, it jumps continuously upwards.
If the artery does not open by itself, then you must measure the space of 2 fathoms (about 4 yards), then make an incision to the bone; and the amount of blood that should be released is about 7 cubic inches (cu) and possibly a little more or less according to what the patient can bear. Then observe the wound: if it remains above the bone without spurting, then the arrow that was incised does not come out, then hold and bind the wound and treat with ointment until it is healed.
migration
When the old migraine comes, and the acute catarrh, due to moisture from tears and heat in the temples and similar things such as an ancient fevered head, and it is treated by methods of medicines but none of them help, then we should cut open the arteries of the temples and cauterize them, as we have mentioned.
And the method of extracting them is that the patient bends back the hairs on his temples, and listens for the artery that opens in the temple, because it opens well with its beating, and it is not difficult to find unless in some cold people; and if it is found, the patient should grasp its neck with some cloth, then rub the area with a harsh cloth, and moisten the area with warm water until the arteries appear clearly; then take the spatumile (a medical instrument) of this shape:
Then, gently scrape the skin to expose the artery, then pull it up towards the incisors, and remove carefully all the threads that are under each part; and if the artery is thin, turn it at the tip of the incisor, then cut off that part according to the quantity of the two cheeks. Because if it's not cut off, it will not heal completely.
And draw out the blood from the .vj. c/, until .iij.; and if the artery is large, you must tie it with a double strong silk thread so that pus does not come before the wound closes and bleeding comes to a stop; then cut off the excess that is between the two ligatures in the same hour itself, and if you see, you cauterize the wound with the cautery until the bone is cut through; this is the amputation work, if the patient does not have fever and he is of a hot constitution.
For cauteries are aid for finishing moisters: that is why they are of greater help to the moisters. In the extraction of arteries, one should fill the area with old cotton and place good-made drains on top; and when they are undone, you should cure them with dry medicines that cause inflammation, and with drains until it is healed; if without the cutting of the artery as much as you work, you hurry to close it with a cautery, or use vitriol and squeeze your hand so the blood does not coagulate; and if you do not have this, place your hand on the area until it becomes frozen, and apply cold water frequently and squeeze it as needed; and the harder and slower the artery extraction is, the more it will be easier in the cauterization of this cautery with two edges, but they should be well thickened to keep its heat longer. For when the pulse is too thin, it retains less heat. And it should have between the two knives, one of thick distance, and then when you have pierced through both the thicknesses, and you place the fire hot upon it until it reaches the bone, and cut open the vein in two thicknesses; and they shall be separated between the two heads because it is not always sealed by this cautery from all; and this is the form of the cautery:
tears
When the tears of the eyes flow out of the veins that are above the testicles of the head and there is no benefit to medical treatment made in this case, and you see the patient writhing with pain, and his forehead seems to tremble like in a fit; and if they are thin and moist so that the hair on the scrotum falls out, and the scrotum is burnt and scorched by the tears, then this treatment is needed.
And it will be called the "contused cure" by the ancients, and you will make it to the patient who has this illness, shave the hair he has on his forehead, then make four cuts or an even cut along the length of the forehead; one of the cuts should be as deep as two fingers from above the eyebrow downwards towards the nose, and the others two at the costal margins above the scrotum, and be careful not to incise the arteries that are at the two costal margins above the scrotum; and keep your hand away from the continuation of the jawbones, and each wound should have the size of three fingers together.
From the incision which is above the temple until the second incision; and scrape all the cartilage that is between the two cuts completely up to the bone, then proceed from the mid-incision to the other second, and then remove this spatulum.
Insert the tool called 'cultellaire', which is sharp on one side and soft on the other, not sharp but flexible, and its shape is: And place the cutting side towards the cartilage and the soft side against the bone, and push it to reach the mid-incision. And chop all the vessels that descend from the head towards the eyes until the incision is continuous up to where the cartilage opens, and then continue in the mid-incision until the other end; and then equalize the blood flow, and press the level for the blood taken; then place a tent of old cotton in each cut, and put damp linen cloth soaked in wine, oil, and rosewater, and ensure that pus does not come in; on the third day untie the stitches, and apply a large amount of cold tetter ointment made with basilicon oil, and other treatments for wounds until it heals.
The root of the hairs
When a sharp catarrh often comes, and you see the hairs thin and small, blurred vision, burned papers; and the hair follicles are itching, and when the head is scratched in pain, and the sick person coughs; then know by these signs that those materials and that catarrh do not come from any other vein, but rather the one which is affected. The cure for this disease is as follows:
And you command the patient to bend his head backward, then make a large cut across the forehead, and another wide one. In doing so, begin from the left temple to the right temple, and let the incision reach the bone; and move your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move during eating; and when the bone is exposed, drain all the blood onto a sponge, then apply pressure between the two edges of the cut and put old cotton in there, and bind it with linen thread; then cover it with damp cloths soaked in wine and oil, and be careful to prevent hot postem; when the bones are removed, you must rub them until char begins to grow, then treat it with things that promote the growth of char.
In this manner: take 2 parts of wheat flour, and 4 parts of colophony, and make a plaster; administer it in these wounds to alleviate pain everywhere.
for the stoppage of ears
Everything that falls into the ear is one of the four things: grains, animals, stones or similar things such as iron; seeds, peas, beans; or something flowing like water and ashes and similar things.
When it falls into the ear stone or in any other way that does not fit into the ear, nor grows within the ear, put the ear to the sun. If you see a stone, distill a little purple oil or camphor oil, then apply extraction; and make him sneeze with medication, and stop his nostrils when sneezing comes, and put pieces of fabric or wool around the ear; and hold it above. Often times festering occurs through this cure; and if it does not fester, apply extraction using subtle tweezers as follows:
If it bursts through the tweezers, that is good; if not, apply extraction using fine and slender scissors; and if it does not burst through this, make a cane of beeswax and push the head of the cane or opening of the ear strongly, and stop what is around the cane with molten wax so that the fumes cannot enter with the cane; then pull it out forcibly, for often times it bursts forth as we have said; and if it does not burst forth in this manner, take glue from wherever you can find it, put it on any device that is sharp for this purpose, and put a little cotton around it; then press the glue onto the stone or whatever it may be, and pull it out. And if it does not burst forth through all the things that we have said, hurry to incise the ear so that abscess comes out and spasms; and the method of incision is that you first anesthetize the patient with opium, then drain the blood according to the strength of its power, then make the patient sit between your hands and turn the ear upward, and make a small incision in the base of the ear where the fat or flesh depends; and let the incision be as a crescent moon, until you reach the stone, then remove it as far as possible, and suck out hastily to your mouth; and cure it until it is healed. And if it is swollen with grain and inflated, administer extraction; and if it cannot be expelled, administer one thin spathule according to this form:
But do not make an incision on the grain if you think that the grain is moist due to ear moisture, until you have made many pieces; then extract it with fine tweezers and absorbent material, as we have said, so that the extraction may be aligned.
In water, therefore, the patient must use a warm wash with first-degree condiments and fill the ear with soft cotton. He should lie on that ear itself or where the water falls. If it jumps out because of this, that is good. But if it does not, take many thin and light pieces of stone according to the length of your finger, heat one slightly in fire; and make the patient hold one end of a piece in his ear, and press with another stone from the other side, and strike another stone on the one in the ear; and do not cease to strike stone against stone until the water comes out completely, and it jumps out completely; and if you see, take a stalk, and put one end of the stalk in the ear, and the other end hold near fire until the most burned stalk is burned; then repeat this with other straws until the water comes out completely, as we have said in the previous section.
In the extraction of small animals such as mice and similar things, treat it as we have said in the previous section; but if it is large and can be felt, introduce extraction with tweezers; and this is the easiest thing to remove that is in the ear.
In the extraction of earwigs, when you treat it as we have said in the previous section or using distillations which do not help, if there are no worms visible, take fine tweezers and grasp them at this shape:
And make it narrow at the bottom and wide at the top. Push the most subtle head into the ear according to the degree of the patient's suffering, then firmly grasp the entire shape; do this often until all the worms come out. If they do not obey to come out, plug the shape with cotton as I have said in the previous section; and if they do not protrude as we have said, administer distillations that the ancients have tested in the removal of earwigs, and you will find them where you treat distillations; and if you distill your oils and medicines into the ear with this instrument as you see:
And it is to be made of silver or lead which is inserted into small openings, and on top with a distilling dish; and for pressing inside the distillation, use one instrument of lead well made for this purpose. And if you see a plug and wrap it around the point with cotton; then pour your oil or juice, and whatever medicine you see fit in the pipe, and let the pipe be in the ear. Then push the plug into the cotton and press gently until the oil distills or becomes hot in the ear. Let the patient smell inside, and the distillation should be heated with fire so it is as it is distilled in the ear; and be careful that it is not too cold, for the medicine will not be good if it is too cold.
of the stoppage (clogging) of the ears
No child is born without having some opening in the ears; and this same thing happens with adults due to ear injury or pus inside the ear, and this stoppage sometimes occurs deep within the ear, if one cannot see it; and sometimes there is a small hole in the ear, which can be seen clearly.
Therefore, when it comes out completely and cannot be seen, it is serious healing in many positions, and in such a case, you must put the patient's ear to the sun; and look inside: if you see the opening clearly apparent, then open it with this spatula of the form specified here:
And sharp and cutting in front and behind entirely, so as not to burn the ear; if the opening is of cartilage or skin of the ear, hold it with subtle tweezers, and gently remove it all.
And if the opening is deep in the ear, take a sharp, subtle scraper and heat it slightly over the fire, then place it on the side of the ear. If you feel the opening that causes pain to the patient's hearing, pierce it gently, but be careful not to damage the nerves of the ear; then put a tent in the ear according to the size of the wound, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.
Do this every day until the wound heals: take a cloth and soak it in strong rosewater, and powder vitriol over it (broken); if you see the ear swelling, then pull out the cloth and apply another cloth soaked in salve made of rose oil and wax, until the swelling disappears; then heal it until it is healed.
If discharge of blood comes out, dip a sponge and cloth in cold water, place it on the ear, and apply other treatments to remove the blood discharge which are called distillations.
of paper charcoal (carbon)
This althelul that come in paper from the eyes when they are moist and dry, you must stretch them with tweezers and forceps, and strike it with a spatula from its roots; then put on the place vitriol ground.
If not removed by other means, then cauterize the lenticular cautery gently and slowly, and cauterize after the incision is beneficial; and many times they heal again, for nothing stays from their roots; and when cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and will not return.
of the hailstone
Often come in paper the eyes appear like hailstones in shape and hardness, and for this reason is this disease called "grandine", which is a gathering of large moisture in the paper above and below; the treatment is as follows: take care that the grandine remains silent from one side and the other, and it is an easy thing to know; then open it widely, then lightly peel off each part, then seize it with the forceps and squeeze. If you cannot cover it without piercing the paper a little, then do not bother the patient; and if the tear is large, bind it up with a stitch, and care for it until it heals; but if it is small, do not exert force because the onions will restore it soon and cause pain.
If the grandine is descending inside the ear towards the upper part, turn over the paper and take hold of the grandine with forceps, squeeze and press it from one side and the other; and if the paper is pushed away by the incision, then do not cause pain; when the grandine is squeezed, apply salted oil to the wound and care for the affected area until the patient is healed.
of the fat of the eyes
Exinach is a grease that is embedded in fabrics made of paper, and this happens more often with children than with adults, and it greatly hurts their eyes, and they come down with catarrh at dawn, and cannot endure the light of the sun because tears rush to their eyes; therefore, they lie on their faces immediately, sleep on top, and their fabrics are damp under their eyelids that the exinach has covered in oil. And when you press the area between your fingers and feel the exinach between them.
And the method of work is that the patient places their head on a clean surface; then take one linen cloth and set up a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity of exinach from each part, and place it above; then press between your fingers on both sides so that the exinach is gathered within the circle; then make an incision in the middle with a sharp spatula, and not larger than the wound made in vein suture; and cut through the skin as far as you see the exinach; and in various positions, exinach comes out from the incision, according to the shape of a white piece of fat.
Then hold the piece of coarse cloth between your hands and turn your hand to the left and right until it is dispersed; and be careful not to widen the incision or reach the oil with the spatula, do not cut it.
And if the incision does not open at the beginning of the cut, lift up the wound slightly; then pull it apart as we have said, wet some bandages with oil and water, place them on the wound, and hold it in place with bindles.
And for those who grind seeds and place them on top to corrupt the moisture that is present, then heal it until it is healthy. If an abscess heats up at the site, treat it with plasters soothing it until it is healthy.
hairs of papers
When paper-like hairs grow on the eyelids that are not natural and they are nurtured, they harm the eyes and bring about types of diseases such as constant tearing and softening of the paper-like growths, which causes destruction of the eyes; and there are four ways to cure them: either by cauterization with fire, or by medicine for ague according to what was mentioned in the previous chapter on cauterization, or by incision and suturing, or by caustics, as I shall explain.
You must place the patient's head on your healthy side, then turn the paper-like growth from the eye towards your left hand; if it turns, that is good; if not, push an awl with one filament through it; and remove the margin of the paper or the hair that grows from those hairs, taking one filament across the entire paper, and shave it off; then make a shallow groove in the part beneath the paper, below the hairs, covering the entire spatula blade from the large tear to the small; then pull out one filament, and place a small tent made of cotton and linen under the paper, then mark on the paper a figure of an anchor, like the seed of mirte, and it is necessary that the figure be according to the size that you see raising the paper which has been previously determined.
And if the amount of paper that needs to be removed is large due to the softening of the paper, then make a groove on both lines that you marked and start from the large tear until it is small; one of the cuts should be near the natural hairs, and push the incisor into one of the two corners of the cut, then peel everything; then bring the two lips together with a suture using an awl with a single thread of fine linen, squeeze out the blood, and make the excess filaments sticky with something gluey, if you want to do this; and if not, leave the sutures and the filaments for 2-4 days without treatment, then treat the wound without suture using drying and constricting agents, since the paper heals at the edge of the wound and the sutures are loosened (as the ancients say), but this is a task done with fear.
And in another way: and it is that you make the paper of a figure which should be as the fern leaf of myrtle, as we have mentioned, in three openings according to the shape which is here:
Then make that which surmounts the small points equally according to the shape which is here:
And if you are not able to hold the tongs, and the thing is not equal, then take a needle with one thread, and stick it into the figure; and put another thread through the large opening, and the second thread through the small, and assemble the threads equally between your fingers; then move your hand evenly, and draw all the skin which you have marked, as we have mentioned, then sew together the two lips of the wound by stitching, and let it heal until it is healthy; and if an abscess comes to your incision, then soothe it with cerote and similar ointments.
And sometimes the hair of paper turns into something: you must use what we have said about incising, but stitching in one and the other is more artificial.
The treatment of cancers is as follows: you should convert the paper and place it inside according to what I have said, then make two cages by art, and two thin threads as long as the paper and width as broad as the spatula is; and bind the two pieces together where the threads are; then assemble the one and the other carefully on top of the paper with oil, and bind the two cages from the two parts; leave it for some days, and the skin that has been bound will die, rot, and fall off, leaving a hole.
If it takes a long time or if you need to force it, then treat it until it is healed; and when the wound is closed, remove the paper and the hairs will not grow anymore; this is the shape of the two cages that you will make according to this figure, and according to this length and width:
The first sentence to translate:
And if the channel (tunnel) is treated and the hairs do not come out, then draw the channel down to the length of the thread you have arranged, until the channel comes out from the opening above and you see it through the oil; then draw out the channel and the thread, close the eye and leave it for 2 or 3 days, until the hair adheres in its place and grows new skin over it; and if the hairs are small, accompany one long natural hair and let it grow with it, until it is elongated and then remove it.
of the abscess (boil) of the oil
When this disease called "aleacrati" or porriture comes in the oil, it happens in two ways: one natural, and the other unnatural. It occurs suddenly through a wound, or from cutting, or by fire, and by similar things.
The method of treatment is that you cut the joint and separate the lips, put threads of flax inside, and let it stay until it heals; it must not be treated with things that dry out or restrict it. For if you do so, the disease becomes worse than the first time; but work with softening things, such as fenugreek; and the broth of water or vinegar and flax seeds boiled, and immediately apply the melted beeswax in any oil, wrap it in a linen cloth, and treat it with that.
And the remedy for your cure is to ensure that it does not heal in the same way as before; and this work that we have said is not effective unless proper attention is paid to this disease, so that it does not return in its previous form.
Of the fat that comes in the oil
This disease that is truly called "axacrati", and is both natural and accidental. The accidents come from wounds and cuts and cauterization and things similar; and the method of operation in it is that you take a needle, in which there are two double threads, and pierce through the fat, starting from the left eyelid to the right, so that the threads come out in two heads of the fat; then lift the fat over the whole needle, and hold with one spatula wide.
And if the shape of the paper returns according to what it should be, that is good; if not, take one razor and put it in the cut, turn the paper, and make two cuts on the side where the paper thickens inside, and let the heads of the cuts be at the corners of the incision that you made, and let a corner be formed so that when they are assembled, the shape is as the shape of a letter that has the name "Greek J"; then remove that fat according to the width that its sides are sharp below the paper, then join the two separated parts with a thread of linen; then treat it with the medicine that we have said for softening and healing until it heals.
And if the sickness comes from a cut or stitch or cautery, then you must make a deep incision under the hairs of the paper, as described earlier; then you should draw out between the two layers of the skin like I said; and the work should be done according to the shape of the illness, for it is very diverse in shape, and wise masters prepare devices with all their might to return the figure to its natural form; and the sick themselves, according to what work and instruments are required in various positions.
the hairs of the paper
When this sewing occurs in the hands of men in such a manner that the paper above is sewn with white oil, and it cannot move or perform its natural work, then you must insert the tip of a razor blade under the paper, lift it up; and stretch it using pliers until you reach the subtle spatula, which should not be too sharp nor too pointed, so that the sick man does not suffer from the too-sharp spatula causing damage to the oil; and your incision, from which you peel off the assembled area, should be gentle, allowing the paper to return to its natural form; and heal all of the assembled area, making it sometimes in oil of vinegar unsalted and sweet leaven, then put a tent made of linen between the paper and oil, and place wool dampened with egg on top of the oil; and after three days use warm water and healing salves until it heals.
of the nail of the finger
The nail has two kinds: it is either nerve-like and resembles a hard horn, or it's not nerve-like but resembles white congealed moisture that, when touched by iron and cooked with tweezers, cannot be removed; and both begin at the great cuticle and grow little by little until they cover the whole nail and all its light and movement.
And the method of incision is that the patient puts his head in your hand, then you open the eyes; take a piece of paper with your hand, then take the nail with tweezers of small double curvature and hold it above; then take a needle and put one horse hair or ox hair and a strong thread on it; bend the tip of the needle slightly and pierce through the nail, and pass the whole needle through it, tie the nail with a thread and hold it above, and peel off all the skin from the side of the nail that was close to the cuticle and the silk until the hair reaches the head, then chop off the remaining in the root of the cuticle with every subtle spatula and small force, and leave the natural skin or cuticle so that no blood comes out of the cuticles as usual; and sometimes the nail is incised only on the edge and at the tip, as we have said; then peel off all the spatumile from it in this form:
And ensure that the spatula does not touch the skin layer and break it, and that the prunelle is not pierced; and after incision pour oil a small amount of boiled egg yolk and let it rest with a litargire collar, leave it until the next day; then treat it as necessary until it is healed.
And if the nail is not nerveous and you cannot insert the needle, and the tweezers cannot enter, this condition of the nail is often treated with medicines; and they grow as I have mentioned in the division, and if you see it covered, then open the oil of the patient, take the spatula gently and slightly sharp according to this form:
Lift the nail gently and if you see that it does not shrink and the reason is pressing on it, then distill from your mouth collyrium made of litargyre and red collyrium and boiled egg yolk into the oil and stopper it until the next day; then continue the other work according to this same procedure until it is completely removed.
If nothing contradicts you in oil (i.e., if it is an abscess), then let it discharge, and first heal the abscess with hot water until it is healed, then continue the work as before, until it is healed.
And if the appearance of the flesh around the arm is harmful in oil (meaning an abscess) by great damage, then suspend it at the joint and cut off a part but not too much, so that tears do not come; then distill red colloidal oil made of litargyre (an antimony compound).
of the flesh which arises on the eyelid
The first hairs of some men sometimes grow red, cover the nail and are raised above the papery skin and resemble a rosebud; and this condition is such that the patient places his head on the healthy part, then he opens the eyes, and all of the red hair that corresponds to the nail should be removed in this way, and it should be held firm with force; then cut the first red hair, and continue cutting all the way to the root until the end, but ensure that you do not wound the skin during the operation; and make the incision with a spatula as we have said in the nail incision and the small forces of which one extracts the skin, as shown by the form after this chapter.
When the incision is completed and all the hair is removed, apply oil of linseed or you distill red colloid and similar corrosive medicines on it with a flax cloth soaked in egg white to ensure proper healing; if something remains and the wound becomes cold, and you doubt that it is properly healing, leave the oil and treat the wound with calming remedies for cold wounds; then return to your work when it is healed, and thus do this for each hair that is soaked in the oil by this method.
However, you must lighten the cure of each oil with natural methods; and in case of accidental injury, in work involving iron; and never insert your hand into any of these operations unless you see that the limb is strong enough to endure that operation.
The veins of the eyes
The red veins that are covered over the oil and take over its function and weaken the eye entirely for all days. Therefore, first it is necessary to examine if the eye, in which the vein is located, has any other disease except the vein; then cool it in this manner: instruct the patient to place his head on your healthy hand, then press those veins all along for the entire length as wisely as possible, and let the hands be subtle double as follows:
And let there be two lengths of the cloth folded twice by degree, as follows:
Then collect the veins subtly with force, and squeeze out the blood hour after hour, until you see the veins move away from the oil; and be careful not to prick the oil with the points of the spatula, and perform this work at noon before the sun, and be very warm in your work so that only these veins are affected; and when you have done this, if it distills into green and red coloured oil for correcting what is left behind in the scab.
And if you cannot collect all of it in that hour, make a plaster on the oil with soothing things for the pain of the eyes, and leave it for some days until the pain is eased and sure of abscessing coldly, then resume according to this manner as long as it is healthy; and this is the form of force:
of the oil fistula
The mirror is called "arissati" fistula: when you cure it with cautery and burning medicine as I have previously said, and it is not healed, there is a cavity in it where it should die, and you must cut open the abscess along that area, removing all the moisture until the bone is exposed.
And when the bone is exposed, and you see corruption and blackness, then use all the equipment that is shown here; it is called "rough head", and should be made of iron and shaped like this (referring to a certain shape as presented in the drawing):
And place it on the bone that is corrupted, then turn it between your fingers and press your hand a little until you feel that the corruption is crushed; do this repeatedly, then restore the position of the medicine extractors.
If the joint is fused, and char (possibly pus) arises, and the body of the bone is also fused and remains in that state for 40 days, without healing or becoming abscessed, and no bad accident occurs - it is known to be healthy; if not, there is no other remedy except to return the fistula to the opening of the nose according to this form: and it is that you uncover the bone a second time with iron, and with medicines, and when it is uncovered, take one iron rod according to this form, and let the head of the iron be at three angles, and the shaft be attenuated until the tip as you see here:
Then place the rod on the bone of the nose and move your hand an inch away from it, then turn the iron rod completely until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it through his nose if he keeps his hand on his nostril; and then restore the joint with dry medicines as I have shown you, and when the pus arises and hardens the joint, the matter goes to the nose; it is an easier thing for the patient.
of the nasal passage
When the eyes are fully open and there is no disturbance to the ship [the body], and it does not decrease, you must hold the patient; then clean [the eyes], then apply plasters or ointment without causing pain, then apply oil - a liniment made from aloe, acacia, incense, and saracocolla - and hold [the eye], and apply the plaster on bandages and cloths; and the manner of the cloths is that you take soft cloths, fold each one in four, and then place one on top of another according to the amount required by the eyes; then hold it together with a tough bandage and repeat the application of plasters without causing pain; then remove the plasters and leave the oil held for day and night, and if the liniment becomes soft, you must hold it firmly; then remove the liniment after day and night, and if you see the eyes heal, that is good; if not, repeat the application of the plaster and the liniment and the bandages until the eyes are healed.
The bursting of a swollen cloth
When disruptions occur in the uvea (the middle layer of the eye), followed by an opening and forced expulsion of paper-like substances resembling grain of resin and appearing alarming; then if you see it covered, the treatment is such that you insert a needle into the root of the affected area up to where it is above, then insert another needle with double thread from the edge of the wound; and make it pierce through, leaving the first needle according to its position; then hold the eye's lid tightly and tie a part of the uvea around it, applying pressure; then remove the needle and apply oiled linen cloth abundantly over the area; and leave it until the threads stick with the uvea, then cure the affected area with soothing substances until the wound heals; and at times, the wound is restrained by the uvea on each side of a circular bandage of fabric, until it is healed.
And if the eyes seem large in appearance, perforate them with a thin spatula filled with oil, remove the albuginea (the middle layer of the eye) and drain the fluid from the eyes; then let it heal completely.
from the beak of the oil
This disease called "alcunnati" is not foreign, but rather it is an abscess formed in the oil (oil sac), appearing like an inflammation draining pus, yet it is not a real inflammation; and the manner of its appearance in the work is that you make the patient sit on a seat prepared and straight. Then take the head between your hands from two sides, and move it until you see the abscess rise to your eyes; then it should be lanced, and the pus should not drain and the light should disperse. Let the patient observe things as he usually does; if it does not drain under, know that it is an inflammation, and if the draining of the abscess is not prepared as we have said. Seat the patient between your hands, then take a fine spatula and poke through the cornified membrane and the corona repeatedly, until the abscess comes out. When it is issued, let it distill in hot, sweet oil mixed with honey, or hot oil or fenugreek boiled with honey, then cure it with another treatment until it heals.
oil abscesses
We have similarities with abscesses in the division, and what is necessary to puncture; if you do according to health. It is required that you seat the patient between your hands crossed, away from the light for the sun, and hold the oil tightly and very firmly; then place a piece of paper of the oil on your left hand if the hairs are on the left side or on your right hand if they are on the right side; then take with your right hand, if the hairs are on the left side, the instrument called "almagda", or take it with your left hand if they are on the right side; then place the point of the instrument near the corona by the thickness of a fingernail in the whiteness of the oil at the lower eyelid; then push the instrument called "almagda" vigorously, and apply pressure to your hand until it pierces through the whiteness of the oil, and feel that almagda reaches the empty space; and it is necessary that the length of the pathway almagda should be at the full measurement of the space from the eyelash to the end of the blackness; and this is the corona of the oil; if you will see the bone in the paper due to the clarity of the cornified membrane, then place the instrument until it reaches the bottom or the abscess; then press it down a pathway after another. If the abscess bursts now, let the patient observe before him and the instrument in his oil.
After a short rest, and if the second vein rises again, put force with the instrument, and when it is pierced and does not rise, gently pull it back slightly by rotating your hand slowly; then put a little gemstone oil inside. Then place linen soaked in oil of roses and abundant egg over it, and seal it with oil. We, and those from our time, place common powder with plenty of egg on top.
If the gemstone oil cannot enter due to hardness, because some men have very hard eyes, then you must take the tool called "alberit", which has this shape:
And therefore perforate only the conjunctive, and do not go too deep, but make it gently shallow, then put gemstone oil as we have said; and when the work is completed, prepare the patient to sleep for seven hours in a dark room on his back; be careful of all movements, take light foods, and do not move your head neither to the right nor to the left, and tie him according to his disposition until the third day; then untie him in the same dark room, examine his vision, let him see certain things, and then rebind him for seven more days; it is not necessary that you perform this, during the cure or after the incision now, but it is necessary that you relieve it because the eyes rise quickly.
If an abscess swells up, you should lance the oil before the seventh day, and direct it towards the one who soothes an abscess; and when it is soothed, you should then lance the wound and place a linen cloth over it to cover for any day, and remain in that dark room. Then gradually leave the room and convert to your quarters; and know that no disciple should interfere in this case.
And one came to us who was from Iram, who told us that in their country everyone has a large pear-shaped swelling, so that fluid accumulates, but I have never seen anyone with such a thing in our land, nor have I read of it in the books of ancient people; and perhaps it is a new thing.
And these are the resemblances of almagda shapes, because those who do not know them see them as such; and they are made of linen properly:
And the heads of these (should) be in the same subtlety, and the rear ones in four corners.
of the flesh on the nose
Sometimes the nose produces various sores that appear similar to scorpions at their feet; and if there are any that have a sore swollen with green color, or a soft sore of white color. In that case, for the soft sore that is not swollen, you should make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun, open his nostrils, and put onion juice on those sores, then pull them out; afterwards, hold what you can with the thin sharp spatula until you know that the sore is completely removed.
And if there remains any thing that cannot be covered, you shall open it all, i.e., with subtle and light instruments, so that nothing remains; and if there is no pus, or an abscess covered, help it as needed; and if it is malignant abscesses, hasten and cauterize until the pus is drained and all the charred matter is removed, then pour in oil, vinegar, or hot water.
If there is no opening and moisture reaches the palace (palate), know that it is healthy; if moisture does not perforate as needed, know that char has grown in the bone above, so instruments do not come to cut; then put a thick thread of flax, which is boiled and moistened with our hands, between each stitch of about one finger's breadth; and insert the floss into the patient's nose as far as possible, and pull it out while smelling until pus comes out from the nose; and many times do this as children in school do, and it is an easy thing for him who wants to perform it; then hold the head that comes out through the nose with one hand, and the other head that comes out through the mouth with the other hand, and know one after the other while we who are the floss-pullers are there. Do this until you know that the floss has corrupted the char; then remove the floss, squeeze the pus, and moisten the flax in Egyptian ointment, and return it to the nose as before; do this for 4 days or more, until the ointment corrodes everything that remains of the char; and then put a plank drain in the nose for some days until it is healed, and if there is a need for drying medicines, use them; and this is the form of the instrument to purge the head, as oil and medicines are distilled through.
And it should be made of silver or brass, resembling a lamp with a closed neck, and you shall lead it so; and if you see, make a closed tube, and the instruments should be full to purge the head; and have one handle on the head to hold when heating the oil or any liquid.
Of the flesh on the nose
Often in the head of the nose there arises a sickness called "telul", which grows and becomes large until it is visible to the eye; and for this reason you must cut it at the beginning, and burn it completely with cautery or hot medicine; and if it is delayed too long while it is still small, beware if it is hard, of a dark color, with poor sensation: do not touch it with iron because it is an aggravated abscess, for when one touches it in any way, much harm comes to the patient; and if the abscess is of soft touch, not of a dark color, and you can cover it completely, let the patient empty it and cut it cautiously without fear, and cure the place with dry things that absorb.
when the nose is cut and sewn
Know that when solutions of continuation come in one of these cartilage joints, it benefits little, unless in some men. Therefore, when this occurs to anyone, you should examine if the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then you align the two lips to a stitch, then cure it until it is healed; and if the lips are already separated on both sides, you must scour all parts of their joint as they heal, then align the two lips to a stitch, tighten it, and sprinkle powder of dragon's blood powder and incense crushed; and put some plaster of strong or other plaster adhering on top of the powders, and let it remain until it dries, then cure with ointment until it is healed.
The manner of stitching is that you assemble the solution: either with needles, as I have told you in the belly stitch; or with thread, as we mentioned earlier.
of abscesses from lips
For men, within the lips there occurs an abscess hard, similar to grains of wheat, both smaller and larger; then you must turn the lips, and cut open each one, take it with tweezers and crush it in every part; afterwards apply the vitriol powder to the wound until the blood is stopped; then apply alum to heal the wound until it heals completely.
of the flesh of the gums
Often arises on the gums a swelling called "albulus"; you should hold it with tweezers and crush it at its root, allowing the pus to flow out; then apply powdered vitriol or other drying and constricting powders to the area; if the swelling returns after cutting, which often happens, you should crush it again and cauterize it; it does not return after cauterization; these are the forms of instruments for covering.
The sores
Sometimes, sores are assembled in the head of the teeth, within the mouth between the gums, rough and harsh scabs that are unsightly; and sometimes the tooth becomes black and yellow and hollow as corruption comes to the gum, and the tooth stinks; you must make the patient sit between your hands, and his head should be in your lap, and scrape the teeth or scabs that appear, until nothing remains; and do the same for the blackness and greenness, and for the yellowish and other blemishes, until they are cleaned; and if you remove that which is at the root first, it is good; if not, start again on the second day and the third, as long as you have everything removed; and know that teeth require different forms of instruments to scrape them, according to what the work requires, because the scraper used to clean the teeth has other shapes than the one used between the teeth; and these shapes and others should be with you prepared.
When you treat a tooth for pain, you must delay extraction as much as possible, because it should not be done at all; for it is a very high substance up until the point that there is no excuse to shave. Then, when the patient is forced to draw the tooth, it is necessary that you are certain of the bad tooth. Many times, pain deceived the patient, and they believe it is a healthy tooth, and pull the good one; yet, the pain does not depart until the bad one is removed, as we have seen in the past; and when you are absolutely certain of the bad tooth, you must cut around the tooth at every side with a strong spatula to protect the gum from all sides; then move it gently with your fingers or fine pliers at the first edge and little by little until it is completely loosened; then firmly close the pliers; and hold the patient's chin in your saint between your knees, and hold it so that it does not move.
Then draw the tooth straight out, and if it does not break off, take one of these instruments and gently push it in from each side, as you have done before. And if the teeth are perforated and eaten away, it is necessary to fill it with cloth where the holes are; then hold it subtly with pliers so that it does not break when pulling; and very carefully work around the gum to extract the tooth.
And be careful not to break it, and leave a part behind, and the patient will have greater pain from the root later due to malice. Also, beware of doing as ignorant men do, who sometimes break the chariot due to their hastiness and recklessness; and they do not bring what we have mentioned; but sometimes they bring about great illness due to the roots that remain, or because they break the chariot, as we have often seen; and when the tooth is pulled out, wash the area with wine or oil and soap; and if bleeding persists, which often happens, use vitriol powder; and if it does not work, cauterize it.
The forms of the instruments, which quiet the tooth roots first, should have long points and large handles, so that they do not double when you extract the tooth; and these are the forms:
And have large handles so that they do not bend when pulling, and be made of good iron, and toothed to hold.
of the root of the tooth When the root remains after pulling, then you must put cotton moistened in butter on it for 1 or 2 days until the butter is absorbed, then insert the pliers called "algefri", so that the tooth looks like a beak of a bird; and they should be made inside as a chisel and this is the form:
And if the roots do not want to come out with all those tools, you must peel back the skin all around the root, and place the instrument called "althali," which is known as a pincer, of which this is its shape:
Be large and thick so as not to break it, and if the root jumps out through these tools, that is good; otherwise, use all the instruments, of which the shapes come hereafter:
And if one assists with this instrument having two prongs, of which this is its shape:
And other instruments which are before the teeth, and of this tool which appears to be large pliers, in its form is as follows:
And this tool should not break, and know that many instruments for teeth are; and also other tools which are not counted; and the wise masters discover their own instrument by themselves, according to what their work and the disease shows, because there are such diseases where the old did not teach any tool due to diversity in each case; and if it breaks the cart or another bone where it should be, then look for the tools that are required, which I told you, and help with gestures, as follows: And be large and well-holding to hold the bone, but not slip away, but be able to hold and remove it; then restore the place of medicines suitable for that, and if there is pus in the bone and it is small, use all this tool:
When the teeth appear not according to natural shape, and the form is ugly, even in women virgins, you must know if the tooth is not born after the dent, and it is not in the correct place, and cannot be corrected or smoothed: then file [the tooth]; and if it is exposed with the tooth, take this instrument, as shown by the form below, resembling a small beak, made of sharp iron at the end:
And the handle of the file is held in hands for long hours due to the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the others, and if it is apparent that it can be smoothed, file it with a flat file as shown below:
and is similar to the file used for making needles; and file the tooth little by little with the file in hands gently, so it does not move too much while chewing; then plane the end entirely with any file, and if the root is too sharp and it bites the tongue, you must smooth the sharpness until it is even, so it does not bite the tongue nor corrupt the speech.
When teeth fall out
When teeth fall out, either by impact or falling, and the patient cannot press up on it when eating unless it falls, you treat them with medicines that restrict, but this is not effective; instead, they should be restrained with a gold wire, as silver wires turn green and decay, but gold does not change ever; whether the wire is medium or thick or thin depends on the space between the teeth; if you see the teeth are moving, take the wire and put it double between two healthy teeth, then place the chips between the loose teeth, whether there are one or more, until you reach the sound tooth from the other side; then start covering again up to the part where you started, and hold your hand subtly and skillfully, so it does not move; and your grip at the root of the tooth should be firm so that it cannot escape. Then grab the chips with tweezers, assemble them, place them back between the sound tooth, ensuring it doesn't touch the tongue; then leave it tight for as long as possible until it heals, if they disconnect or the wires break, re-tighten it with another wire; if it remains and serves for the entire time, that is the form of teeth and the shape of the alignment of two healthy teeth, and two loose ones, as you see:
And when a tooth falls out, if it is put back in its place, as we have said; and let no one who is not skilled and patient interfere with it; and sometimes the shape of a bone tooth from an animal is made and placed at the place where it lacks, and it should be held and served for a long time as described earlier.
To cover the wound of the tongue
There are times when this wound comes under the tongue either naturally or through an injury of a healed wound; and the treatments for it are as follows: you open the mouth of the patient, hold his head still, and lift the tongue; then cover the nervous wound with a large bandage until the tongue is dislocated from its position, and if there is hardness or pain, and it is a sudden injury from a wound, insert an arrowhead and cover that dislocation with a large bandage; but make sure the cut is not too deep, because there is an artery underneath; and when you have done this, raise the rose-colored and ashen, or cold, level of the wound and put under the tongue a tent of linen; and bind it to the patient every night so that the level does not heal. And if discharge of blood comes out, apply vitriol powder; and if the blood does not stop, cauterize with a slow-burning cautery, which is good for this; then cure it with another remedy until it heals.
and if you see it of dark or black color or hard, so that the patient does not feel it, do not touch it, for it is a cancer; and if it is declining towards blistering, and there is moisture, throw in an arrowhead, and make a small incision on both sides with a thin spatula, and free it from one side and the other; and if the blood does not stop at your work, apply vitriol powder until it is drained completely; then raise the rose-colored and ashen level, and cure it with other remedies until it heals.
The abscess of the throat
Sometimes inside the throat come swellings called "godath," which are properly called the two almonds. When you treat them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, be careful: if it is a hard abscess of small size and pale color, do not touch it with iron. And if it is red and the root is large, do not touch it with iron, also for the flow of blood; but let it remain until it is ripe, and then you will cut it open, or it will burst by itself; and if it is of white color returning, and the root is subtle, prepare the instrument for covering, but first check if the abscess is cooled down and calmed. Then make the patient sit in front of the sun, and his head should be in your hand, and open his mouth and take the serjeant between his hands, and press the tongue under the entire instrument, so that this is its shape; and it should be made of silver or thin brass like a knife:
Press the tongue under the entire instrument, and if you see the abscess, take the awl and poke it into the almond, and pull it upwards as much as you can; pull any fabric away from there, then cover it with the instrument, so that this is its shape, like a vise; and although the head may be bent, one end to another, and they are very sharp, made of iron or steel:
And if you do not have this instrument present, hold the coppersmith's pliers, of which form is:
And if you do not have this instrument present, hold the coppersmith's pliers, of which form is as follows: grasp one of the almonds and squeeze the other in the same manner, and after the incision gargarize the patient with hot, sharp, and astringent substance, and if bleeding occurs, gargarize the patient with hot, or scorches of green grapes cooked, or twigs of myrtle, and similar things until the wound is cauterized; then treat it until it heals; and sometimes other abscesses than the two almonds may appear in the throat, if they appear, squeeze them in the same way as the two almonds equally.
And I treated a woman with an abscess that was inside the throat, to wit, an abscess of small size; and I had cautiously closed the whole throat, such that the woman could not breathe due to the blocked passageway, nor eat or drink, and she would have died within one to two days if she continued like this. The abscess was so large that it had filled two fingers by the two passages of the throat. I therefore punctured it at once, and pulled out a bone, followed by a large piece of pus; then I sealed the other passage in the throat, opened her mouth, and pressed her tongue; after which, I punctured the abscess again, cut off a part of it, and not much blood came out; and thus the blocked passageway in the woman's throat was unblocked, and she began to drink hot water and then wine, and did not cease to cut away from that abscess for a long time; the abscess grew again, filling up the space that I had seen, becoming very large; at that point, I tricked it and cauterized it inside the throat: in this way, the abscess stopped growing; and I left those places, and let God do with them as He wished after me.
of the eye
When the eye swells and becomes long, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is large and round, it is called "eye". When it is treated as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help at all, and you see that the swollen abscesses are alleviated, and it becomes subtle, it is necessary to cut; and if it is round and swollen but not long; and it is blood-colored or of dark or black color, it is necessary to make an incision. For there is great danger for the patient. Therefore, when you see it, according to the manner that I have said, depending on its size and length, you must make the patient sit before the sun, and press the tongue with the instrument that we have mentioned above; then poke the onion into the eye, drag it out, and cut it at .i. of .ij. stitches that I have said in the incision of .ij. almonds. And it is necessary not to cut beyond the natural limit; for if you do so, it hurts the voice, and speech. After the incision, use what we have said in the incision of .ij. almonds, and treat it until it is healed. And if the patient fears the cutting, it is necessary to use an instrument for cauterization to allay fear. And the manner of cautery is sharp heat. And it is that the patients put their head in your lap, and then press the tongue with the instrument that we have mentioned or chapter of cautery, and hold with hot live coals, so that it is not too thick nor too clear; and employ the handle of this instrument, which has the following shape:
And have a comb or hand put the medicine, like the handle of a spoon, and place the instrument over all the medicine on the eye; and let the patient lie on their side so that saliva and mucus flow from their mouth into the medicine without going down to the throat, and the blood. Then hold your hand over all the medicine and press it on the eye, the amount of half an hour, until you see it swell and the bites of the medicine are alleviated; and if you see, take cotton and wrap it around some instrument, and moisten the cotton in the medicine, and push the instrument to the entire cotton into the canal above, until the cotton adheres to the eye; and do this repeatedly, until the cautery is perfect, then let it dry, and wait for 4 or 5 days. And if you need to start the cautery of the medicine again, restart it, and after the cautery suck out around the eye, with a cotton swab in butter, and clean what is around the medicine; and wash it with cold water, and treat it with gargarisms until it is healed.
This cure is more effective than incision, not just cautery; if it is treated by fumigation in this manner, take camomile and yarrow and origanum and rue and wormwood and similar herbs, put them all together or any of these in one pot, and place it on the fire; let the pot be well sealed with strong clay, and inside the pot have one instrument with hair according to this manner: And it [the instrument] should be made of silver or lead, and one end pushed into the patient's mouth until the steam rises to the eye through the tube while the eye is being mortified; afterwards repeat often, until the eye dries, and ensure that you do not do this at the beginning of an abscess boil, for many things can happen; and do not use this unless in the presence of a declining abscess boil. And if this instrument is not present, take a tube and put a chicken feather inside the head of the patient so that his mouth does not get too hot; as the chicken feather will not burden the mouth with steam, and it is good cure together with safety.
Many times it [the abscess] adheres to the throat with bone or splinter of fish, or something else; therefore, you must pull what you can see, and press the tongue against the instrument until you see movement in it; and if that does not open up and returns to the throat, you must make the patient vomit before the meat is cooked in the stomach; perhaps this will expel the thing through vomiting; or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of seaweed, or a radish root, or a small piece of dry bread; and tie one thread to the sponge, and then swallow it; and when it reaches the place, if it adheres, you must pull on the thread; and if it does not come out as we have said, take one stick according to this form:
And let the instruments be curved at the head so that it can more easily enter the throat, and raise the head high; and watch that you do not touch the epiglottis, as both will come to harm, nor push the bone in; instead, it is better for the patient to push the instrument, because he may be moved or the thing is loose; if he pushes down, or draws it back completely, keep pushing equally until it has gone.
the saliva from the throat
Sometimes the saliva is medicinal, as I have said in the division, by means of medicine's cure; and when this does not help, then look into the throat of the patient towards the sun, since you press his tongue against the instrument that I told you about. And if you see the saliva, take a small pair of scissors or subtle tweezers, which are suitable for this purpose. If this is not effective, take a hair-rope and insert it into the patient's throat, then push down the end of the rope with a hot iron and repeat this often. Dip the patient in cold water all day. Then take a full ounce of cold water, open the mouth, pour it inside without swallowing, and move it around with your hand frequently; and as soon as the saliva feels the water, it falls out.
And if it does not fall as we have said, then you should suffumigate the patient with asefetide, at the instrument I mentioned in the fumigation of the eye; do this many times, because it will not subside easily. The method of suffumigation is that you take one pot or one that has charcoal within, and cover it with a perforated cloth in the middle, and put the head of the instrument into it; then pour your suffumigation, and the patient puts the head of the cane in his mouth, and closes the mouth so that the smoke does not escape but comes to the nostrils; and the nose will now be affected, and if it does not subside, then continue the suffumigation many times; allow the patient to thirst, and eat salty and alkaline things, and drink no water; and then it will be necessary for it to come out under this management.
The form of the instrument to treat the nose, is like corbeled tweezers for entering the throat; and resembling the beak of a syringe, and having asperity of lime, so that what it takes, it cannot lose; and here is its shape:
Chapters on abscesses
"Many resemble abscesses, as recalled in this chapter from one and another in this book, and they differ in perforation and cutting; and these are in .ij. ways, of which the first is like itself, and due to moisture. The second way is for the joints that are in the body. For abscesses on the head are different than those from the foundation, and abscesses from the charnut joint are different than those that come at jointures, and each should be judged in its work."
"And if there are abscesses that one should not perforate until the boil is ripe according to its completion; and if there are those that need to be perforated when they have become hard, and do not die according to their completion, such as abscesses near jointures. For when an abscess comes near a jointure, and it is left until it is surrounded, by chance the ligament and nerve of the jointure may become corrupt, causing contraction in that member. Or the abscess is from the main part of the body, and if you delay the perforation until it has ripened, it will harm the main part; or it is from the foundation, and if it is perforated before it has ripened, it should not be perforated without digestion being completed, except for that which is from the foundation, that it may burst completely, and be drained internally, and a fistula comes; and it cannot heal in a long time."
"And you must know the time of perforation of the abscess that is ripe according to its completion, and it is when the pain is relieved, and the disappearance of fever, and the reduction of pain and redness, and the swelling and reduction in size of the abscess head, and other signs; and you should make a small incision in the perforation area that depends on the location of the abscess, and where it has opened; and the perforation should be along the length of the body, and if the abscess is at the hands or feet, or joints and nerves and arteries, and in all even places where there is no pus."
1. In those who plunge (sink/fall), according to that member. And when an abscess is in a hard place, it is better that you leave the perforation until it is confirmed by complete digestion, as we have said. For if you pierce before this point, it will cause the body to bleed excessively and fill with much pus; and possibly swell and deepen the wound. And for any abscess that are pierced according to the size of the body, according to what the limb requires.
If there is no head (opening) in the abscess, like a superficial one, it is necessary that you pierce it completely; and when the abscess is large and it has collected much pus, and you pierce it, do not draw out all the pus in that hour, but only some part; then stop up the abscess until the next day, then draw nothing out incorrectly; do this many times gradually, until the pus is all out. However, if the patient is weak, or a woman giving birth, or small children, or old and decrepit people, the pus may jump out occasionally with the release of the pus, possibly causing the death of the patient, and you will not be at fault. Therefore, proceed with great caution in this chapter, and when you have pierced your abscess, clean the wound, and examine if the wound from the abscess is small; and if it is a flat area, bring linen or old cotton threads; and if it is large abscesses and there is much pus, it is necessary that you stuff a thread in each one so they come against each other; and if you have cut part of the skin in the abscess and shaved around it, fill it with old cotton or flax rags without moisture, and tie it until the third day; then remove it, and treat with ointment until it is healed.
And if bleeding occurs during your work, bring cold water and alcohol, and moisten one cloth, and place it on the wound repeatedly.  If the bleeding persists, apply treatment and care, and the powders I have mentioned in this book to the affected areas; and if it is winter, or the wounds or abscesses are very nervous, you must place hot wet towels on them; and if it is summer, and the limbs are fleshy, you must place wet towels on them, or cold water and oil, or cold wine and oil for three days as we have said; then drain the abscess, lance it and treat it until it is healed.
This must be universally known in the treatment of abscesses: here I have told you how to proceed before the treatment of abscesses, and now comes the chapter.
on les faut oster et conforter par l'aiguille et les poudres
1. For small abscesses that come in the head, there are methods known to us that are in linens, like the knot of a vine, and there are many similar ones. Some are fatty with moisture, like boils; and some are hard and rough at the base, without any doubt that arteries do not oppose them. And the procedures for the neck, it is to be experienced with every tool used which is called "entromissoire", from which this form follows, what it contains. For if it contains moisture, they do it above the long one. And when the moisture is evacuated, they scrape without leaving any skin that contains that moisture, for it returns immediately when nothing is left; then put cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is available; otherwise, in water and linen, and apply it to the wound and leave it until the next day; and those who have been delayed at night will heal. And the following day, repeat the cotton, as before, for three days, until you know that it does not stay at night; then treat the wound with ointment as appropriate, until it is healed. And if the abscess is one nut size, squeeze it according to this form, longwise; and throw your fingers around it, and scrape from all sides, and apply your entire care to draw pus out of the place where it lies; and if arteries oppose you, do as I told you before. And do the same for the abscess if it is hard, and treat and cure as I told you.
And the cutting above the hard abscess and the moist one is lighter, because they have little blood. And if any of these abscesses or head has no moisture, and among them was one abscess that I squeezed or head of an old woman; and found the abscess like a hard nut, rough and white, and could not break; and if iron had been applied to it, it would have made an equal wound as from a hard nut. In other abscesses coming from the head, whether they are those that come at the heads of children and the roots of the ears, they should be opened every day for the longest time depending on the case, in order for the pus to escape; and they are cured as needed.
of the scrofula (scrofulas)
Many times this abscess occurs at the neck, under the ears, and in the groin, and sometimes it appears elsewhere on the body, and they are large, and they are connected with one another. And each scrofula is properly within its cavity, as the aposteme of the head and the shoulder, as we have said; and the resemblances of these scrofulas are many. There are some that contain moisture, and there are also malicious ones that do not wish to obey health. Therefore, when you see it in good condition to touch, and it appears like the color of the body, mute on all sides and not swollen near the neck or artery or conduit, and not inflamed; if you have need to lance it, cut it open from above, and remove the scab from each part, and set the two lips of the curette as the oneches, if necessary, as we have said in apostemes of the head; and draw it out gently and be sure that you do not cut the nerve or the vein, and do not use the spatula too much or cut deeply, so that your hand does not slip, and look carefully so as not to cut what should not be.
And if you cut the vein or artery and it does not allow you to finish your work, put vitriol powder in the wound, or some powders that stop bleeding, and hold the wound; leave it until the abscess is calmed down and the wound softens and begins to purify. And when the blood has stopped flowing, return to your work as long as you complete it; then ask your guide if there remain any small scrofulas, cut and clean them. If there is a large one at the root of the scrofula, do not cut that scrofula at its root, but bind it with a strong double thread and let it hang, without harm; then use old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment on the wound and heal it.
And if you excise the entire scrofula, it is necessary that you bring together the two edges of the wound and sew them up immediately since there will be no excess due to the size of the scrofula. It is necessary that you understand to cover the root and draw pus out, and sew as we have said before. Those scrofulas with superfluidity, pierce where it has grown closed; and pierce as described above, depending on it, then introduce tweezers with ointment and similar things so that it corrupts what remains of the corruption; and when the wound is well cleaned, apply a charmed ointment until it heals.
And if you excise the entire squinchy bump (a term used to describe a lump or swelling in medieval medicine), it is necessary that you bring together the two edges of the wound and sew them up immediately since there will be no excess due to the size of the squinchy bump. It is necessary that you understand to cover the root and draw pus out, and sew as we have said before. Those squinchy bumps with superfluidity (excessive fluid), pierce where it has grown closed; and pierce as described above, depending on it, then introduce tweezers with ointment and similar things so that it corrupts what remains of the corruption; and when the wound is well cleaned, apply a charmed ointment until it heals.
The ancients spoke of the shape of the throat; but I never saw anyone do it in our land, and it is written in their words.
For those who have squinch (a condition), the slit in the throat called "epiglottis" should be opened; and no help should be given by those with abscesses hot in the mouth, or in the throat or in 2 tonsils. When the disease is in the channel of the throat, it should be covered to prevent the danger of choking caused by strangulation.
Therefore, when we want to cut the epiglottis, it should be cut below four circles or two small cuts through the center, between the four circles or by the size of the scythe, not in the cartilage;
And if the neck is swollen at the incision of the epiglottis, there is no cartilage, and the vessels are long behind.
And if the master is afraid, then you must stretch out the skin of the throat all along, then cut open the neck until it reaches the trachea; and cut off the vessels carrying blood, if you see anything, and then tie the sutures as we have said.
And it is demonstrated by the incision of the trachea which bursts through the broken neck, and by the lack of voice.
And leave the wound open for a while.
And when the hour has passed in which one doubts the strangulation, bring the two lips of the wound together gently, and close it completely with a splint; then administer medicines that promote healing, until it is healthy.
Al-Zahrawi said not to do this until the throat is completely stopped up and the patient has been judged dead and the breath has left him/her. Then, squeeze the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe, and he/she breathes through the wound, and thus is guarded from death.
And therefore the ancients instructed to leave the wound open until the evil of the illness has passed, and it has passed in 3 or 4 days. And then they instructed to sew up the wound and heal, until it is healed;
And I will tell you what I saw. I saw a maiden take one knife, and stab it in her throat, and cut off part of the windpipe.
and I was summoned to heal her, but found her already dead.
I found the wound and saw the blood coming out of it, and knew that it had not opened up or been directed anywhere other than the throat, and the wind was going through the wound.
I quickly sewed up the wound and healed it until it was healed.  */*   And when I had finished healing it, I realized that she had died before my arrival.
And there is no damage to the lady except that her voice was hoarse, and she returned to her condition afterwards.
Therefore I say that in the case of the epiglottis, there should be no fear.
of the large throat
This abscess is called "throat hernia," and it is a large abscess colored like a pigeon's egg and occurs mostly in women.
And it occurs in two ways: natural and accidental; where the natural has no device.
The accidental is also according to two ways: one resembling fatty tissue and the other resembling an abscess that comes from us by way of arteries. And there is fear and one should not do anything forceful except in the small one, and it must be proven and searched thoroughly with all the introduction. If you find it as a small abscess and it does not open anywhere, if you press on it, do so like with fat, and pull off the entire head, if there is any. And carefully examine [it] thoroughly, and heal it as necessary, until it is perfectly healthy.
from us
Many methods of ours are there, which I will describe all the likenesses;
And it is necessary that I tell you the whole difference which is between cause and effect.
I say that issue (discharge) is heat and fever lasting, until the eruptions have passed, and the purification has been completed; then the fever and heat rest.
Without doubt there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and contains one pustule (abscess), which is its own sac and is similar to the color of the body, and starts like a blister and becomes large.
and they are according to two types, either fat or moist, and have much the same color as I said in the division.
It is necessary when you come to the care of the sick, that you test and inquire first about all the equipment which is called "entromissoire", according to its form or the chapter that follows.
And the method of inquiry for abscesses by us is that you take or the most moist place that you find within the abscess, and turn your fingers little by little, until you feel that the instrument has pierced the core, then according to the size of the abscess;
Then remove the instrument, and be careful that it does not fall.
If moisture runs out from the wound, make it so that it becomes colored as I have said for other abscesses;
And if no moisture comes out after the incision, know that it is fat, then make a cross-shaped incision, take hold of it with forceps, and gently peel off from both sides and watch the coat that it comes out healthy with the lancet;
If you cannot draw it out healthy, draw it out in pieces so that nothing remains.
If there is nothing left, it returns many times again.
and if there remains a little bit and it does not trouble you, apply some corrosive powder to the wound, hold the wound closed, place warm things over the abscess to relieve the pain, and treat with other remedies until it is healed.
If the wound is large, make two lips of the wound, and treat with what cures sores.
and if the vein bursts against you or another, hurry and use vitriol powder, let it lie for two or four days, until the wound scabs over, and let the pus of blood settle; then cover what remains of the wound with a poultice.
Here is the translation of the provided Old French text:
and are also similar to needles used for sewing sacks, and they are of citron cane, or iron, or silver, and those that are yellow have more value, and they are more sharpened with black wood for encircling the boils of a fistula.
and come in three types: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the wounds.
The forms of ulcers are much alike, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and some ulcers have two hump-shaped appearances in four ways;
and some ulcers have four humps in four ways, and some ulcers have two humps and others only one hump, and they are all necessary in their place.
The head of these (things) that are sharp is pointed, and those who do not cut completely from one side, from which we scrape the nerves, so as not to strike the vein or the nerve;
And from these openings are the incisions replied in stitches, so that the patient does not hurt himself at the opening of abscesses;
They are of three kinds: large, small, and medium-sized, as you can see;
And it should not be used anywhere else but in soft flesh, such as legs, arms, breasts, and in similar places;
And sometimes another small instrument like scorches of pliers, shaped in this form, is used to draw blood:
and it is placed at the location that bleeds to stop the veins, and the arteries, and sometimes again according to this large form:   (This translation assumes that "copement des voines" refers to stopping the bleeding of the veins, which might not be accurate without more context.)
Sometimes the breasts of some men swell when they begin to become corrupt, until they seem like female breasts:
and remain ugly and swollen, and whoever wants to treat them, it is necessary to be according to this form of the following line: b to g:   (This translation assumes that "b" refers to a certain point on a scale and "g" refers to another point on a different scale, but without more context, it's hard to be sure.) Then, scrape the fat, apply medicine on the wound made of inciting char, then sew together the two edges of the wound with stitches, and cure it until it heals.
and if the limb bends downwards, it is swollen due to its size as happens with women, they make two incisions on top of it, through two similar cuts; by which one is held to the other at the end of both, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this shape, from this line b to line g; Then scorch the skin that is between the two lips [of the wound], and remove the fat, and bring what we have said about stitching and powders, and whatever is necessary in the treatment, until it is healed.
And if it is not healed or the incision is not complete because the patient does not want to rest or due to blood flow, then you must fill the wound with cotton moistened in corrosive ointment. and leave it until it digests the remaining flesh and fat, then treat it until it is healed.
of the abscesses from the buttocks
These abscesses coming from the buttocks are types of scrofulas (hard) or they may contain moisture.
Therefore, those that contain moisture should be cut according to this form: from line b to line g: And when the entire bowel in the abscess is emptied, you should use old cotton for the wound and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and heal it with an ointment until it becomes healthy.
And if the abscess resembles scrofula (or scrofulous lesions), then make incisions in it as we have said before for scrofula, and if the wound becomes swollen, bring fire cautery as we have said before.
The cutting of an artery.
When the artery is cut and the skin over it heals, there are often abscesses, and the same thing happens at an opened vein and abscess.
And if one knows it thus as for the artery, then the abscesses are long in depth; And when you feel it with your fingers, then it feels narrow; and when it is for the vein, then the wound appears wide open;
It is foolish to cover this abscess, and especially when it is under the nails and angles, and near the neck and in many other places, and it is very large. Therefore, the iron cure must be avoided, and the one at the neck should also be avoided, and in the case of swelling from the artery, make an incision through the skin along the length;
Therefore, the iron cure must be avoided, and the one at the neck should also be avoided, and in the case of swelling from the artery, make an incision through the skin along the length; Then make the incision in the bellybutton, and carefully separate the artery from the intestines, while it is exposed.
Then insert a needle and make it pass through to the other side, and tie the artery with a double thread in two inches, as I have shown you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples.
Then pierce the space between the two ligaments with a probe until it passes through, and break open the abscess.
Then apply a poultice made of yarrow root, while the ligament heals. Then treat this with ointment until it heals.
And if the abscess is due to the vein being opened, then you must smear your hand with what you can get from the abscess all over the skin. Then push the needle under the place that you hold with your hand, and make it pierce through, and have it double thread so that you can pull it out from the other side. Then tie the abscess, as I told you, or bind it with one of two parts to each of the two sides with thread.
And if you doubt that the thread will pass through, push another needle through all the way under the abscess at the incision of the first needle, and hold the threads in four lengths;
then compress the abscess until the excess comes out, then compress the exudate from the wound and leave what is tied;
Then put a moist cloth soaked in wine and oil on it, then treat it with plasters and liniments until it heals.
Of abscesses of the nerves
As abscesses come in arteries and veins, they come in nerves when injured or from excessive work, and similar things.
This happens more often in the shoulders and thumbs and all joints where there are connections, that is, severe abscesses, and its color resembles the color of the body, and it causes pain in various positions.
And when it is strained forcefully, the patient feels pain, but it is not all over the body, but under the skin.
And it should be completely immobilized from all sides, neither forward nor backward, neither above nor below, and one who is in the joints should not be covered by iron; by chance it may cause contraction.
And the one who is on the forehead or the head, should use the cupping glass. If the abscess is small, grasp it with forceps and strike at its root.
And if it is large, lift it up at the edge, peel it off, then pierce and sew the wound together and let it heal until it is healed.
Large lumps hanging Sometimes there occurs in bellies and nowhere else but this is a disease called "fungus", resembling worms, with subtle roots and large heads; there are small and very large ones.
I saw one man who had two bellies that resembled fungi more than anything else, and there was no difference between them; they were white, had a thin root, were split open, and continued to leak moisture.
I cut them out and found one weighing 16 ounces and the other 5 pounds. The abdominal cavity in the incision appears moist if the patient is wet, and the color of the growth is pale and moist with a thin root.
If the neck is swollen with pus, and the fire cautery is in your presence. For in cutting it often comes too great discharges of blood, and if the blood escapes without you being there, hurry up to cauterize;
and if you see the patient afraid and fearful of the iron cut, take a thread of flax well made, tie the artery as we have said, and leave it for two days;
and then hold it, and do not stop straining the thread of flax until it presses the artery, and feels working; and if the roots are thick, be careful to cauterize it by the belly, but you can certainly cauterize half of it,
Then cauterize so it does not recur; then heal the wound and ensure you do not cover the ulcer that is of fox color and weak sensation and milky gaze.
For it is an abscess enlarged, and I will come to the treatment of the scrofula hereafter.
When the boil bursts forth
If the appearance of the boil comes from cauterization of the wound or tear of a fistula and is on the abdomen and in some cases of boils as it happens in other routes or blood that cuts from veins or arteries according to what is before, or from wind;
And if it is through the break of the sack and the exit of the boil, its color resembles the color of the body, and it is a light thing without pain, and open with various openings. And if it is through the intestine's opening, then it is more diverse; and when you press it with your hands, it repulses, and returns, and possibly becomes hardened, and grows greatly at the entrance of the bath and by great effort.
And if it is due to moisture, then it is light and easily open when you press with your hand, do not force it; and if it is due to blood, the abscesses are large and hard, and are filled according to a certain amount.
And if it is due to swelling, it is soft to the touch, and the work is that you observe whether its appearance is due to the blood of an artery or vein, or swelling. You must let the treatment be. For there is doubt and fear, as I have told you in the chapter on abscesses, for the artery and vein.
And if its appearance is due to the intestines or feces, you must command the patient to strain their bowels and stretch out straight, then press down all around the belly. Then command him to lie down between your hands, then go around the area that you have pointed out with a spatula. then place half of the abscess on top of a large spoon.
Then open half of the abscess extended on the tendon, and put your index finger in it, and seek the intestine. if you find it caught in the tendon, loosen it, and push the intestine out of the abdomen.
and if you find the bubble, grasp it at its base, and cut off the excess.
and if the artery or vein becomes obstructed, go around it, then return to your work and take two needles, and put two thin wires through them, and place the needles in a cross shape where you made the incision to pierce.
Then pinch the abscess in four leagues above the needles, and if you see, pull out the needles, and leave the place until it can, and let the flesh rot by itself; when it becomes tender and can be pierced, then treat as necessary, and cut open the abscess as we have said;
when it becomes tender and can be pierced, then treat as necessary, and cut open the abscess as we have said; and draw out the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the place as necessary, and stitch up the place;
two boils
In the division we said the resemblances of boils, and how to treat them with medicines, and how to remove the cure of iron; and we say boils occur in the flesh, and great caution is required in their treatment, and the ancients said that when boils are in a place where they can be shaved like boils that are on mammary glands, and in the thighs, and similar places, it should all be removed when it is at the beginning; and when it is large and old, it should not be approached, because I never knew anyone to heal them; no one ever healed them before me.
And the work, when it is in a place where it can be removed as we have said, it is that you purge the patient once with black bile; then let him heal if he has manifest repletion, then make the patient sick or healthy one league for the work; then pour your ointment or salve over the boil and shave all around, leaving nothing unshaven; and let the blood flow freely, and press well the place with your hand or something else, and if the discharge of blood makes you counteract against cutting the artery or vein, cauterize until the wound is staunched; then heal it with another medicine until it heals.
Of hydropisy We have said in the division the similarities of hydropisy, and in what manner the accumulation of water is made, and the signs of each semblance, and the cure which is made by medicines, and that which is cured by iron: it is only to be treated; and no iron should be touched for these 2 semblances: tympanites and yposarche, because it is a deadly thing; therefore, when you treat this semblance of hydropisy called "eclites" with medicines, and the cure does not work, look to see if the patient is weak or has another disease besides hydropisy, such as swelling of the belly and similar things; do not touch iron, because there is doubt; and if you see the patient of strong constitution, and he has no other disease besides hydropisy alone, and he is not too old nor too young, then act thus: Lift the patient upright on your hands, and the assistants press the belly towards the lowest part of the bladder, then take the spatula with sharp points according to this form: And it should be slender in two parts. The point should not be too deep so that it cannot reach the intestine when inserted, and it should not pierce through.
Then look to see if the hernia is directed towards the intestines: if so, you should cut incisions of three fingers' width straight down below the navel, and if the hernia is due to liver disease, it should be on the left side of the navel, three fingers; and if it is due to swelling, it should be on the right side, and the patient should not lie down over the incision so that superfluous fluids do not run to that weak place.
Then pierce the skin with an instrument, push it out, and place your hand with a spatula between the skin and the sac as when peeling back a layer to a thickness of one nail or less; then pierce the sac until the spatula comes to the place of the fluid, which is the bladder, then pull it out and push this instrument of which there is a picture here: It resembles a thin silver chain, made of tin or light iron, and has four small holes on the underside; one on one side, three on another side, and one on another. The head is shaped like a feather quill, and it's the form of the incision that scribes cut the quill pen with:
On the top above is the anus, so that when the instrument reaches the bladder, you should now push down on the instrument. Void it then either halfway or one-third of it, for if you look at more than necessary in this hour, it may happen by chance that the patient dies due to resolution of their spirit from the weapon, or they fall unconscious, or they come close to death;
But in emptying according to the quantity of its power, and according to what the dispositions of the power mean for the patient and his pulse; then draw out the instrument and retain the juice, and it is now held back by the coagulant that stops the bleeding which is on the vein, as I have spoken, that you pierce in this way; then repeat the instrument the next day, if you see the patient suffering this, and draw a small amount of juice from it;
Do this every day and be careful not to let it stay but only a little juice. If you doubt about the patient and leave too much juice, heal it with burial or hot sand, and by much sweating or bathing and in the sun, and anoint with wine; heal it with drying medicines until it is healthy, and cauterize on the stomach and on the spleen after the extraction of the juice, as I have said before.
of the stopping of the wound Occasionally, children are born who have no or small foreskins in the penis, or they are not in their proper position. If it is necessary, it should be pierced immediately with a very thin cannula such as this: then put a thin silk thread of flax into the foreskin and tie it and keep it for 2-4 days, until it wants to urinate; if it is removed, urinate, and then replace it. However, it should not be necessary in this case, as the urine that comes out does not close it. If the foreskin is small, it should be treated with flax thread as we have said, and it will expand. Those who do not have a foreskin at the tip of the penis are bladder-stones, for no one is born with a foreskin at the head of the penis, so they cannot urinate until they stretch their penis; and they cannot enjoy sexual intercourse due to this because the matter cannot reach the opening, and it is a bad disease.
And the method of the work is that the patient lies on their back with the head of the penis and the bottom in the same position as a pen, so that the foreskin can open in the middle, as needed; beware of blood flow that often comes, and if it happens, stop the bleeding by applying pressure to the affected area and treating the wound until it is healed.
Pustules of the penis Often, this albatross appears on the penis, and it is an appearance of foul genitals; there are both malicious and non-malicious ones; you must catch them once a week with subtile ointment, pick and clean all of them, then put soft cotton moistened in Egyptian ointment on top, then treat with diaphinicon ointment until it is healed. And if the albatross is malicious, with a putrid color and discharge, then you must bring cautery. When you have picked it, and if the albatross is in the root of the penis and has both an internal part and an external part, then you must remove the internal albatross first; and when it is sewed up, you cure the external one. For when you treat them together, the genitals are not secure from being pierced, and there comes blackness and corruption in the penis and where it was; you must chew everything that is black and corrupted, then put it on top of the poultice of honey and flour made of pumpkin seeds and sometimes, then treat with other cures until it is healed.
And if bleeding occurs, bring the lunar cautery as follows: The cauteries assist in two ways together: for bleeding and for corruption. And if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, you must apply or lead a sheath of plank, and make the patient urinate; and when the skin becomes loose at the tip of the penis which happens to those who have not been circumcised, or it occurs due to injury or abscess, then you should shave with one instrument, until the ligaments are separated, and release the head of the penis from all sides.
Then shave with one spatula or knife very close to the tip of the penis and skin; then separate very carefully between two fingers, and put a thin linen cloth dampened in cold water on it so that it does not become exposed again.
circumcision
Circumcision is not simply the healing of wounds like other injuries; however, when we perform this work at our will and specifically on infants, it is necessary that we do the best work and make it as easy to heal.
They did not say circumcision for their children in the old days because it was not in their law, and we have only what we have acquired through experience.
For I have wanted the greater part of the masters and sages who performed circumcision around .i. day, and the strong, and in all cases a novice; however, the cowards because there are two pieces of cloth, and by chance if one above is cut off and it remains the one below.
Now it should be covered, and the pain is double; and in amputation, which is near the tip of the member, there is no assurance of healing; and in amputation of the nail by chance the iron escapes, ruins the work, and many times there is such a need for amputation that there is no need for amputation.
In the amputation made at the ligament of sinew, I have found the benefit of experiment, for the saw cuts equally well above as below.
For when you press your hand, you should cut equally in every direction; but that the sinew be well straightened around the skin; and let the manner of the first work be such that you make the child think, if it understands, that you do not tie the sinew only, but rather to loosen it in all possible ways. Then make it be between your hands straight, and put strength between your hands or under your feet so the infant does not see, nor any of the tools; then push your hand to the vein and blow or sigh, and pull it up until the head of the vein is out; then clean it well of the filth that has assembled there, then tie the place signified with a double thread, then tie it under one knot to another loop; and hold it at the second knot by the thumb and index finger, and twist between the loops, then quickly untie the knot and pull the chief of the vein.
Then make it be between your hands straight, and put strength between your hands or under your feet so the infant does not see, nor any of the tools; then push your hand to the vein and blow or sigh, and pull it up until the head of the vein is out; then clean it well of the filth that has assembled there, then tie the place signified with a double thread, then tie it under one knot to another loop; and hold it at the second knot by the thumb and index finger, and twist between the loops, then quickly untie the knot and pull the chief of the vein. Let the blood come out drop by drop, for it is the pus; put powder on top and on top of the powder, one cloth glued with a mixture of cooked egg white steeped in rose water, compounded with fresh rose oil, let it stay until the next day, and cure it with other medicine until it heals.
The form of the strength for cleansing is as follows: the two heads should be tender and sharp, and they should be as large as the fists equally.
The error of the mundification is when the vein within is cut open; then it must be stretched with your fingernail so that the wound festers over; and press it equally, and if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, take tweezers, and then press.
If it lasts for three days and what is under the penis is swollen, let it be until the abscess subsides, and the wound scabs over; then press gently as you can move it, and keep away from the part of the penis, it will not harm anything.
Then treat the limb with things beneath a wound of powder, as we have said or treating powders, and if you press too hard beyond measure, it will go above; then treat it, as we have said, until it is healed.
Retention of urine
Retention of urine is due to obstruction by a stone, or frozen blood, or pus, or cheese, or similar things, as we have said in the division;
and if the urine is not relieved, and you see that retention is caused by a stone in the bladder, then the patient must be bent over his knees; and he should put his feet on the back, and extend his abdomen from the part above the lower back, and hold the patient as tightly as possible; and then the bladder neck is compressed to expel the stone upward, so that the urine is relieved.
and if it does not come out as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must administer extraction with all the instruments called "siringue", which is as follows: it should be made of thin delicate silver tube, like a bird's feather; and its neck should be about half a palm long and subtle at the top.
And the method of urine release is that you take one double thread, tie one end to the top of a linen or cotton cloth and push the top of the thread into the syringe; then pull off the excess lining and push it up to the top of the syringe, then oil or butter and egg white are applied to the syringe, and the patient is seated on one chair, and their bladder and penis are rubbed with moist oil of olive and cold water;
then gently insert the syringe into the penis until it reaches the base of the penis, then double the penis up towards the anus; then push the syringe forward to the bladder, and make the patient feel like they are coming to an empty place, and this is not done according to this order for any other reason except that the one guiding it or where it goes is twisted; then the thread is pulled out little by little, and the urine follows the lining, then remove the thread, and correct the urine;
and repeat the syringe until the bladder is empty and the patient is relieved.
Illnesses of the bladder
When scratches or blood comes in the bladder, or pus is assembled there, and you see it exuding acids and medicines, do everything with the instrument called "clepsydra", and this is its form:
It is closed, and has three openings: two on one side, and one on the other, as you see; and the levers are set so that the medicines flow out in such a way that they stop the penis well without addition, if it can draw out moisture, and push when necessary;
And when you wish to administer your medicines into the bladder, place the head of the caster in the moisture, and pull gently along its length; if you pull the moisture towards the caster, and then push strongly along its length; it will enter the caster, and reach the bladder now, so that the patient can feel it.
And this is the form of the subtle enema used to enema the bladder: it is as follows:
And it is made of silver or copper and has the head higher than one thumb or the fingers; below this is one sheep's bladder or linen; then take a goat's bladder and put in the moisture that you wish to enema the bladder, then tie it between two thumbs using a good thread doubled; and heat one end of the moisture over fire; then insert the head of the enema into the penis, then hold your hand above the bladder with all the moisture approaching, until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder.
And if you don't have the bladder, take a piece of parchment and make one circle, pierce it roundly around; then put a strong thread through these holes, then assemble the circle like one would assemble a thimble and put inside that which you see of oil and moisture and water, tie it in the instrument; and do as you have done with the bladder, press it with your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
from the stone
We have said in the section on stones, and their extraction together with medicines; and I have told the difference between a stone embedded in the rain, and all the signs, and in which stone one should work in size; and in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will tell you openly and briefly.
I say that the stone in the bladder happens more often to children, and it is a sign that the water jumps from the bladder like water in its subtlety; and it opens the urinary passage, and increases the pain of the patient's penis, and it pierces many times, and then twists; and from these jumps the foundations are weakened; and children's healing is light until they have 4 years, and it is very severe in the elderly, and it is a medium ailment for those who are between youth and old age; and the cure is easier for those who have large stones than for those who have small ones.
And when we come to the treatment, it is first necessary to clean the patient with an enema, to draw out all the feces that are in the intestines. For it sometimes hinders searching for the stone.
Then take the patient by the feet, bend and move them downwards, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and sometimes comes out upwards; then make him sit between your prepared hands, and his hands should be below his thighs, so that the bladder is entirely declining downwards; then search for it and touch it with your fingers;
If you feel the stone in the space, hasten now to cut it on the stone. And if it does not fall with a touch all around, moisten your left index finger, if the patient is an infant, or use oil, if the patient is an adult who has completed his development; and place it on its base, and search for the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, push it towards the bladder's neck; then press on it and push it to the side where you intend to cut.
Instruct the assistant to press the bladder with his hand, and order him to extend his right hand upward and remove the skin below the scrotum in the part where the cutting is done; then insert the spatula covering it, thus forming the shape:
And make an incision between the scrotum and the base, not on the left side but along the right side of the nail; let it be straight above the stone, and your fingers should be close to its base, and the cut should be wide outside and narrow inside, according to the size of the stone, not too large:
By chance, the pressure must be applied which is the foundation, so that it leaps without labor; and know that there is this stone or angle, and edges: it is broken out; and if there is this one which is swollen, similar to a plum, and rounded, from where the dislocation occurs, it is to be expelled.
Then, where there are edges and margins, make the cut larger; and if it does not leap, then you must pull up with tweezers which are like a limer at the top, to forcefully draw out the stone so that it does not escape; or you push underneath with a thin curved instrument at the top; and if you cannot manage it in this way, you widen .i. small hole, and without cutting, pull it with vitriol.
And if there is more than one stone, push the largest one at the neck of the bladder, then hit it, then pull it out, and the smaller ones afterwards if there are more. And if it is very large, it must be broken into smaller pieces, and a larger wound must be made. For two things happen to the patient: either he dies or urine comes immediately through the place where the lees cannot seal; but still you should make an effort to pull it out, or break it with tweezers, until you pull it out in pieces.
And when you have completed your work, apply the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, hold it together, and place a damp cloth in oil and wine on top, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to cool the abscess; then make the patient lie down on his neck, do not undo the bindings until the third day.
When you undo it (the bindings), wash it well with oil and water, then treat it with ointment defyfikon and basilicon until it heals.
If an abscess or rotting occurs in the wound and congealing of blood in the bladder, and urine is retained in this manner without passing: then insert your finger into the wound, extract the blood, because if it remains, it will rot the bladder and destroy it;
Then clean the wound thoroughly and gently with water and linen, and aid in all possible ways until it heals; and it is necessary that all the herbs you use for healing, you bind the patient's legs together, and apply the medicine on the wound.
And if the stone is small and it is lodged in the urinary passage and cannot be expelled; treat as I will say next, you cut many times, excuse yourself from cutting due to this treatment. I have proven this before.
Take one iron rod in the following shape and pierced at four angles into one thread:
Then take a thread and tie it around the stone beneath the bladder, so that it cannot return into the bladder; then gently push the awl into the stone; and turn the awl bit by bit in the stone until you can pierce the stone from another side; soon after the urine will come out, then press your hand on what is retained inside the stone that is within the bladder. Soon it will be broken, and it will burst forth with the urine, and the patient will be healed.
If you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, then tie a thread around the stone and another above, then direct the awl towards the stone between the two threads, then pull it out, remove the lower thread, and clean the congealed blood in the wound; and heal it until it is healed.
of the stone (of women)
It often happens that a stone is embedded in a woman, and if it ever occurs, it is a great trouble for the healer, and it is forbidden for four reasons: one is that there is the possibility that the woman is a virgin; and the second is that it cannot be found a woman skilled enough to reveal herself to mirrors, especially when she is chaste.
The third reason is that sometimes it cannot be found a woman skilled enough in this art; and the fourth reason is that the stone of the woman is deeper than that of a man, therefore it requires a more profound incision, causing great fear.
If you find it necessary, then you must take a woman skilled in this art and if she is hard to find, do not hesitate to use one chaste maiden; and present a wise woman as bailiff or a woman who knows a part of the art, and command her to make the incision of the stone that you command.
And look very carefully if the woman is a virgin: then you must insert your finger or base and search for the stone; and if you find it, you should press it down with your finger under its base, and advise her to push her hand or the sick person with her left hand on the bladder formed.
If you find it (the stone), she should move it little by little from the opening of the bladder downwards to its root, until it comes to the root of the thigh; then strike on the stone in the root of the thigh near the cervix, where it is moved, and feel the stone in that area; and do not move your finger above or below the stone, and cut it at first small.
Then bring the patient's thigh, if you feel the stone, press the wound so that the stone can come out freely, and know that there are many kinds of stones: for example, small and large, rough and smooth, long and round, and those with ridges. Know their appearances to know the outcome.
And if the bone pierces through [the skin], put vitriol powder on it and hold for an hour until it is cauterized; then return to your work, until the pain subsides, and have the tools I told you about in the extraction of the stone, to help you in your task.
And if the bone pierces through [the skin], it is because an artery has been cut; put powder on it and bind with tents and bandages, do not continue this, but leave the stone alone and do not extract it, or the patient may die; then heal the wound.
And when the heat of the blood is appeased, and the wound heals, then return to your work until the pain subsides.
Of a flesh hernia
An aquous hernia is nothing other than an accumulation of moisture or white pus, which is beneath the bladder, containing the egg; and it is called "white pus", and sometimes it is specifically within the egg's membrane, if one believes that it is another egg; and it is the skin of the bladder between the white pus we have mentioned; and this does not happen often.
And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness that comes from the bladder, and it spreads out this matter.
And sometimes it comes from a blow to the bladder, and this moisture can have several colors: either it descends to yellow, or it is without redness, or black, or watery white, and this happens more often.
And these are the signs to recognize this assembly, for if it is white and smooth as we have said, it is an abscess, that is, long like an egg, and does not open the eyes, because it has moisture all around.
And if there is moisture in the very cloth, it is an abscess with part of an egg, and for this reason, one thinks that it is another egg.
And if the moisture is between the skin of the eyes and the white smooth part, one can feel it well; therefore, when you want to know the color of the moisture, probe it all around with the instrument, so that you understand its form, as described before. According to what comes after the intromission (procedure), judge of what is within.
According to what comes after the intromission (procedure), judge of what is within. And when we cure it with iron (fire cautery), it is necessary that the patient should be anesthetized to the extent of our power and filling of his body; then lay him on his back, upon a thing slightly raised, and put many layers of cloth underneath him.
then lie on his left side, and command the assistant to sit on the right, and extend the probe to one of the two costal regions near the joint.
then take the spatula and pierce the skin of the joint along its length until reaching the nail; and let your incision be straight in dividing the skin of the joint up to a white line, and peel off the thin layer according to your power.
Then pierce the wound deeply with a wide lancet, extract all the liquid, then place your fingers, and hold the wound open from above; do not touch the cartilage of the nostrils but only the wound itself. Cut through the ribs carefully so that it is done skillfully or else the liquid will return.
And if the egg jumps out of your work (during the procedure), reset it in its place when you have completed the wound treatment with the lancet; then join the two ribs at the cartilage of the nostrils with a stitch, and treat the wound as other wounds until it heals.
And if you find the egg corrupted by another disease, then you must bind the vessels that are suspended with caution to prevent bleeding; then cut the cartilage completely and extract the egg, and treat it as we have said.
And if the wound is divided into two parts together, know that it are two branches; if you cut the other part like you have done the first equally, then squeeze out the blood, and put in the wound linen moistened in rose oil.
and put more linen moistened in wine and oil on it, and put on the two wounds, and put cloths doubled over it, and tie it all up with the bandage that is in this shape:
Then take two cloths and use linen thread according to this pattern and sew them together into the belt of the braces, and one of the wounds takes it on the bottom up to the back, and the other at the part of the thumb; and the other two wounds take the other ends, and gather all the rest together in the buckle of the bracer.
And sometimes medicine is this ramice of fire in the place of iron's thickness, and you take .i. cautere cultellaire subtil (a thin cautery knife), and press the skin with it, and let it be heated as we have said, so that the white pus containing water is uncovered;
take the cautery according to this form, and pierce the pus at one point, and peel off the skin with this thin heated cautery;
And press in all ways as you can, until everything is heated; and be careful that the fire does not touch the egg (yolk); and know that this work is more beneficial; and pay attention to avoiding the flow of blood, and do not perform surgeries at the joints;
And if no thing opposes you, or abscess boil or running of blood or other such thing, then heal what opposes you, as stated earlier.
And if the patient is afraid and does not want to endure this work because of its dreadfulness, you should perform a perforation as I tell you; and it is that when you are sure by the signs we have mentioned that the dislocated joint is on the left side,
Make the patient sit on a raised seat; then perforate the abscess in the part below the whole spur, and place the perforation along the length of the body; and let the openings be wide, so that all the pus can flow out.
Then place cotton on the joint, hold it in place, and let the remaining water drain out, then heal until the wound is healed.
and if the white linen cloth does not allow the water to flow from the wound's mouth, you must insert a reed or an instrument used to treat the water of dropsies (as described previously) into it; then widen the wound by 1 inch, ensure that the water returns, and wait for 6 months or thereabouts, and when the water is collected as described earlier, the patient's days will pass.
of the abscess of the cheek
Know that in the section of this treatment there is fear in many positions, therefore it seems to me that one should leave [the patient] in those positions.
and I will tell you the work and the similarities of the abscess.
Therefore I say that many abscesses come from the body, especially from the bowels; and this happens in many cases.
This is due to an excess of sour and acid fluid that spreads to the bowels or by percussion;
And the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body; it does not hurt, but it is a serious abscess.
And sometimes an abscess is painful and hard, of the same color, and sometimes it comes from an artery or swelling of a vein.
When it is due to an artery, it can be recognized by the hot and painful position of the abscess when you press it with your fingers. And you should not touch it at all.
A person who is affected by swelling of the vein can be recognized by his characteristic signs on the touch of the fingers,   (or, "A person suffering from swelling in a vein can be identified by the manifestations displayed upon touching the fingers.")
and can easily make an incision on this appearance, and on other signs. (or, "and can easily perform an incision on such symptoms, and on others.") and it is that you cut the kernel of the cyst, then the egg is in the upper part, and the thread is very white and free, and release the suspension from all parts of the egg.  (or, "It requires cutting the core of the cyst, with the yolk located at the top, and the thread being very white and unattached, and releasing the contents from all parts of the egg.")
If the egg is already softened with these hatchlings born, then you should pull out the egg and crush it.
And if it is sour in the yolk, or within the vessels (inside the egg), you must deliver all that tender part, and crush it roundly.
And if the birth of the shell is on one side, you must crush it completely, and pull out the egg as we have said.
And when your work is accomplished, apply the wound with dampened wool in rose oil and wine, then cure it with other remedies until it is healed.
from the abscess of the eyes
This is an abscess enclosed by a swelling resembling a boil, with the softening of the eyes. and the patient grows silent when he goes;
And the treatment for this disease is as dangerous as it is necessary.
Nevertheless, we shall tell you the work of it, according to what the ancients did.
You must make the patient sit on a raised seat, then place the support for the loins below the waist. To every vessel which is near to the penis, touch them the masters, and stretch them out properly.
Then pierce the sharp lancet broad across the vessels until they are uncovered.
and then peel them from both sides, as we have said in the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
Then I insert an awl with a double thread and tie it to the first place where blood has come out, and then tie it to the other end. Then strike the limbs straight, according to the length of the body, and expel the corrupt moisture from them.
Then treat the wound as with other treatments where you apply a poultice, so that no worms emerge from either of the corners.
because by doing this, there is no harm, and if all the worms appear visible, it is necessary to draw out the corners of all the wounds. so that the eyes do not lose their sperm due to the incisions of the worms, and dry up and cannot help themselves.
From the rupture of the hernia The consequences of this hernia are by the incision or herniotomy, or extension on the abdomen in the area of the inguinal region, which causes the intestines to descend from that rupture towards one of the groins.
and this hernia is either by the herniotomy or extension of it, and these are the two ways in which it may occur due to various causes: either by impact, or jump, or strain, or lifting heavy objects, and similar things.
And the signs when it is of the extension of the disease, are such that they occur little by little, in a long time, and do not come suddenly. And abscesses are equal up to the full point, because the disease follows the intestines.
And the signs when it is of the section of the disease, are such that they cause sudden pain at the beginning and abscesses appear different, close to the skin surface, which is due to the outflow of intestines and the body turning away from the disease.
And sometimes the intestines come out of the circles and are retained there, causing great pain to suffer for the patient, especially when pressed.
And in these iron treatments, there is fear, which causes one to avoid them.
The method of the work is that you instruct the patient to draw out the intestine with their hand from within the wound if it can be inserted. Then place it on its neck between your hands and lift the legs.
Then cut the skin above, and slice the whole hide of the hocks with length; Then insert your fingers into the groin area according to what you need to open the wound, and make them so that the bones can come out.
Then scrape off the fat that is under the hide of the hocks until the white fat is entirely exposed from all sides.
Then insert your index finger into the area behind the hock, between the white fat that is under the hide of the heel, and the second fat.
And separate the one that is behind the eye, and enter the second syphac; then move your right hand within the cavity of the skull, and place the white syphac towards the top at your left hand, and lift the eye to the whole syphac towards the tailbone. Instruct the minister to extend the eye upwards, and release that which is in front behind the ligament.
If you find that the intestine is rolled up or hard white syphac, bring it to the abdomen.
Then take an awl with one thick thread made of ten strands, and insert it in the back part of the sacrum, which is after the skin of the coccyx; after the loin, then cut the heads that appear from the threads, until there are four strands left; Assemble them one on top of the other in the shape of a cross, and tie the sacrum, which we have said is beneath the skin of the coccyx, with a strong thread of two strands; Wrap the threads around the heads and tie them with a thread of two strands so that no one who cares for them can enter into it, except arrows cannot come out; And set the ligature straight according to the first long ligament, and after these two ligaments leave the suture that is under the cartilage of the knee, the great one by a thumb's width.
Then according to the roundness that the egg carries; then strike in the part that is under the skin of the knee, as much as it needs, and bend it, as we have said before.
Then apply wet wool in oil and put it on wounds, and bring the ligament that we have said. And sometimes, the whites (of the eyes) are cauterized as we have said, after incision, due to fear of blood flow.
For there are often instances when the ligament (of the eyelid) remains closed; if it takes too long to fall down, it should be gently washed with hot water, and what we have said applied to it until it falls.
Then treat the wound with another cure until it heals perfectly.
Of a meaty hernia
In this remedy, I have never seen anyone who dared to make the cure with iron.
And the ancients said that it is made like a remedy that is composed of iron, in such a way that you tie the vessels, above the wound gently below.
Then you press it in the middle and treat the abscess of those who open it, until the vessels bleed; and treat it as we have said, until it is healthy.
"At times rupture comes in the abdomen, as we have said, and open the flanks; and do not remove any of the intestines through the anus, and if it is removed, it is a little bit, and repair them every hour;"
"Moreover, if it remains too long at that point, the wound or the hernia swells as the intestines are expelled;"
"This happens due to the extension of the hernia in the abdomen, as we have said, because it is stretched out, then the flanks become soft and swollen and open;"
And the cure is by cautery, as we have previously said; and sometimes the cure is by iron in this manner:
And have the patient lie supine on his back between your hands, then strike the swelling at the wound with a three-finger width.
Then remove the scab that is under the skin, then take the iron and place it on the visible part of the scab.
And press at the center of the abdomen, then count the two levels appearing above the navel, and count them both;
then pull the head of the arrow, and do not cover it or extend the sheath nor anything else, as I have told you in the treatment of intestinal worms;
then heal by the treatment of wounds. And when you cut the threads, if it becomes infected and heals the wound, until it is healed.
The swollen member has no appearance in the wound, and the fire cautery is applied here, and it is closer to salvation.
of the swelling on the skin of the genitals
Often the skin of the genitals becomes swollen in some men due to softening of the testicles, and it appears like pus; and when one sees it needs to be cured, you must make the patient lie down on his back, and strike the swollen skin on top of the natural skin; then bring together the two lips at a stitch, and if you see, first sew the excess skin swollen part in 3 or 4 firm stitches; then strike between the stitches, and the cure is like other wounds until it heals, and the thread the skin.
The punishment (or treatment)
The chapter speaks of two kinds of punishment or treatment (chastremens) mentioned in our law, of which one is when the mirrors answer concerning the treatment, and the other, because we often need to punish certain animals for our assistance, such as cows, sheep, pigs, and others. I say therefore that chastremens is performed in two ways: by attraction or by cutting. In the one we perform on the animal, we seat it in hot water until the joints are softened; then we grab them with our hand, keeping it pressed until they return to their original position and no longer feel painful. The treatment of cutting (chastrement de taille): you must dye the animal, press the skin of the joints with your left hand, attach a rope, and strike above each limb with one blow when you have sufficiently scorched them; leave a small amount of fat and the subtle fat that is on the vessels; this kind of punishment is more severe than the one performed by attraction because sometimes there remains something in the joints due to attraction, which makes the animal desire lust. Then cure the wound until it is healed.
Hermaphrodites (or intersex individuals)
Hermaphroditism is in two ways among humans: one, when there are openings between the two genitals like a woman's figure by nature, where there is hair and sometimes urine from the urethra. And the other way is in women, who have something above the penis as a rod and two genitals. The treatment for man and woman is to treat all adjacent wounds as with other wounds; however, in the second case, of men whose urine jets through the skin of the genitals, there is no treatment.
the tentigen
The cautery with fire instructs the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
The cautery with fire instructs the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Erratic is the nature of women that is not delivered or lost; it can be by birth or accident due to disease; or it is due to growth or swelling that occurs inside a woman, or outside, wherever it may be; and it should be prevented, and the conception, and possibly the flowers to grow. The knowledge of such things is by observing the behavior of the belly. If the discharge is close to appearing, whether in your hand or at your right side, hasten and press as follows: place your two hands together, and have the woman lie on her back, spreading her legs; then form the fingers, so that the subtle swelling is round, and the discharge opens. Then take flax, wet it with oil, and lay it over the area, and let the woman rest at home every day, so that it does not heal. And if the swelling is soft and subtle, and it is close to two levers, you should hurry, and press as follows: place your two hands together again, and have the woman lie on her back, spreading her legs; then form the fingers, so that the subtle swelling is round, and the discharge opens. Then take a linen cloth and pour oil over it, and lay it over the area, and let the woman rest at home every day, so that it does not heal. And if the swelling is hard and large, you must cut it with a spatula resembling the leaves of myrtle. If the discharge is from a growth, you should squeeze it with onions and cut it; and have medicines stained with blood, such as cinnamon, dragon's blood, incense, together with much egg; then bring a large wooden spoon, so that the wound does not heal; and let it be long, and bring a tent of dry linen; then cure it with other remedies until it heals. And when in the woman there is a growth, you must cut it according to this method, unless it is an enchanted abscess in the woman. For the enchanted abscess that is in the woman should not be touched.
The diarrhea
For hemorrhoids without full evacuation, which is not usually treated with cautery, and when hemorrhoids are old, they become swollen; and we have said in the division what their likenesses are, and signs, and I will say here those that respond to cure. I say that hemorrhoids and the swelling, when they are fully in the anus, and cannot be felt, may not be cured with iron. Those that are at the mouth of the anus, which can be felt, are those that may be cured. Therefore, it is necessary that you put the woman in a cold house, then let the swelling be tied up with pincers near the roots, then sprinkle medicines stopping blood on it, such as camphor and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things; then press its feet to the outside for an hour, then put it in hot ice; and if bleeding comes out, make her sit in a decoction of sumac and grapefruit peel and holly and similar things, and then take barley flour, and mix it with honey and oil, and make one poultice on its back. And if it bleeds, that is good. If not, let it be pierced with blisters on the back and at the breasts without iron; then take linen, and moisten it in the juice of plantain or elderberry with old wine, and let it heal at the place. And when the abscess rests, cure the place with ointment until it is healed; and that which is called "albathir" is red, and resembles one sharp head, which must be covered as I said for the swelling; and then let it heal until it is healed.
abscesses in the anus
Many ways of treating an abscess come in marriage (meaning the body), such as boils, abscesses, herpes, fistulas, hemorrhoids, and other diseases that I have mentioned in the section on classification. Therefore, it is necessary for me to speak about the hot abscess that comes in marriage, which is not one of those boil-like abscesses; and if you wish to know how to treat it with iron, observe whether the abscess is acute at the beginning of its occurrence, full of heat and fever, and turns red if possible. Do not rush to pierce it, but let it heal until the pain subsides; then have the patient sit on a seat or two seats where he can lean, support his back, place his feet in the direction away from the leg, spread his legs apart, tie them with a strong cord, then bring the needle towards the right side of the abscess, and introduce the instrument used to open the abscess, from which the form will follow. It is necessary that when you see this instrument introduced, you pierce the base first to know the depth of the abscess, so that what enters through the instrument does not go deeper than it should, and does not hurt the patient; if the instrument is larger, it is necessary to cover the depth of the abscess with cloths, so that the instrument does not irritate it; it is also necessary that you place the nozzle of the instrument above, and mark the instrument. And when the abscess opens, and it becomes soft in your hand, it should be covered with linen or a clean, damp cloth; when the boil is empty, you should put moistened wool soaked in rose oil or green, dry, cooked oil into the wound; place the soaked wool on the bottom of the abscess and on top of the abscess and on the handle of the linen a clean, damp cloth that has been cooked with vinegar or malves (a type of plant); then heal it after two days with ointment, until it is healed; sometimes the abscess and wound are lifted by enema with water and honey, and then with water or long-cooked lily roots and aristolochia, then return to the ointment. And if the wound has returned in the abscess, it is necessary for you to avoid using fire, but treat it as we have said in the section on classification.
childbirth
1st sentence: It is necessary for the midwife to first recognize the figure of natural childbirth, and the signs when you see the woman laboring downward, and desire to smell the anus; then the child should hasten to be born; therefore know that this childbirth is according to the natural figure, and it issues forth from under its head, and follows it with itself; and when you see these signs, it is necessary to press gently on the woman's abdomen, so that the child comes out quickly; for when it pushes against her head, it follows it, and the husband sheds his superfluities by good cleansing; and this which comes otherwise does not come naturally. For sometimes it comes upon its feet, or the body or the head, or the hands, or upon the abdomen, or the backside, and is converted perhaps on its neck, and by other evil figures; therefore, it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and skillful in these matters, and be aware of error and deception, and I will show you all the figures how one should assist.
If the child comes out from under its head naturally and the woman gives birth with difficulty and her strength is weak, make her sit on a saddle or have women hold her; then apply to her nature oil or fenugreek that has been cooked, and then put the midwife between her hands the small spatula of which this form is: and split the afterbirth, and press its edge with a nail until the moisture that is inside it comes out; and hold the woman's belly until the child pushes down, and if it does not push, you must cleanse her with musk-scented fenugreek oil and castor oil; then make her take and vomit condisi, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour; thus this will help the child be born. And if two hands come out, you must gently straighten them bone by bone; and if they cannot enter, put the woman on one saddle, lift her legs up; then turn the saddle onto the ground, and bind her so that she does not move at the turning; and if the hands cannot enter, and the child is dead, cut the hands with the knife that is placed here before, and extract the child, and straighten it as well.
From the birth of the child on its feet When the child comes upon its feet, it must be pushed upward. and then turn the buttocks from side to side until they are even.
Then take one foot and extend it outward.   \]\]
It cannot jump up as high as the hips, if it is commanded to leap, and makes it vomit with discomfort. If it jumps far, let it be.
And if it does not jump as much as we said, if you turn it little by little until it is according to the natural shape. For then it becomes easy.
And if it does not come out as we have said, take muscle salve of high quality, olive oil, melted resin, and grind everything in one mortar; and apply the mixture onto the female side (of the body) and turn it outward (towards the affected area); then make her sit in hot water up to below the ribs;
And when it becomes soft within, make one myrrh collar and place it under, and leave it for an hour; then make it sit on a seat, then make it vomit and hold its mouth and nose tightly, and press gently on the stomach as the child jumps now. of the child's birth upon its knees When the child comes in this form, place the midwife's hands on it here and there;
The birth of the child is coming out one hand's breadth wide. It is necessary to find a way to bring back the hand: If you cannot bring it back, make her stand up and walk.
If it cannot walk, make it lie down on a bed, spread its legs apart.
then bring the mustard plaster as I have mentioned;
and if she is not in labor, make her sit on a chair, then study how to reposition the hand; and deliver the child according to its natural form, make it vomit, and order it to grip tightly as long as the afterbirth comes out;
The issue of the child on its neck, and he has spread his hands, and his face turned towards the back of its mother. It is necessary that you hold his hand, then turn it little by little, and pull it gently.
and when it is even, you should place natural muscle relaxant ointment of high quality and oil on it, as we have said, then you should instruct her to move it little by little.
and when you have done this, make her sit on a chair, and tell her to grasp herself, and make her vomit. In this same manner, all must be reduced.
In this same manner, all must be reduced. When it comes to reduce in this manner, grasp the reduction with your nail until the moisture is voided.
and if the limb presses upon its face and neck, grasp it by the root so that it is not held back, and kill the limb.
Then push the child inside as far as you need to, so that it is positioned correctly, and instruct the woman to take herself once:
of the birth of twins Know that twins are often born, and sometimes three or four; and it is not strange, and it happens often. These are strange things, and do not live unless named;
I know that they multiply, and are distressed by the one who designs them, who is tied to the devil;
and sometimes they come out naturally like a tooth, as we have said.
And if it discharges loudly, the treatment should be as we have said, and the balm should be subtle, and make it quickly and lightly as it does. and make it as it is worth moving towards healing. of many children
of many children At no time are they formed in marriage. I.e., 1, 2, 3, or 4, or 5, or 6, or 7, or more up to 15, and all are formed in the shape of a child according to the measurement of the sacred manhood.
And it is necessary that the bailiff knows all this, for by chance similar things may happen; follow what is necessary according to this.
of a dead child.
When you are treating the woman with a dead child or pregnancy and it does not come out, and you are forced to perform manual labor; it is necessary for you to know whether the woman is of good health, and does not have any accident or fear of death.
the woman must lie on her back, with her head inclined downwards and legs raised.
and the attendant shall bind her loins with two bands, or tie her to the bed so she cannot be treated in delivering the child.
then anoint the husband's mouth with oil mixed with musk and fennel seeds, then anoint his hands with these oils and these musks. Then push it gently into the socket, then seek one side or the other where it can be pushed in.
and take care if the bones are splintered on top of his head; if you stick the bones back in their place or neck, mouth, throat, under the beard, wrist or near the sides,
And if the dislocation is on limbs, pierce or press it gently with fingers.
Then place the thumb of your right hand on the dislocation and put the back of your left hand between them, and push it gently with all your left hand, and insert the thumb into one of the places we have mentioned until it comes to an empty state.
Then insert it against another thumb or the third one if necessary, so that the extraction is even.
And then it should be straightened equally by moving it from one side to another, so that it may come out, and the joints should be grinded down to hold, as shown in the figure:
If any part remains, then oil some of his fingers with oil and push it into that part, and pull the other part.
And if there remains no part at all, then place this instrument higher up and continue until it comes out completely.
And if one hand comes in front of the other, and it cannot be returned due to strain. you must roll up a cloth over it until it stops.
then apply the splint at the joint of the palm or the wrist, and in this way you should do for the other hand and the feet.
And if the child's hips are large and he is narrow at the outlet, or has a sharp head assembled,   ....... It is necessary for you to push the sharp spathulum between your teeth, and bend it and draw out the pus. You grind the instrument called "almidach" to shape it with the tools or chapter that follows it.
and similarly, you treat a hernia naturally with a strong blow. And then extract the bones with the tongs,
If the joint jumps out and it is held by the forceps, it should be cut, as far as the moisture that is farther out goes.
If it cannot come out, hit it in parts with what you can.
And if it swells in the belly or beneath the ribs, then you must pierce it until the moisture subsides.
And if the swelling is on his feet, its removal will be easy and redirecting it to the mouth of the wound will be easy.
And if it is narrow in the belly or the loins, then you must draw it out with one folded cloth on your hand. and pierce the belly or the loins until the moisture subsides.
And if the other member is dislocated, and the head remains,   (translation) Push the ball in deep into the wound of the bladder, and pull it until it reaches the mouth of the bladder;   (translation) Then put one or two fingers inside and pull out;   (translation)
And if the mouth of the bladder is narrowed by a hot abscess that has come in, there is no need to work on it;   (translation) It is necessary to administer moist and fat substances; And apply ointments, soften and moisten them in warm water.
If the inflammation is on the costal side (ribcage), and you can equalize it, apply what has been said in the previous line.
If there is no possibility of repairing it, cut it into pieces and leave nothing of the second part.
And when you have done this, bring it to him as we have said in the treatment of abscesses, those that come in marriage;
and if bleeding comes out, it should be stopped by cautery, and bring other treatments.
And I saw a woman in whom the child inside was dead, then consulted another on this and revived the child. After a long time, an abscess came in the groin, and swelled so much that it opened, and began to putrefy greatly.
I was called to the healing, and for a long time I considered it, but could not stop the wound.
I placed strong adhesive plaster on it, and after some days another bone appeared. I marveled greatly, since the stomach has no bones.
I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
I probe (or examine) the wound, and insert my hand bones as far as the woman's condition allows. And keep the woman in this position for a long time, and at that point apply a little more traction on the bone.
and I have not heard of this chapter being used except for when the master finds an unusual problem that he knows how to help with it.
to put the arm back in its place (or socket)
Here comes the first sentence to translate: The horns should be more delicate than the restrainer, and made of ebony or boxwood.
And the mouth of the tube should be one finger wide, and the margins of the wood pieces one finger thick, and one and a half palm long. And in the two limbs should be two similar joints of the same bone, which are closed on both sides, half a palm long or slightly more;
And these two joints are pushed into the mouth of the mortar to open when turning the two horns.
Another form, more subtle and lighter in appearance, should be made of ivory or beechwood, similar to pliers; And say to the two shoulders, as you see, of one span in length, and two fingers in width;
and when you see to open the woman with all the instruments, make her sit on one bed, her feet hanging down and legs apart; Then push the two shoulders together inside the woman, and hold the head of the instrument beneath between her thighs; Then work your hand with all the instruments, as you have done with the pliers equally, according to the quantity that you see to open the mouth of the anvil, until the bail makes it do what it wants.
These tools are all covered and have similar appearances; and when the blacksmith has equipped them, they work more quickly, and higher for humans because of their size.
Never disdain the tool that you have not equipped, for its necessity is not excusable.
When the second child is retained during birth, it is necessary to command the patient to hold back her milk, and then make her vomit with emetics, and hold her hands at the mouth and anus. And if she jumps because of that, it is good.
If that does not happen, take a pot and make a plaster or cover and put herbs inside that can open the mouth of the woman, such as rue, anise, chamomile, camphor, and centaury.
All these herbs, or some of them, should be cooked or boiled in water over fire; then put a cloth or lid on the pot, and pour the other end into the mouth of the patient.
And let the steam go inside the patient's mouth until the vapors come within, then make him vomit, as we have said. If the patient suddenly jumps up. If it remains after this treatment and does not heal, as commanded to the woman, let her moisten her left hand with oil of thyme or musk oil of alum, and then apply it to the natural openings.
And seek the second joint; and when you have found it, grasp it gently and extend it little by little straightway, so that the muscles do not resist extraction. but you must move it gently to the right and left, and then pull; if it comes out and dislocates again.
And if the opening of the muscle is stretched, we have said the remedy for evacuation and fumigation with herbs.
And if it [the dislocation] is not all of what we have said, be careful when pulling [it].
But it is necessary that the one at the mouth of the bladder [urethra], tie it to the woman's leg, then cleanse it with a fourfold ointment.
If she [the woman] passes it and replaces it again, and comes to pass feces; however, in any case, if it emits a bad smell from the stomach and head, burn the patient.
Therefore, it is necessary to use suitable fumigations for this condition; no one of the ancients has tested fumigation with dill and dried figs.
The shape of the instrument with which one fumigates the woman for retaining the flowers and the afterbirth is as follows:
And is shaped like glass similar to a cane, with the tip thin in its nature and wide at the end over the fire;
and let the fumigation be above the coals, and hold it until it is burned out, then start another one.
to pierce through the bottom
Many children are born who do not have the bottom pierced, but it has been stopped by a subtle obstruction. Therefore, it is necessary to pierce the obstruction at its right place with a suitable instrument and not with a sharp splinter, and ensure that it does not touch the child.
Then put warm linen soaked in wine and oil on top of it and treat with ointment until healed.
And if you doubt that it will reopen, place a plank on it and leave it for many hours, and it should be taken off when the child wishes to go to bed.
And sometimes this sudden swelling of a wound or abscess occurs; it must be covered: whether treated, as we have said, with the poultice of lead.
Of the fistula from the foundation Fistulas that come from below the foundation are nodular, and larger than those that come out of it divert, or in the space between the two parts,
If there is a fistula or several; and when that swelling becomes old, it bursts, and moisture causes a wound to appear white or subtle pus.
And sometimes these fistulas are persistent; and they are recognized by those who have them or exudation or wind when the patient evacuates, and possibly by a sudden jump in one direction.
And if there are fistulas that extend to the bladder and halfway up the penis; they reach the knee joint and the ankle.
And thus one recognizes the fistula persistent at the base, and not at the surface: and you press your thumb or index finger at the base, and insert a thin awl of iron or steel into the fistula where there is no twisting.
if it has twisting, then insert a thin splint of wood or horse hair until you feel the splint or hair at your thumb:
and if you do not feel it, and there is no pus, gas, or worm, as we have said: Know that it does not pierce at all; hasten to cure it.
And if the fistula extends to the bladder or leads to the flow of urine, if it gushes forth, and cannot be sealed with medicines.
If it is pierced to the juncture of the thigh, then the tendon comes out at the level; If there is no twisting or the onset of pain around it, then it will remain bowed and no medicine nor salve can help it.
And in these Persian blisters there is no cure except labor, and vain attempts of foolish physicians who interfere.
In those not Persian and not ancient, with hope of healing by iron, as I have experienced,
And it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back; and he raises his legs up to his thighs, and has his thighs inclined towards his belly. Then insert a tent of arrows or wood if there is a curve, until you know where the tent comes from.
If the patient feels it around the foundation, then it is necessary that you insert your finger as an indicator,
then it is known that the tent has pierced through; and whether it has pierced through the bone or flesh, in this case you will know that it is a hernia. If one does not work on it, it cannot be healed.
One should always understand that some can be healed well, but this happens seldom;
and the aid that one does, if it is heating the cautery gently according to the width of the wound, as was said before; And push everything hot into the fistula until it comes out from the base; and do this twice or thrice, as long as you know that these charred objects should be burned, which are similar to a feather of an eye.
Then, heal the swollen swelling with moistened cloths, until the charred objects issue forth; then heal it with ointment that burns and cements.
If it is thus healed, that is good. If this, however, cannot be healed;   In this context, "ensi" means "thus", "sanez" means "healed", and "ceu" refers to the condition or injury being treated. The phrase "nom autrement ne puet estre sanez" can be translated as "if it cannot be healed in any other way".
And if it tries to enter [the wound], and does not pierce to the correct depth which is the foundation, and put between your thumb and the tent a thick cover of flesh or leather, and you see the fistula at that place where the cover is cut. If the tip of the fistula's beginning touches the tent and it presses forward against the tent, and then apply the cautery after, until it reaches the top of the tent.
The tent will be relieved and it will burst; then cut off the fatty tissues that seem like a bird's feather, and do not leave anything behind.
And if the bone pierces through [the flesh], and cuts into you or the work, then cauterize it with fire or medicine ointment.
For the fire cautery has two effects: namely, burning of charred joints and stopping of blood and removal of moisture.
Then the wound of wet tents is cured with butter or ground cheez until the flesh swells and the charred joints are burned in it.
Then treat the wound of the onions soaked in hard charcoal, and the medicines are dry.
When it is restored, it becomes healed and will not return.
And if a fistula comes up to the full depth of its foundation and is removed from the body, push it in with your thumb or foundation, and investigate it.
If you feel the opening and go in 2 fingers or the syringe or charms where it is about to pierce, but there is no other way of hope or promise except through the administration of one of the 3 methods:   (This seems to be missing a line)
or you cauterize it as we have said, or you strike it to the bottom, or if you can do so, you put plasters and treat it as before.
and do not go too deep, lest you strike the holding member that supports the foundation, and the escape happens through it voluntarily. then treat it as we have said.
then treat it as we have said. possibly it will heal, or you remove that covering and clean it after it is struck away from the foundation, whether by force or by another instrument. Then fashion that iron implement which is in the wound, as much as you can;
Then study to heal the wound, and to stop the fistula on the side of its base; it will be easier for the patient.
And sometimes fistulas are like this: and it is when you press the tent into the fistula, and it is where the base touches the skin above. Take a pierced tent with this shape: And insert one twisted thread into two, and insert the sheath along the whole thread into the fistula until it reaches its end.
If it is perforated on the edge of the base within, then extract the thread from that pierced area, so you push your finger or base.
pull out the head of the thread, and bring the two shoulders together, and tighten one against the other, and leave it for one day or two;
and hold it without moving until the pus that is between them boils and bursts;
then treat the wound until it heals and becomes healthy.
If the fistula is not pierced, then pierce it in any way possible, as long as it is not too deep.
For it should not be covered too deeply and then treated until it heals as we have said.
The shape of a spurlike spinous one from which they make a fistula is very sharp at both ends; and on the other hand not, because it should not be struck where it should not be struck, as you see here:
Hemorrhoids are of two kinds: either they are inside the foundation, like a grain of resin, and there are small and large ones, and in the court nearby there is blood; And if there is one or more (of them), and they are dislocated at the base and at the head of the base; but those that are dislocated have little moisture,
And furthermore, there is also sometimes a small amount of clear citron juice or blood, and they have the color of the body;
and the treatment for those who have it within the base, is that you command the patient to strain to urinate in chambers, until the base subsides, and this appears in the urine; If it is urgent, then you can cut it with scissors or hold it with your nail and crush it at its roots;
And if the bones cannot be held by their moisture, take hold of it with a cloth or cotton, or a piece of linen; Then pull it straight, then strike it, and sprinkle some hot powders on it instead of cautery; or you can cauterize as said in the chapter of cautery, then treat it with other remedies until it heals;
if the foundation does not come out, then you should clisterize the patient with a biting and sharp clisterium to wash the affected area until it comes out easily.
If the patient can present themselves, and if their veins are forced from the foundation, this is an easy cure. and it is that you grab them with your fingernail or tweezers, strike them, then cure them as we have said, until they are healthy, and fear the incision by iron.
It is necessary to apply the stitching in this manner: take one thread, put it on a needle, then pull the thread above and pierce the needle from the other side, and twist the two ends of the thread below the needle. and if it is wide, stretch the thread firmly, then knot the thread, and draw out the needle, and do this with all the others, leaving one for bleeding excess blood;
Then place a damp cloth soaked in rose oil or turpentine on the foundation, and command the patient to rest.
And then leave it until it stops bleeding, and when it has stopped, cure it with salve and other treatments until it is healed.
of the fire or foundation   (This line seems to be incomplete or missing some part) Many times there is drying of the intestines due to fire and by natural constriction, and when the disease is old and the medicine has no effect.
It is necessary for you to scrape with a splint or your nail the bark above, which prevents it from becoming wet. and then heal it until it heals as required;
and if it cannot heal, then begin the shaving more strongly than before, until it heals well, and scrape it. and then heal it until it is healed.
The trembling (or shivering) Louse is a small insect that burrows into the body and goes deep;
And sometimes it freezes (affects) the throat and one feels it as if dying from trembling, spreading throughout the body but more in the hands than other parts.
And the remedy is that you take a cane made of an ostrich feather or a strong goose feather, and place it on the trembling, encircling it completely with the red ring (of the cane); Then turn your hand all along the neck until you grasp everything around the swelling, and put it in place, and straighten the swelling from its roots.
And if you see, do as with a dog or iron chain of this shape, and be subtle inside and pull it out from above:
Do not pierce, for fear of the thumb; and press it hard. If you see, then cauterize the swelling, as described in the chapter on cautery.
Of the form of the plaster Sometimes plasters of silver or arsenic, or melted beeswax or lard, are made; and sometimes such small and large instruments are made according to those for whom they are prepared.
Therefore, when administering to children or weak and suffering individuals, the plasters should be small.
The form of the small and large plasters is as follows: wide or flat, with the belly tied in this manner:
And there should be an incision where the belly is tied, as you see, and the head should be pierced within; and on one side there should be two holes, and in the other one.
And fill the belly or place medications from an animal bladder or parchment, and pierce it all around with small holes.
and there should be one space between each hole, then insert into these holes one strong thread of twisted thread in 10 or more around it, and tie the belly together like a goatskin. And when the medicine is within, if it is tied with a strong thread to the instrument in front, then plasterize; and this is the shape of a circle.
And let the medicine not be too hot nor too cold, and smear the head with a plaster of oil or egg yolk, or similar thing, then gently press it in.
Then the ministers squeeze it with their two hands together until it is all visible, then remove the plaster, and make the patient spread out his legs before you.
If the medicine comes out, press as much as possible; and if it stays for an entire night, it is more effective aid.
And if you apply a plaster for the disease of stomach decay, and the medicine is hastened to heal, then continue it until it becomes healthy.
And if the hemorrhoids are based or an abscess, then apply the plaster as thin as for a child;
and this is the form of the subtle plaster when the skin is tightened:
wounds
We have already said in the division the treatment of wounds; now we will tell you the treatments for hands and medicines, according to their completion.
I say that wounds are diverse according to what they are made, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and of how they are made.
The things by which wounds are made are by thrust of a spear, cut with a sword and knife, or lance or fist or arrow, or similar things;
What is done according to the body's laws, such as wounds that fall on the neck, or on the head, or the chest, or the belly, or the liver, and similar limbs;
I will tell you the cure for each wound, and I will begin with simple wounds of the head, because memory will come in its chapter.
and when a simple wound comes to the head and the bone is not broken, take care if it is caused by an arrow or similar things, and the skin is torn completely and the wound is large; And you have doubts when opening the abscess hot: if it makes a wound in the head itself, even if there comes little blood from the wound, and the wound is healing contrary to the damaged part.
And you should evacuate the patient's repletion of thick wine and meat.
If it does not heal, let his meat be reduced, and do not let him drink wine, nor eat flesh.
And put on the wound, if hot abscess comes, cotton dampened in rose oil or in vinegar steeped.
And if there is no abscess hot, place on the wound, if it is fresh with all its blood, and it is not moved by air or powder, I will say a little after;
If the arrow has moved it, place on some unguents until it heals.
If the wound is large like that of a sword and similar, and the lips cannot be closed with stitches, then join them by suturing, as I will say for abdominal wounds, by suture.
If the wound is exposed of bone and gaping and does not stay closed, press it; then treat the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of skin. Instruct the patient to eat large meats such as cooked heads (testes), wheat, peas, and similar things.
And if you find or notice pus-covered skin without reaching the bone, press it all and pour boiling water over it, then treat it.
and if there is an artery in the wound or vein, which without cautery cannot be stopped, you should tie it with a thread if you find it dislocated. and if that doesn't help, then cauterize it.
And if these wounds are small and simple, the cure is easy; it is that you put this powder which solidifies as soon as the flesh has healed.
And the method of the powder is as follows: take incense one part; dragon's blood 2 parts; quicklime 4 parts and grind finely.    Et si tu ne pouvez pas en prendre .ij. parties de sanc de dragon, si pren les parties de sanc de serpent; ou il est malsain de prendre sanc de serpent, et pren une partie de gumme de cynnamome; mais on doit prendre gumme de cinnamome pour li cure les plaies qui sont en la teste. And apply the wound, hold it open-formed, until it drains well and unites with all its blood.
Then bind it up well, let it heal by itself if it does not swell; for the medicine is not removed until it has healed.
And sometimes this is done with chalk only, when there is no incense or dragon's blood, but the wound has not healed.
If the wound has healed, do not put this powder on it in summer.    Et s’il est de hiemes, et s’il li soit froid, mets la poudre sur la plaie et l’oncist et le liens.  Et si il est chauwainz et le temps est doux, ne mets pas la poudre sur la plaie;
but place over some digested herbs, or pulps made of barley flour boiled with water and honey, until it flows out. then heal it with other remedies until it is healed.
And if the bone breaks along with the wound, and it is small, draw it out with fine forceps.
And I will tell you after the breaks of the head.
Of the wound of the neck.
If a wound comes or it is in the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between it and that of the head, but if the nerves of the neck or the artery are cut.
If it is the nerves, there is no other remedy than to let them heal and not to put anything binding, because it hurts the nerves and makes them retreat; And put nothing cold on the wound, for the substance of nerves is cold, and the continuation of them is with the brain, which is the highest member.
but let the medicine be warm, such as warm water washed in sweet oil, and cooked again in warm water. And other stones of similar manner, and always moist.
If the wound is large, cut it and bind it with bands, until it heals.
And if the wounds are deep and she is swollen and full of pus, pierce it or lower the level.
If the artery is cut and bleeding occurs, stop it, ligate it, and cauterize if necessary.
If the spine of the throat is cut or the trachea is damaged, keep it guarded so that the flesh can pass. Cut the trachea above the throat and do not touch the throat but put it back in its natural position. And then the straining comes, and it is left for some days, then it is cured with rejected ointments until it heals.
and if the wound presses against the bone, squeeze it; and if there are fragments of bone, pull them out completely if possible; and those that cannot be pulled out, leave until the wound heals. make the opening and align the edges;
And if the wound is fresh, sprinkle on it the powder I have said. And if there is bone in the wound and there is a fistula, treat it as I have said in its chapter.
of the wound from spear or knife
If it is a wound from spear or knife, and the wound is deep, look to see if the patient bleeds from the wound: know then that the wound is fatal.
and if it is not fully healed and it is fresh with all its blood, do not put the powder on it at first hour nor bind it because the blood might dissolve it completely, return to the heart, and cut open the patient; but apply atractive ointment and bind it twice a day;
and if you don't have ointment, put old cotton in the wound to absorb moisture;
And make the patient sleep on the wound for three or four days, or more. If no convulsions, nor bad tremors of heart, or any agony of the entrails come, And when you see good signs, know that the wound is saved. Treat the patient with tenting and other treatments, as long as he is healthy.
And if it cannot heal, and there is an opening, then make sure there is a fistula; treat it as needed.
And if the wound is from a sword or knife cut, and it is simple, or worse, or at the back, treat the one in front of it.
If it is large, stitch it; if it is small, powder it, and if it has penetrated the bone and split it, then treat the wound and pull out the foreign objects if they are loose. And if they are not drained (or opened), let the wound fester, align the extractions.
As for other wounds on other limbs, the judgement is similar as we have said.
The rupture of the stomach (or abdomen)
The rupture of the stomach can be great, medium, and small.
From a large wound, the intestines may jump out occasionally, or parts of the intestines, due to this, insertion occurs.
and stitching is more difficult, and sometimes a small wound is worse than a large one.
because then the intestines are inserted with greater difficulty if not inserted from end to end. because the intestines expand when they feel pressure, so they go in more easily.
And because it is more beneficial for wounds to move, therefore one moves the intestines back to their place more than other two [parts].
Know that the hernia of the belly is according to four kinds:
The first two common hernias occur in the abdominal wall,
And the stitching of other wounds on the body, and 2 additional stitches specific to these wounds, are common for other wounds;
Moreover, they are more suitable with the stitching of the stomach, and I will tell one and explain each one:
I say that when the wound is small, and nothing from the intestines protrudes, And a great thing is to reset, this is by one of the two ways: or through the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are inflamed due to cold.
And when it is cold, heat it in this manner: Moisten a sponge or a thin cloth in cold water only. and you cook in hot squiant and cypress and spike. and pull out the intestines when the swelling has been removed;
and sometimes make this wine restraining, and it is mixed with sulphur to reduce swelling.
And when you see the swelling separate, if you moisten the intestines of aqueous or bad and ill-cooked [substances], for this way is narrow the entrance to something.
and if it cannot enter, then make a small incision in the instrument with which one strikes the hemorrhoids.
and the first cure is to grind the tail (of the intestine). We should not cut it except in great necessity.
and this is the instrument to split it:
if you cut inside the hump and do not turn it, and look at its shape:
When the wound is enlarged, and the intestines burst out, If you reset it according to its natural shape in its proper place, then, if possible, for it is necessary.
When the wound is wide and in the lower part of the belly, you should make the patient lie on his back, And he should raise his legs higher than his head; If it is in the lower abdomen area,
and if the rupture of the belly is in one of the two areas, If the part (limb) is broken, it should be higher than the other.
And thus you must treat as I say in large and small wounds.
In small wounds, use what is appropriate (equipped).
Then have between your hands a compassionate minister who anoints the entire wound with his hand, and press your lips together; and this is the common way of stitching,
and this is the common way of stitching, and you take a needle or more depending on the width of the wound, Then leave from the head of the wound, that is, a space of a thumb's width, and insert an awl or a strong threaded needle there. and pierce the two hide layers with the two shoemaker's awls,
then bind with a double thread around the needle of two parts (of the sheep), then assemble the two heads of the wound facing each other;
And then leave one finger's space, and insert another needle; then tie the thread in the same way as you did with the first needle. and continue to do so according to what you need with the needles. until the entire wound is held tight;
And the needles shall be moderate, neither too thin nor thick, for fine needles pierce all the skin and large ones cannot enter well. therefore, they should be moderate.
and needles should not be pressed too far into the skin and flesh,
"So they do not open and wound the wound before the suture."
"Then sew up the head of the arrows so that they do not pierce the patient while sleeping," "and bind cloth or patches to the head of the arrow to hold it in place," "and leave them until the wound is healed."
And this method of stitching with needles is more suitable for small wounds, because it pierces an awl or two [through the wound].
The second type of stitching is common, and it is that you assemble the two sides of the skin and the two sides of the flesh together with one awl having a strong medium thread. And when you have pierced these four things altogether,
And when you have pierced these four things altogether, draw the needle back to the part where you started, in the manner that is customary with threads;
and place a space between each stitch of about the thickness of a thumbnail;
this stitching is for the man.
And I sew a wound that someone had or belly,
which was pierced with a knife, and the wound was more than one palm in length, and it extended the intestines by two palms in length,
And the wound was inside the belly. I returned the intestines after it had been twenty-four hours.
and the wound was sewn up for fifteen days, and he recovered, and became healthy.
And they had judged that he would die, and it was a miracle;
And do not treat it with ointment, for I am in one place where none can be found, nor any medicine. and put cotton wool twice a day on the wound, and wash it with water of honey until it is healed.
I will tell you the two proper ways of stitching:
Take the needle, and push it from the outside to the inside up until:
When it has pierced the heart straight through, if the chest is opened or costal cartilage cut where you inserted the needle,
and cause it to be pierced from the inside part up until that point;
and the understanding of this suture is that you sew as a tailor sews fur. and leave the chest open from one side and take it up from the other until the suture is complete.
The second method of stitching, which Galen specifically calls,
is such that they join the two parts together naturally, and apply one of its [the suture's] heads to the other, in this manner:
Insert a needle or the next awl into that place alone, and pierce only that spot, And let the two shoulders rest. Then turn the needle and make it pass from the outer part to the inner one. until the two shoulders are at rest.
Then pass a needle through one and the other from the outer part to the inner one, in two other shoulders on the opposite side of the ribs.
And this is the common method of stitching.
Galen said this word, and no one denies it.
One should sew the stomach with two needles, each having thread in them;
and one needle should be driven in from one side, and the other from the other, like those who sew leather.
And know that when the hernia is inside the abdomen, is the stitching more painful than other places in the abdomen.
The judgement of the wound is such as the judgement of other wounds:
and when you probe the fresh wound with all its blood, just as the arrow has moved it, If one sets right the intestines, and the stitch; then put on top the powder stimulating flesh,
If one sets right the intestines, and the stitch; then put on top the powder stimulating flesh, and if it has been moved, set some ointment that is available, until the wound heals; and sew the flesh, and bind the seams, and the stitching; Then heal the wound as others, until it is healed;
And if you do not have medicine, immediately place on top, as soon as it starts to throw out pus, old cotton. And move it two times a day until it is healthy.
For you do not need other medicine in many situations when the wounds are simple;
and if you doubt that the wound may affect the main members, It is necessary that you soften linen lightly in warm oil or rose oil, and place it around the swellings, and beneath the saddlebags;
and if there is pain or pus in the belly, and it frequently happens, if the clysterization with black wine is hot, and especially if pus comes all the way to the intestines;
And pierce it within, and know that when it is the large intestines, it is easier to heal than the small ones.
The intestine called "jen" cannot heal when it is punctured. and it is because of the inflammation of the veins that they are in, and due to the subtlety of the entire body, and the proximity of its nature to the nerves.
And if the worm jumps out from the wound, put it back in the same way as the intestine, while it is still fresh.
And if it is old and turned or black, you must tie the blackened place so that blood does not flow from there. For there are veins and arteries;
Then cut that which is between the ligament. And place the two heads hanging from the part below the wound to straighten the extraction when the arrow falls, and the wound bows.
of the rupture of the bladder
When the intestines are torn, and the wound is small, If it can be restored in some men,
because I have seen that a man was wounded or pierced with a lance;
and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and became an abscess and became a fistula, and in it was evacuation and flatulence;
I will treat him according to what I know, and I will not stop refining it until he is healthy again, and the limbs will be united.
And when I see them united, I fear that the patient may have something wrong in his stomach; and it turned out to be nothing, but he improved in better condition, and eating and drinking;
And they said to any experimenters that when there is a small wound in the intestines, it should be tied in this manner: take firm grips on large pliers, then bring together the lips of the wound. and when the pliers have opened the mouth, place it on the two lips.
Then apply another force after that in the same manner as before, until the wound is completely seized.
and stitch (or suture) the wound. If the head (of a dislocated joint) is re-set in the intestine and causes no harm to the patient.
And it can be tied the intestine with a thin string which is cut from the intestine of an animal.
in this manner: take the head of this thread from the intestine that is quite sharpened, and then tie to the head of this thread a thin twisting linen string. Then thread the wire on the needle, sew the intestine, and draw it through the incision.
and this way of stitching wounds is not beyond what can be done with faith and hope.
if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the large intestines, there is no remedy nor health, except by skillfulness.
from a fistula or ... Know that every wound or abscess, when it swells, is universally called "fistula". and moreover when it bursts and releases fluid.
And a fistula is according to the truth, a hard and white nodulation that causes no pain, and it is swollen like the feather of a bird;
And sometimes in clear jump, and other times thick bowed. Sometimes shallow, and other times quite deep.
And I have spoken about it in the section on wounds, that every wound that is not healed, and there is no flesh, It can only be through one of the eight causes:
It is to know, by the little wound or body. or by its illness. or because there is hard flesh within and above the lips that does not allow flesh to grow. or if there is too much pus. If the limb is fractured, and the substance is of bad quality; if the medicine is not good in the treatment; because the corruption is a kind of pestilence; or because in that region, digestion is slow and health slows down and becomes weaker by nature; There are veins or bones here.
And I have already shown all these causes, the signs, and the remedies of medicines in divisions.
Now I will tell you the cure for a fistula that is made by handwork.
Know that a fistula occurs in all members of the body; For there are fistulae (abnormal passages) coming from great veins, arteries, and nerves. or to the anus, or to the intestines, or to the bladder, or to one of the ribs. or to the spine of the back, or to any joint of the hands or feet.
And all such fistulas are of severe healing, and there is nothing but labor and ignorance to remedy them.
If there is any fistula that does not reach the level I mentioned, and you are confident of its cure, and examine it to determine if it is straight. If the fistula is straight, puncture it with a tent of pitch or iron.
If the fistula is twisted, search for a thin probe made of wood. For the plaster (bandage) bends itself around the twist.
and if the fistula (abscess or wound) is pierced with fingers and you cannot find it well by probing, If the clisterium (the lower part of the uterus) is punctured by one of the openings,
Because moisture is short from one place to another, and purifies it;
then pierce it cautiously to your power, so that you know if there is bone or nerve, and it is completely healed,
and ask the patient carefully about the pain they feel when you press with your hand, and where it is located;
and when you truly know the location of it, and if it is far from a joint, nerve, artery or vein, or in any of the joints I have mentioned, if the shoulder follows as I have said,
or in any of the joints I have mentioned, if the shoulder follows as I have said, and break open the fracture and the rotten bones that are within; and then care for it until it is healed,
if the wound is well penetrated in a straight direction, you must cut through it as deep as possible, Then he puts moistened bandages in the treatment of ague, and thrusts them into the mouth of the fistula.
Then he puts moistened bandages in the treatment of ague, and thrusts them into the mouth of the fistula. until the medication erodes the excess that remains at the bottom;
and then he puts salves with clean fat, until it is healthy.
if it is not healthy by this means, then cauterize as we have said,
And if the bone is corrupted by a fistula, strike it. If the vein or nerve does not trouble you or your main limbs as we have said;
and if the bone is exposed and there is corruption and blackness, strike it until all the corruption is removed, then heal with things that are healthful until it is healthy;
And if [the patient] is not healthy, bend [the limb] as before, know that you are not yet at the font (spring/source):
if you dig and excavate as much as possible to reach the bottom, remove all the corruption, then reset it (the affected part) in its place;
And if it (the dislocation) is thus settled, that's good. If this isn't so, know that the corruption is too advanced, and you cannot achieve anything in it. there is no other remedy but to let it heal naturally.
and if there is a small bone corruption, and you can extract it with the pliers If it is dislocated by some instrument,
and if there are several bones, pull them all out, do not leave any one of them;
and if the moisture opposes you and there is no error or fear, and press, moisture, and heat, and deliver the bones.
And if you cannot remove [them] within an hour, place something stimulating [or irritating] pusiferous on the wound. Let the flesh grow around the bones,
then the bones will be more easily set.
and if it is a large bone such as the thigh or the leg, Let the king press down on the corruption only until all the blackness is expelled. then restore the wound.
and if there is much corruption and it reaches the bone marrow; if it is necessary to be cut all the way to the corruption and then treated until it heals.
And I will tell you about a fistula that happens to one man in his leg, [or] so that you take an example and aid in your work. [or]
There was a young man around thirty years old who had pain in his leg due to something coming from within his body.
The matter kept coming to the leg, and a large abscess was drained without any reason to open it further.
However, due to their foolishness, they opened the abscesses too much. and they dug out a lot of matter, and it became a fistula, and many pustules formed that all exuded pus and moisture from the body.
and many patients were cured around two years without any skilled surgeon present.
As long as I was summoned to him and saw his leg and the medicines with which he was treated, and that which ran through the wounds with great pain. And the chest of the young man became red and had a yellow color.
I pitched a tent at one of the wounds, and then searched all the wounds,
And I found that they come together from all parts of the leg.
Then I hurried and cut into one wound until I discovered a part of the bone. And I found it corrupted and pierced, and the corruption reached to the bone within;
I was convinced that the bone was corrupted and thought there was no other corruption except what I had left.
And begins to treat the wound with salves for long times, but cannot heal.
Then continues, and uncovers the bone as before,
and found continuous corruption in the bone, and burned it, and then left it to heal on its own;
but I could not cover more than a palm of the bone, and the wound festered all over, Then heal with medicine; it will quickly become healthy and strengthened.
and no need to start the work again except for the weakness of the patient who could not endure. and because of the fear of death that I had for him. Because it often evacuated blood, but it became entirely healthy.
Because it often evacuated blood, but it became entirely healthy. And a hard cyst was born in the place of the bone, and it was well-placed and had no harm or adverse effect whatsoever, neither at the side nor in coming.
And extend the head, so that you draw the rotten cartilage downward; And uncover the flesh over the joint where you want to be, let it not blister the flesh; And put one iron or a plaster under the bone to heal the corrupt flesh; It is necessary to be as much as can be seen and felt [the corruption], and be there again later.
And if the bone is corrupt but does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or a part of it, If you uncover the flesh entirely; then put one splinter beneath.
and when the corruption is between the parts, let the thread be of the length of the corruption, one finger width, as we have said;
and if the corruption is in the joint, then cut the corrupted joint, and let the bone be on the other side.
and if the corruption is in the continuity of two joints, then there is no other remedy than to cut it (the affected part).
and if corruption is at the knuckle of the hand or the foot, it is very severe. but in any case, you must investigate this corruption, how it has opened. and clean it in all ways that you can, but do not let the vein or nerve oppose you.
and know that there are many different cutting tools and saws to cover the bones, according to the position of the bones and their appearance. And their thickness and subtlety, and their largeness and smallness, and their hardness. for this reason, it is necessary to equip each kind of work with its tool.
and know that the work will show you the tool needed, according to knowledge of this craft. and the testimony of the signs of diseases. If you consider the instrument which is needed according to what is required of it.
cautere de The shoulder joint may dislocate from within or from without.
and when you have tried this corrosive treatment with the medicines, but it does not help, It is necessary to cover that member up to where corruption starts. If the patient shivers because of death or a greater evil, which is a defect in the member;
If the patient shivers because of death or a greater evil, which is a defect in the member; and the signs that the member turns black as if it were burnt by fire, and after the blackness, then comes the corruption of one member to another. And takes hold of the whole body; if you hasten to cover it.
and if it is by the sting of certain venomous creatures such as sea-scorpions and vipers and the like.
if the corruption is in the throat of the neck, strike it, and give it no opportunity to reach the hand.
And if it reaches the hand, strike at the joint, so that the corruption does not reach the arm;
And if it comes to the arm, strike at the elbow; and if it passes the elbow, it is death. And there is no use in applying foreign substances except for the amount of its virtue;
And do this in the same way when corrosion comes or putrefaction: if it comes at the first joint, strike after the other joint.
And if it comes or strikes, strike all the blow. And if it rises in the leg, strike at the knee joint.
And if it comes above the knee, there is no other remedy for the patient but to weaken him with death.
The method of striking or treating a limb is that you tie it above and below. And extend one minister to the lower link, and another minister to the upper link. Then you desire the cartilage that is between the two links at one spanile wide space, as long as the bone is exposed.
Then take the hide or silk and put on each side one linen cloth so that the silk does not touch the healthy skin. And come to the patient with other wounds and abscesses dressed.
And when bleeding occurs during your work, quickly cauterize the area. and you place some restraining powders; then return to your treatment until it is completed.
tie the limb with a covenable rope, and heal it until it is healed.
and I will tell you what happened to a man in the city of Piet:
It happened to him a black spot that seemed burned by fire,
and this corrosion first attacked his tooth at the root, until it consumed all the tooth;
and when the man saw the corrosion, he immediately covered the tooth with copper, and it became healthy;
and a long time later the corrosion returned to his hand, and it came to me,
And I place him on things causing rebound after the purification of the body, but the corruption cannot cease.
And you command me to cauterize (burn) his hand, and I do not want that unless I have hope of making it better. And also doubted that if I am cutting off his hand, he would die. because the strength of the human was weak; and he gave up all hope and returned to his land. And if it (the patient) strikes with a sword his hand, and it becomes wounded;
And I have no other purpose for relating this except that you do otherwise if necessary.
An abscess sometimes occurs in a charnut (probably a type of joint), and it remains for so long that it causes a great swelling of the body. Then they (the doctors) run and pierce, and jump on the swelling, and the wound opens up, as a knight does. And the skin on top is as thin as a single linen cloth. and it will not reach to the bone or to the nerve, and such illness is called "putrid".
but if it is long enough to reach the bone completely, it is called "fistula".
And the cook who is to do this task, you are to wrap him all over, and in the same manner when it becomes thin, just like a cloth. And let it not be cut away for its corruption.
If you have the belief that the skin is rotten and the corruption is not complete, And if the skin is thick with flesh, you should cook it with clyster in this manner:
Look if the breasts are large, and if the ones within them have a strong-smelling discharge. Then, administer the Egyptian enema medicine as follows: Take equal parts of asafetida, oil, and litargirio; cook them in one vessel over fire. until the medicine turns red, and becomes as thick as honey;
And then take from these as needed, and make it into vinegar and honey, and anoint the breast and constrict the wound; leave the medicine in for two hours, then remove it by straining;
do this frequently until the breast is purified and the pus is removed;
and sometimes it is cleansed with water of ashes, when this medicine is not present, and you take vine charcoal ashes, and pour water over it,
then let the bleeding continue, and cleanse with leeches, until you know that the wound is well healed;
And if the patient cannot bear it, neither the Egyptian medicine nor ash water. and the cleansing with water and honey or a little litharge ground. or you cleanse it with honey and sweet wine, which the honey has the property of purifying and washing. and the wine made it stronger.
And when you have done this, and you are certain that the breasts have been properly cleaned, if the clusterization of those causing it to produce pus in them,
and you take emplastrum of definite amount, and make it with rose oil and wine. or you clusterize them with certain medicines and unguents, of which I have spoken of their properties or treating the wounds.
And if the wound of the breast is small and the cannula of the cautery cannot enter, and makes a small wound with a blade, and puts on it an Egyptian ointment bandage, and apply basilicon oil, spread it out widely.
And if the wound is too wide, make it narrow to leave only enough space for a finger or a plaster to enter.
If the hernia protrudes above, push it down or lower it to its level. For when the hernia is full, do not let any flesh enter into it; And if you cannot cover the breast from below as you see fit, If the arm is arranged so that the elbow bends as low as it can go.
and if you cannot cover the breast under as you wish, If the arm moves in such a way: that the bone moves slightly downward without anything being left of the bone; and take consolidative medicines to place on the breast,
and stretch over it a linen cloth that covers the whole breast; then apply the force to the sore on the breast, just a little larger than the first one, The hinges are anointed with oil or another cloth according to the amount of wounds. and place it on the wound over the chest to align the bone, and do not remove the large cloth outside except after several days.
and the one who is on the wound over the chest, removes it frequently to remove the bone, And learn what kind of bone is moving, whether it is poisoned or bruised, or digested, or undigested.
And take care if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not,
and when your medicine has been applied in this manner and you see the pus rising from the breast wound, if you know that the breast is hardened, approach the healthy part;
and then in the morning or later in the day, when you open the wound, If a bandage or dressing is changed and renewed.
And if the breast sags down improperly after many days, know that the breast will not heal. And if subtle poisons circulate after a long time, do not despair of health.
For the healing approaches. For there are men whose wounds delay in healing and those who act contrary to this;
and bends unhealthily out of joint from the breast after many days, knowing that breasts do not straighten themselves;
and if the breasts remain swollen and are protracted, apply medicines that dry moisture in substance but are moist in virtue, as I have determined, for there is great part of vitriol and it is the last medicine;
Take an ointment made with rose oil and equal parts of old wine as a base.
then let it set and use it; this same method works better when heated and thickened. when the prescribed ointment is not available,
or you take myrrh and aloe and incense, grind them, and sprinkle the powder on honey when it is over the fire. And then apply a cloth (drapel), place it on the chest, and sometimes an Aristotle's sage (long-term treatment) is administered. and roots of celestial lilies, which is also like flour of vetch and centaury;
and roots of celestial lilies, which is also like flour of vetch and centaury; and in the use of simple or compound medicines: grind them, make into powder, put on the honey that I said, and use it. And if the patient is wounded, and not treated by this cure,
And if the patient is wounded, and not treated by this cure, therefore learn that corruption enters fully, and causes pressure in the bone, or hard members, or joints; if the cure of the fistula cure, as we have said before.
from the abscess of the nail
Pancreas is an abscess that arises beneath the nail of the finger. and may arise in other fingers by chance.
and when it becomes inflamed and no care is taken, one abscess will follow another. and they run and throw boil ointment until it reaches the root of the nail, and by chance, it may reach the entire nail.
And comes the corrosion up to the bone, until pain smells, and the chest is wide, and the color becomes pale.
When you treat it as we have said in the division, but the treatment does not help at all, then you must cut into it. Remove all the excess that remains from the nail, Then cauterize the wound afterwards. The cautery is very helpful if the bone is healthy and the nail is clean.
and if the nail follows the flesh closely, and starts to become swollen, and begins to pus, You must put the ointment under the nail so that it does not touch the flesh. And push up the bone, and strike the cartilage softly and gently. And place on top of the remaining cartilage, the remains of burning and corrosive medicine to remove all;
And if the corrosion is in the bone, strike and draw it out, because as much as the bone becomes corrupted, it cannot heal;
And if you see a bone to correct, strike it with a hammer as mentioned before. heal it until it is sound;
if it is wounded and swollen and causing great pain, then you must first heal it. strike the joint with a sharp spatula in a transverse cutting motion above.
And watch that the incision does not reach the flesh beneath the nail, for the patient would feel too much pain.
If it happens, place something on top to alleviate [the pain].
The swelling that arises in some men's hands by accident is entirely fleshy. And by chance there is a tooth or bones, and sometimes it has a nail.
And from some of these, nails grow in the root of the joint, or the growth is in certain fingers. The nail that grows in any finger does not move, And the nail that grows at the joint of the finger may move.
The girth of a fat person is light, in this manner: the circumference at its root with a wide spatula.
He who is born at the root of the joint should be treated carefully, cover him.
In a newborn or one whose navel remains, you must first cover the round cartilage up to the bone, Then bind the bone with an appropriate splint, then let it heal until it is healed.
Simultaneously the swellings that come to the joints arise by birth, or by injury from a wound, or by burn, or similar things.
You must bind that swelling so that it can heal according to its natural shapes. then place between two dampened or wet linen cloths soaked in rose oil, so they do not stick together; or you place between two thin planks until the joints are welded, as it should be.
If any of its bones come together with the palm, then strike the weld as needed.
Peasants
These are large veins swollen with melancholic waste that come in many members of the body.
And it often happens in legs of those who walk and work more than others.
Therefore, you must administer purge of the gall, and then heal from the basilica.
The iron cure is according to two methods: one is to strike it, and black blood will be drawn out; and the other method is that you open the vein and let all the blood flow out.
The waist is to be treated in this manner: First, roast the leg in very hot water until the flesh becomes soft. then hold the patient's leg from above the knee to the part below the kneecap; then cut open the vein in one, two or three places, making a large incision.
Then drain the black blood from your hand, from one end to the other, as much as the patient's strength allows;
and then tie it up, and instruct the patient to bind themselves with black-colored meats.
And repeat the evacuation and sanitation when veins are full, which helps the patient.
The swelling is handled in this manner: raise the sick person's leg if there is much hair on it, Then immerse [it] in hot water and raise the leg until it turns red and the veins swell.
And if you have no hot water, heat it with fire, and then press it against the vein along the thigh or in the part below the ankle.
Then peel back the skin and scrape the vein from both sides until it appears when it is felt.
And it will become red and black, and when it enters the skin it resembles a white cord.
Then push the joint underneath (or inside), as long as it is swollen with skin, and then gently bend it to the angle.
Then strike it into another place three fingers away; then cut the skin over the vein as far as it appears, Then tie up the joint again, as you did, and bend it to another angle, as you did before;
Then cut another piece, or more if needed, then tie it, and bind it at the ankle.
Then draw and empty up to the second joint; then pull it out of joint by joint, until it comes out entirely, then hit it.
and if you cannot draw and lift it, push an awl with a single very strong double thread into it. and draw it out and pull it straight, then push a rod under it, and turn your hand from one side to the other until it comes out. And guard that it does not bruise, for if it bruises, one cannot draw it nor lift it, and it harms the patient.
And when you have treated it all, place wool soaked in vinegar and oil on the wound site; and heal it until it is healed.
And if the sight is contracted, twisted, and entwined together, and it is not straight as we have said, If you must break it, do so violently, but do not cover it up; draw it out as we have previously said.
If you must break it, do so violently, but do not cover it up; draw it out as we have previously said. The shape of the iron used to pierce the windpipe is curved and does not cut through, but instead it should be used to open up a vein.
and is large-curved, for if it is thin, it would pierce the windpipe, but let it be thick as we have said, and here is its shape:
Of the civil windpipe
This vein is inserted into the legs, in warm places where no herbs or trees grow, and in dry ground without moisture.
And by chance, it arises elsewhere than in the legs, and this happens due to rot that comes from beneath the skin.
If it comes within the body serpent-like and extends, insert between the skin and flesh.
And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are that it comes in the leg with a very great swelling, Then change the joints, and begin the vein to come out, just like a root of a plant.
When the head opens up, it is necessary that you wrap around it with a piece of wood from one and a half to two feet long, and sew it.
and leave the wooden piece on the leg, and every time it moves away, you wrap it around the wooden piece again, and sew it. And if it is too long, cut a part of it and wrap the remainder, do not cover its root, until it all comes out. If you cut it, it will return into the flesh, cause an abscess and pus or a bad illness.
Therefore, it is necessary to treat it little by little up to the head, and nothing remains in the body.
And sometimes this vein is as long as five or ten fingers. And once a man came to me whose size was ten palms long, and when you touch it, it bursts out with one pear or puncture, and pierce it all the way through.
Empty everything inside it; and bring medicinal substances with purgative properties to the place, administer them for some days, then treat it as an abscess.
And sometimes this vein swells again, and especially when it opens at the joint of the foot or ankle. And it comes very quickly, and from where it jumps; treat it then as we have said before.
From worms that are born between skin and flesh
This disease is called in our land "cattle disease", because it often affects cows.
and it is a small worm that is born between skin and flesh, and goes throughout the body swelling and shrinking. And he feels well when moving from member to member, until it hurts him where the skin is torn or bruised;
And it is infected by corruption of certain humors such as worms, serpents, lice and roundworms or the abdomen;
And there is doubt about its nature, because when it travels through the body, it rises to the head and comes to the eye; By chance it enters and destroys the eye; and this happens many times.
When you wish to cure and drain it, one can force it only when he goes:
then you must lie the limb above and below with a strong ligament tightly.
then press on top and draw forcefully, and if it is turned completely into the flesh, and you do not find it. if you burn with fire above, until it dies;
And the greatest harm it causes is that it runs oil, as we have said;
and if you see it coming towards or near the oil, hold a bellows beneath it, then strike on top, and pull it out.
and the patient must use corpse medicine with soluble substances to remove bad humors.
and avoid eating unclean meats such as pork and shellfish.
Of the pain that comes from windiness This illness is called "vakirir" in our land, and is a pain that comes in certain members, And it moves from member to member; and I have seen this as I told you.
I was called to a sick woman, and showed her arm, and saw a small swelling in the armpit of the arm;
And after that, the eyes rise as if it were a worm towards the shoulder, more quickly than anything else, as living silver when it cuts from one thing to another.
The pain spreads from that place and penetrates into the shoulder,
And then a little after, it runs through the whole body until it reaches the other arm.
Then I saw that it continued to turn around the body repeatedly.
I was greatly amazed at how it moved from member to member, for I had never seen this disease manifest itself in such a way before. However, I had heard that pain often moved from one place to another, But I did not want it at all, as I saw in the woman;
and I thought that was because the woman had a dry body, and her veins open. and because of this appeared that constrained windiness;
and it does not appear according to this reason in those who are debauched and have moist bodies and veins returned.
And when you see to cure this disease, and the patient feels such pain, if it opens as we have said, and press on top firmly until the gas confines itself to its place. and cauterize the place; and if you do not see it with your eyes,
If the remedy for those who suffer from windiness is similar to pills made of foul substances, such as pill-shaped figs and pillows of serapin, and other similar ones.
Arrows
Arrows are diverse in their shapes and the parts of the body they strike.
The diversity of arrows is that some have large points, small ones, blunt, and sharp-edged ones. And of those with two corners (angles), and of those with joints (lengues), and of those where there are bones broken (pieces). And when a bone falls out in any member, it falls in two ways: either in the principal member, the head (cheveit),
as the brain (cerveil), heart (cuer), liver (foie), spleen (pormon), kidneys (rains), intestines (intestine), bladder (vessie), and similar organs. When it falls into any place of these limbs, and the signs of death which I will tell you later appear to you: Then it is necessary that you beware of the extraction of this arrow, for death comes in many situations afterwards. and if this bad sign does not appear to you at all, and the arrow is not fully in, pull it out and treat the wound.
And the sign of the brain when the arrow pierces the bone and the swelling occurs above the brain: It is about cataract, stone, gravel, and inflammation in the eyes, redness of the tongue, spasm and confusion of understanding, and vomiting of bile; and perhaps without force from the nostrils or ears; and perhaps loss of speech and voice; and jumps from the wound with white fluid like pus, and also jumps like burning coal;
And if this sign appears, keep yourself from treatment, and pull out the arrow if it is not in.
The sign of the arrow when it pierces or wounds, is that it is close to the left breast and feels like it has been stuck in something hard, not empty. And sometimes the arrow becomes swollen like hair and produces black blood in the court, and brings coldness and cold sweat, and fainting. Therefore, there is doubt that death is sentencing him.
And the sign of an arrow that never pierces the flesh is when there is no scum bubbling from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient turns pale, and breathes heavily and seeks for cold air.
And if the arrow falls on the bedclothes, it is dislodged from the small ribs; and it releases great agony and pain and breathes heavily; and all the limbs of the shoulders move.
And if the arrow falls or stomach, in case something of undigested meat jumps out from the wound.
And if the arrow strikes or wounds the belly, and it does not burst through the intestinal path, there is no hope in the cure, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
If the arrow strikes the bladder, and it bursts and leaks urine and comes out, and the patient feels great pain: know that the wound is deadly.
The other member, like the hand and arm, neck, shoulder, and collarbone, spine of the back, ribs, pelvis, legs, and similar parts are safe according to various conditions. When the arrow is in the nerve or artery and it's not poisonous, as I will tell you what happened to me, do this instead.
It happened to a man that an arrow struck or pierced the root of his nose: I pulled it out from under the ear fat, and it came out without harm to the sense.
And then I played with an arrow that struck in the grease of the oil underneath the paper below, And the arrow was inserted, but it could not reach beyond the flesh. And the arrow was large like a Turkish bow, with a light iron head shaped like an ear; the wound was clean, and no bad accident happened to it.
And through the throat pierced an arrow of an Arab, and the arrow had ears (feathers).
I was a barber, and skillfully pulled it out, and the Christian was unharmed.
And draw an arrow out from a man, who was struck either in the head or abdomen, and I thought he would die;
and after thirty days, his condition did not change; I cut above the arrow, devised a way to draw it out, and extracted it without any adverse event.
And if one sees a man who has an arrow stuck into his back or chest, and the wound is sewn up;
And the arrow remained within him, and did not break its natural position. nor finds any hindrance in any of its natural functions.
And a second man, who was struck by an arrow in his face, and the wound was sewn up.
remained like that for a long time suffering great pain; and many other similar things happened.
And draw an arrow from a man of the princes, the king who was stuck in the snow. and it was slightly tilted to the right side; and the arrow was completely bent
I was called to treat it after it had been stuck for three days. When I found the wound, it was very narrow.
I made a subtle probe and did not feel it. He feels a prick and pain below his right ear. I thought it was the tip of an arrow.
I applied a soothing plaster to the affected area, as the wound did not swell. And the arrowhead appeared from the wound.
And the arrowhead appeared from the wound. I place the plaster for many hours, and heal the wound directly, and let the patient stay like that for a long time,
until he feels the arrow within his nose for one day; and he tells me. I put on the wound a corrosive medicine with my hands for many hours, until it was opened,
and I tried it, and felt the head of the arrow that protruded from the place; Then I align in the opening of the wound with that medicine, until the head of the arrow becomes visible.
and passed beyond the limits for four months.
And then I cut open the wound that I had pierced with the tweezers, and could not pull it out from either side.
Then I did not cease to refine and devise means of instruments, until I had made tweezers well for one day. According to its form that will come at the end of this chapter, as long as I treat it and return the wound.
And the mirror judges that the nose cartilage cannot be restored: I will then restore it, and the wound will heal, and the patient will be completely healed.
Now I will tell you about the extraction of certain arrows: If you apply your treatment to it, which I am not saying, for books cannot completely grasp it;
but wise masters can compare it well with little things, and with what is present and failing. nine new works, and nine instruments, in the following of strange things that happen in this art.
I say that arrows do not go into members where they are fixed except in two ways: or from which side they enter, or from another part;
and that which jumps out where it enters is an arrow entering into the flesh, and it will jump out again at times.
And if it does not jump out, leave it until the flesh is swollen all around, and the opening is even.
and similarly if it is embedded in the bone and cannot come out, leave it for some days and move it every day;
And then it jumps, and if it does not jump, pierce all around with a very fine needle until the joint is opened wide, and then pull it out.
And if the arrowhead is inserted into the body where it cannot be seen, seek it thoroughly; and if you feel it, pull it out with any suitable instrument.
if it cannot be extracted due to the narrowness of the wound and the depth of the arrowhead, And there is neither bone nor nerve nor vein, if the wound is large enough. Pull out the arrow, if there are ears in it as they hold.
Pull out the arrow, if there are ears in it as they hold. Bone out the part which is fastened in by 2 fingers, if you can. Then break or fold the arrow's ears, as much as you can pull it out.
Then break or fold the arrow's ears, as much as you can pull it out. And carefully make sure not to break the arrow, but to draw it out more gently.
If you cannot do so at once, if the wound around the arrowhead is opened, then draw it out, for extraction will be easier. And if the flow of blood obstructs you, bring what we have said in its chapter for the cure.
and protect the incision of the nerve and vein, and use devices as you can move to draw out the arrow without danger.
Or soon or later, firmly or gently; place the patient according to the shape he was in when the arrow struck him. for this is the greatest aid that can be, and if you cannot do so, then place it according to what the signs indicate to you.
The arrow that comes from another part, or if it pierces something or the skin is swollen in that place as we see or feel.
Cut then across, as far as the pliers can reach, and then pull it out; if it does not come now.
And if it is held within the bone, turn your hand roundly until it enters the bone and expands the bone, then draw it out.
If it cannot come out, let it remain for a while, and then continue the extraction until it comes out.
and if it is an arrowhead inside, push it all the way out.
And if it [the shoulder] had fallen, and you wished to administer a remedy, you would give it... one instrument, comb-like. so that the point of the arrow enters into the hair of the instrument; and then strike hard,
and if the arrow is combed, you strike one instrument with pointed entry for easier extraction.
And if the arrow has touched bone, it is necessary that you cut all the flesh around where the poison is, if you can. Then treat the wound as required.
If an arrow or spear or in the belly or bladder or side is near and you can cover it, then cover it.
And do not cover the vein and the nerve, then remove it (the foreign object), then stitch the wound if necessary. And the treatment until it heals.
The shape of the tweezers used to remove arrows is similar to an owl's beak, and here is its shape:
And they come in many forms: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
for wounds on the chest From veins from which one is healed are 31, of which the head is 16.
This means: 2 bands that are after the ears, which are called the "doubles 'herbech'". and the 2 arteries that are in the 2 visible temples; and the 2 veins that are in the 2 hollows of the 2 eyes, which are called "aspirations". 1) And the vein that is on the forehead; 3) And the two tendons which are in the neck; 4) And the two veins that are above the mouth on the lips, and these veins are called "augeherich"; 5) And the two veins that are below the tongue.
The veins from which one commonly drains are 5 in each arm:
the first is the cephalic, and it is on the left side of the chest, and the lay people call it "vein of the head"; and the median is called "fasting" (or "median vein"), and it consists of the cephalic and basilic veins. And the laypeople call it "vein of the heart"; and the left or right side is called the basilica. And they call it "vein of the abdomen" and it is above the liver. This is the one from which blood is drained, which opens clearly above the navel.
The saphenous vein is the vein that lies between the little finger and the ring finger, and it has two branches.
And in the leg and foot there are three veins: one is beneath the cavity of the left hip bone, and the second saphenous vein which is at the wrist of the right side; and the vein called "nase", which is at the other wrist,
and there are three more veins beneath those in the other leg.
The following sentence translates to: The blood from the veins that are after the ears helps with old catarrhs and migraines. And the qualities of a surgeon, as I tell you, are that you raise the patient's head.
And the qualities of a surgeon, as I tell you, are that you raise the patient's head. and rub the place where veins or vessels are with a rough cloth; then hold the patient's neck with a screw. until two veins appear behind the ears in two places depending on the head: seek then for its pulse under your hand, and where you feel its pulse, press firmly.
Then take the lance, and thrust it beneath the vein until the bone, then lift your hand along the whole vein. And cut the skin and vein well, two fingers deep through it, and make the blood come out as much as you see;
then bind and tie it until it is healed.
And I have already said the incision and the cautery in the first book.
The translation of this sentence is: "The vein of the two arteries that are in the two temples, it is beneficial to migrate/move old." and swollen, and inflamed eyelids, and in the heart of tears dried-up in the eyes.
and the qualities of the vein, as I said: and it is that the patient stretches his neck, until both veins appear openly; And feels the pulse beneath your throat, then press on it.
Press the artery near the vein at the top of your throat and thrust the lance beneath it. Press the vein upwards, and grasp it, as you have done in the other two veins, and make a cut to let the blood flow according to your need.
Then release the patient, place your throat on top of the vein for an hour, then put a piece of cotton on it.
And then form the ligature and leave it until it heals; and we have spoken of its covering and its dressing, or the beginning of the book.
The healing of the vein in the forehead is worth as much as the healing of the head in the ancient diseases of the face, and has migraines, and reddens.
And the quality is that the patient twists his neck so that the vein appears; Then take the instrument called "fosseur", whose shape is:
And place the point on the vein, hold above your hand, or something else, and let the blood flow according to the quantity that you see; Then loosen the patient's neck, and tie the vein when it is healthy and not until you work with a large flame.
However, the fire should not be too sharp; and it should pass through obliquely because the bone is close, and by chance break if it is too thin.
The sinews of the two veins that are in the elbows help with the joints and the thumb, and the groin, and the ulna in oil, and diseases of the face;
And the quality of its pain is such that the patient twists his neck in some way, as previously mentioned.
Then pass the iron, and let it be the width of a finger, slightly long and wide, for there is no flesh there.
If the iron is thin, it may break; then make an incision for the blood, as much as you need, and then tie it up with linen, and bind it well.
The iron from the neck vein is useful for fever, scabies, and fecal diseases, If it comes as a migraine and reddens like in the face, and particularly when it is old;
and the quality of the urine if the patient compresses their neck, then holds their penis with your left hand; and take the subtle flame long and thrust it into the opening between the two nostrils; because the vein does not open well enough, and the blood will soon begin to flow.
And do not go too far (in) deep, and make the incision for blood according to your need, then tie it up for a night, because it is quickly restored.
The boils of the two kidneys help in the treatment of the anus, and the beginning of leprosy, and many diseases, and poisoning, and corruption, and sores, and scabs.
And the quality of the wound is that the patient strains their neck under both [arms], as we have said. And let the master stand on top of the sick person's head, and the sick person lie on one bed.
then open the vein along its length with a small incision, then drain the blood gently or as necessary.
Then fix another side on the other vein, then undo the ligament, and hold all the veins moderately. Do not make the patient strangle (it); leave it until morning so that the wound is healed.
On Cures of Rabbits The sinuses of the veins in the upper lips help to drain into the mouth, and contribute to decay of the gums, fissures in the lips, and teeth problems and surrounding areas.
And the qualities of the sinus are to make the patient sit before you, and hold their neck as I have said; Then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one of which is at the right lip and the other at the left. And they are recognized by being black, and by having small veins around them: touch them both, and if you do not recognize them and you doubt about it,
touch them both, and if you do not recognize them and you doubt about it, touch the larger one of each pair, and do the same with the two veins that are above and below, for it is the same method.
The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries. The drainage of veins located beneath the tongue assists after the draining of the cephalic [sinus], and it is in the incision of the throat, and diseases of the eye, and diseases of the mouth;
And the qualities of draining are that the patient spits into your hands in front of the sun, and lifts the tongue, and looks beneath on each side for a black vein:
therefore one and the other [side], but do not go too deep, for underneath are the arteries.
The veins from which we commonly heal are healed according to two methods:
or when pricking with any flame, mirrhin large or subtle olive oil as you cut, and it is called "anesil"; and they are large and narrow according to the width and narrowness of the veins. The form of the mirrhin flame is very renowned, and it is large as you can see:
And it is necessary to open the large veins full of thick blood that contains thick and troubled blood. and this is the form of olive oil flame:
and it is pointed more finely, and it is for the fine veins to drain the subtle blood that contains yellowish blood.
The draining of the basilica, which is one of the veins, helps with diseases that are in the throat, neck, chest, and abdomen.
And the lord must purge himself thoroughly, and let blood from the artery that is below. If he pierces the artery, and bleeding occurs, it must be stopped, as I have said; And the flames must not be pricked, but cut like a knife.
And if the basilica does not open manifestly, you must force it to open and change another. or if there is no opening in the basilica, or if you pierce the vein in the arm: it opens manifestly. and apply the fire cautery as we have said.
And if you wish to find the location of the vein, it is necessary that you force the arm, that you touch the place until you recognize the pulse. Then sign the joint with a needle, then tie the arm, and burn the vein with fire.
and beware not to hit the artery when you see the joint swollen, for it is the artery: avoid it then.
And if you see it swell up high like a child's urine and the limb is red and tender, know that it is not from the artery: Therefore, hurry up, put your hand on it for a long time, then move your hand away from the limb when it stops swelling, as this often happens.
Leave the arm alone, and do not move it, let the patient not move it; be fearful, and do not move it until it heals.
And if the arm is not bled and it swells, and there is no medicine present, then cut open the artery if it is open, for the head of it will recede; bleed the arm.
Take a piece of plaster, cut it and take one half of it and apply it well until the next day.
If the arm is bled, that's good; if not, then treat it as we have said, with powders that stop blood.
And the stitching is not to be hastily done in many positions due to the small size of the wound and the strength of the tendon of the arm.
The stitching of the vein shall help to treat blood from the head above and internal bleeding below, because it consists of the basilic and cephalic veins, as we have said;
And the lord must turn himself for the nerve that is beneath, and if it pricks too deep, and he finds the nerve, and he inflates it and anoints it with oil, and unfortunately cannot heal;
and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in any man due to its subtlety, then you must heal it with the instrument anesthetic; pull on the nerve as much as possible.
And if there is a vein between the two nerves, make it long.
The sanity of the head helps, because it draws blood from the head, and assists the eyes.
It is necessary to cauterize with olive oil or myrtle fire, because it is the safest of all veins, because there is no nerve or artery beneath it.
However, you should seek the least forceful place, and do not exert pressure if it is necessary for the first time, and you should repeat. And sometimes the joints swell for some men, how one should act the first time, but it causes no harm. The quality of the purity is according to your thinking.
The first thing you should know about purification is that purification is not brought for anything but to maintain health,
And to avoid future illnesses; and the incision shall be made in one of the four veins that are close to the skin: namely, cephalic, saphenous, and basilic. and it should be incised at the beginning of the privy member, in autumn and winter after eating, when signs of fullness appear.
and it should be incised on the first or third day, after two or four hours.
The treatment of sickness does not have a fixed hour, but when necessity arises, day or night, in every hour and at all times.
And it is not necessary to treat children until they are 12 years old, nor a woman carrying a child before the fourth month up to the seventh. Nor should the elderly who have passed 60 years be treated.
And when some wish to be treated, in whatever way that may be, it is necessary that they cleanse their intestines with a light clyster. If there are many worms retained, so that the veins do not allow the intestinal waste to flow out and harm the main limbs;
does not heal who is too salted with foods, or drunk, to such an extent that he farts and urinates;
and if it is purged after a colic attack, vomiting, abdominal pain, excessive copulation with women, physical labor, staying awake and fasting, or any loss of vitality, either by something related to the weapon or body;
Then subtle the humours, if it lacks size, with food and drinks and medicines, if you have the power to do so.
Then enter or bath, unless something prevents it, for the purpose of subtling the blood.
and heal the vein with the poison around the third, as we have said.
and keep yourself that day from work, pain, lust, and similar things.
And let them be bound and comfortable, and let the lancer (surgical instrument) be higher than the one who is being treated, and scrape the arm 2 or 3 times.
Then gradually pull out the ligature above, for if it is too narrow or tight, the wound cannot heal without it.
and then press the wound with your hands until the veins swell, and feel for them (the arteries).
then wet the lancer with a spoonful of old oil, then place your thumb on that vein under the joint where you want to treat it. The vein should not fail or break when piercing. For there are veins that run like cords in a sieve, and some that are full of pus. If one applies heat, if it draws towards the fire and cannot open the vein, such is the case.
And if (the patient) opens a vein, then the wound is too narrow; therefore, the surgeon should be advised in these matters.
And if (the patient) opens a vein the first time, that's good; if not, begin again under that place or immediately above it, if the vein is not swollen.
And if the vein is swollen, and the patient fears, let him rest for one day or two, and do not tie the arm. In case of abscesses, let them wear shoes; do not enter water, then begin the incision if it pleases him.
And if the hole is small, or without subtle cautery you doubt that it does not bleed much as you see, trust in that same hole entirely with the direct flame.
Perform the work a little hastily, so that the flesh is inflamed; for this happens often when the wound is small.
If you see the flesh inflamed, do not start the incision, and put a little oil of lard on it, for it soaks up the blood and is made in this place by the lard oil.
And so administer the oil ointment on every wound that you lance the veins, to stop the flow of blood.
And this same thing makes them shrink and swell up, when it is placed on the wound; if it becomes too large, divide it into parts until it becomes smaller.
And if there comes a large abscess, which often happens, especially when the lancing of the vein is small, If you hurry, put a damp sponge soaked in vinegar and a little hot water on it, and hold it for an hour;
and it is necessary that you do this after the blood flow from the vein, and if it stays in place after several days without any black or green discoloration, it will not be harmful; and if you see, put something made of aloe or myrrh in boiling oil, mustard or similar.
And often abscess and signs of the abscess appear in the sanctuary: therefore, put your hand on it, and if you feel the place soft when compressed by your hand, this is a bad sign. Therefore, do not put anything above what we have said, for by chance in court without the artery; but make .i. a dry plaster to harden it, then cure it with another treatment until it is healthy.
And draw blood from each according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the blood.
For if the wound is black, let it drain until it turns red; and if you see it swollen, let it drain until it becomes thin; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
And it is necessary for the one who is full and hollowed out, and has need of blood extraction, that you make a larger wound for him, and that the veins be wide.
And to the one who is weak, do the opposite, and it is necessary to draw blood little by little, and it should be done by cutting across, not by pricking.
And this method of bloodletting is safe from discharge of blood and damage to the nerve, and it is more effective than long bloodletting or wide bloodletting.
And for the one whose body needs to be healed, it is necessary to give soft bread with grape pulp; if he has been scalded, drain the blood three or four times.
If he is of cold constitution, eat soft bread in syrup before the healing, or syrup of honey with aromatic spices like pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and anise, and a fragrant syrup.
If he has pus in the healing process, after the discharge of blood, it is necessary that he drink broth of meat and a fragrant subtle syrup.
And use other things as we have said in the section or chapter on syncope, for the evacuation of blood.
If you want to burst open one of the arms and heal it again at times, if it is weakened by repeated bleeding, then let it heal little by little, according to the amount of its power continuously.
And if you want to burst open one arm after the first bleeding and it has a strong chest, then let it heal for 6 hours after the first bleeding or after the ninth hour.
And if you want to heal from another part, it should be healed on the second day or the third day.
Since there is much blood within the body which has been heated, and it causes fever; therefore it is necessary to draw a large quantity of blood, and to widen the opening as much as possible. Moreover, you will treat all conditions of healing, and place your hand on the toes when they heal, so that death does not come in their place. and this happens many times when healers are negligent;
And it is not good when you dislocate the arm, and make blood come out a second time, and the wounds are closed, that you press firmly. If it is curved, you should extend the arm quickly, for it would be harmful.
but leave it until the blood comes out again; or you prick at the tip of the flame, as long as the frozen wound opens. And place on it, i.e., a piece of linen soaked in hot water, and press gently upon it.
If the vein is open, leave it alone and do not constrict it until the abscess has been pacified.
If you need to draw blood a second time, do so in the same place or in another vein, or in the other arm.
The veins in the arm are connected to the vein of the head because they are composed of them.
And the method of healing is that the patient immerses his hand in hot water, until the flesh turns red.
then bind it moderately, so that the vein is visible, then heal it with a cross, neither too wide nor too long.
and make the wounds wide, heal the junction of the hand well, and if it cannot be pierced, place the hand in hot water again, let the blood flow out into the water until you have enough.
And if it is cold, do not push the hand into hot water, for it is put more in winter than summer.
And the vein of this vessel is safer than all other vessels, for there are neither artery nor nerve.
The vein of the left-hand savary is good for all liver diseases, and this is how it works:
Hold the hand, push into hot water until the vein is inflamed, if you see it. And if the incision is transverse, and if you sew it up entirely, it causes no harm.
And do not go too deep, for nerves are exposed below all the skin.
Then put the hand in hot water, so that the blood does not coagulate in the wound and cannot flow out.
And when you have treated the blood as necessary, put oil and wax on top of the vein to quickly seal it, and do the same with each one (vein).
The blood from the left hand is useful for the sickness of paralysis, and do it as I told you on the right side.
The blood from the spine is useful for all diseases that are below the chest, as diseases of the womb, and stopping of flowers, and sickness of the kidneys and thighs, and similar diseases.
And the quality of its health is such that the patient should step into hot water, and rub over the vein until it perishes, and on top of the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and from above the foot there are many rain-like drops.
let the drop of blood therefore be as wide as possible or at the ankle, for it is worth more.
If you let the blood flow from above the foot, beware of the veins that are below it, and let the blood flow through as when cutting; let the flame be quiet.
And if the bone cannot come out, put the foot in water and let the vein drain well.
And if it is necessary to start again, do so a little higher up, since the flesh is salty; Do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and do the same with the tendon of the other foot equally.
The large vein of the sciatic nerve is at the shin bone, and its pain resembles that of the heel when it is hot with blood.
And the quality of its pain is that the patient immerses himself or herself in water and pulls above the shin four fingers in twisting.
for otherwise it does not open the vein; and if it opens, you should drain it in every possible way, crossing over. and it heals as you cut it, for the vein is hidden, and it is very responsive to human hands.
and it heals as you cut it, for the vein is hidden, and it is very responsive to human hands. And if you don't pull it out [the arrow], no healing will come from that wound or the back of the foot, and turn towards the little finger;
Make such a correction to the blood flow that you see, then undo the binding and put cotton on it and press; it is now healed.
Cupping treatments
Blisters are made of horns, or iron, or glass; and blistering is done in two ways: either by drawing blood or without drawing blood.
And this blistering done without drawing blood has two methods: it is either by fire or without fire.
And two more on each side of the neck; and the veins below the chin. and the veins in the armpits; and the veins above the ankles. and the veins on each arm; and the veins on each leg. And the blisters on the two ankles; and the blistering does not involve blood, unless from small veins that are scattered in the flesh.
because of this you should not pierce it at all, as you do with venous bleeding. and it should not be administered at all, neither with cold nor hot fire, in any disease that comes from swelling, until the entire body is emptied out.
And if by necessity or custom it is necessary to bleed, we will administer it every hour at the beginning of the month or at the end, and morning and evening.
For there are some who, when they need to fart, have a heavy head.
and those who find distention and redness in their face, and in their head, and at the neck, and darkness of the eyes.
And those who find a drop of blood in their mouth, with their tongue swollen and spitting blood. And if there are such [cases], who think, see by no blood and swelling and death and similar things.
And when we observe these signs, and especially during the month [of menstruation], we order to bleed after 4 hours of the day.
The menstrual blood helps to relieve the headache... that comes from the eyes, and it is not necessary that this be after the evacuation of all the body.
and this bleeding is in place of the menstrual flow
And it is not appropriate for someone of cold constitution or one who has scabs to use [the treatment], as this does great harm to them.
and because the old and those with cold diseases should not use it.
And whoever heals themselves often become forgetful, and because of this it is necessary to place the leech (a tool used for bloodletting) a little lower due to the fear of forgetfulness.
The leeching at the neck is in the place of healing for the head and basilica (a term used to refer to a part of the skull), and therefore it is useful for treating the sicknesses. and in cleaving of the channel of the throat, and to pierce, and to fill up;
and it must be pushed gently, for if it holds too firmly, it may cause obstruction or obstinacy of the stomach and the heart.
The ventosations in the two ribs of the neck are worth the pains of the head, and obstruction, and migraine, and strangulation, and pain in the roots of the teeth.
and is in the place of the sanity of the basilica; and you must command the Lord that He extends His hand to perform it, so that He does not cut the artery and no flow of blood results.
The ventosations beneath the chin are useful for treating mouth disease and corruption of gums, as well as similar diseases in the mouth; they are located near the salivary glands of the two lower lips.
The ventosations of the shoulders are useful for treating disease caused by heat and swelling.
The ventosations of the ribs are as valuable as four veins in the arms, For it draws blood from these large veins;
and instruct the lord not to be too deep, for the muscle is bare of flesh, and knows beneath nerves and arteries.
The ventouse that is on the buttocks is effective for emordes from the root and for diseases beneath it, and it should be large and made of iron, as it needs to be well drawn; and in case it is too thin, it would break; and it makes large wounds.
The ventouses of the legs heal open wounds, for they draw blood from the entire body, and are effective for old pains in the kidneys, bladder, and urinary tract, and remove pus; and they are in the place of the thighs and ankles, and in all cases they weaken the body over a long period, and bring phlegm in various dispositions.
The method of applying the bladder (ventouse) is such that you first empty it, then fill it immediately and apply it hastily, move it equally, and not stop doing so until you see the place turn red and swell, and appear the redness of blood; then press and remove the bladders, and pay attention to the position of the body, for there are some who have tender skin and clear pores: you must pierce only once, and must make wide incisions, and a little deep ones; and suck lightly.
If the wound is large, you must pierce it twice: the first time to refine the blood vessel's path.
And if the wound is very thick, you must pierce it a third time; and when we want to draw blood little by little, we should only do so once.
And if we wish to draw much blood, we should often do so; and if the vein is thick, we should pierce it thoroughly, and the end should be tied off so that the arteries are punctured suddenly,
and for those with thick and hard skin, and narrow pores, you should anoint the joints of the armpits with sharp and dissolving oil: if it is in summer, use violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or oil of pumpkin seed:
And if it is in fever, oil of watercress, or lilies, or chamomile, or anything similar.
And if the excess is large and cold, take bitter almond oil or balm oil, or anise oil, and similar things.
And if the person whom you are healing has thin flesh and narrow pores, do not put any oil on it,
But it is necessary to wash after the dislocation with rose water, or cold water, or marsh-mallow water, or cucumber water, or pearlwater, or another similar one.
And those who have much moisture, if they rise from asafetida or marjoram and sumac, and similar things.
And those who have great surplus [should] rise with old wine or grape juice, or the decoction of anise or chamomile, or others similar.
And it is not advisable to let blood from a vein before the bath nor in the bath, but an hour or two after the bath; and do not sleep after venesection.
And it is necessary that he purge himself, when he should let blood and when he has had blood let from him. And watch the person who lets blood is choleric, and if he lacks it is too sharp and inflamed; It is necessary that he takes cold things, such as green apples and endives and lettuces, and similar things.
And cook peas, meat broth, and moist meats.
And he who has a cold constitution, let him take honey syrup and fragrant mellow wine, which is between old and new, and eat apples and peas and small birds and young birds.
and on the day that he will vomit, he should drink more than eat.
It is necessary to give some men three times tracle or muskatel before vomiting, or after, to strengthen the main members. And let the wine be refined, but it is not suitable for those who are hot to drink.
The boils that are placed to be struck are those that are placed on the liver, the spleen, gout, the abdomen and the buttocks, and the thighs, because these members cannot bear to be struck on them.
and it is not done to draw blood from one member to another, As we put on the mameluke when the limb is unhealthy; to remove the viscosity that is in the member, as we put vinegar on the belly and on the boil to reduce it.
and remove the pain when there is an abscess or arrow, using its attractive power by chance to draw out the abscess, or moving the arrow from its place.
and in this way is it done when placed on the spleen and the kidney when there is retained wind.
And these blisters are administered empty to be sucked only; and sometimes they are administered with fire, and sometimes filled with cold water.
as in cases of pleurisy and in this way the bladder is filled with hot water or water in which herbs such as comfrey have been boiled.
The shape of the blister to be administered with fire is as follows:
And it should have two fingers width and half a palm breadth in length, and have one small hole on its side, like pushing a needle,
and be of iron, soaked before putting it on the member to prevent pricking the patient.
have in the middle a rod of iron or steel, for placing a plaster (bandage).
And they are large and small according to the diseases and the age of those who take them.
for boils on children are different than on adults, and on thin people than on fat ones.
And this boil should be placed over the limb:
Take the lancet or thread made of wax and place it across the boil where the rod is placed over the boil. so that the light is at the bottom of the bladder (ventouse) so it does not burn the patient
and then place it on the member (limb), and your fingers should be on the perforation (pertus) that we have mentioned, so that when one sees, if steam goes out, then remove the bladder.
and press (apply pressure) on the lineament (area of injury) as before, and repeat often if necessary.
In the bladder (ventouse) which is administered in pleurisy disease, there should be no perforation (pertus), and it should not be administered with a needle unless when full of water, and it should only be placed on the member.
And this is the shape: [This line doesn't contain a subject or verb, so it's not possible to provide an exact translation. The phrase "et c'est li forme" translates to "and this is the form" in English.]
Suction is not applied except to members where no bladders can be placed due to their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar places. [Here the phrase "Sansues ne sont amenistrees" translates to "suction is not applied," "fuer que" means "except", and "en membres" translates to "to members".] and in naked places of flesh, such as palms or soles, and other similar places. [The phrase "et en leus desnuez de char" translates to "and in naked places of flesh", "si com doi ou neis" means "such as palms or soles", and "et autres semblans" translates to "and other similar places".]
And the qualities of the user are such that when you find sores in clean, sweet waters, you can take them;
and place them in a nut in sweet water until they are rotten and have nothing inside; and then it should be purified with vinegar and wine, then rub the limb until it is red, and place the sores on top of it;
And when they become swollen and hot, if it is a place where a blister can be applied, apply one, for it is very effective.
If not, lift the limb and put it on a cushion, then sprinkle with warm water;
and if the limb is too far from the body of the blister, moisten one linen cloth with cold water and place it on top until the blister dries up.
And if there are no open wounds, apply powdered glass or similar substances until it dries.
And cover the area with half-boiled beans, leaving them until they harden, which will stop it now.
And if you need more, take other sanguines (bloodletting agents).
And if bloodletting agents are not available, rub the area with fresh blood or insert an arrowhead until the blood comes out. And then place them on it, and as soon as they feel the blood, they bleed.
And when you see them bleeding, sprinkle a little of aloe and crushed seed or ash over it, then they will stop bleeding now.
Here begins the book of fractures
This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it deals with the repair of fractures and dislocations.
Inform, dear son, that the foolish man abandons this chapter, he never saw any old books or read any letters from them.
and for this reason, knowledge in our land is foreign, because I never found anyone good at it.
and I know nothing about it, except through the knowledge of old books, which I have studied so much that I have treated the science, and by experience, and by the habit of my life.
and I have described for you in this chapter what is contained within it, and I have summarized it at the end, and I have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are brought forth, as I have done in these two chapters before.
It is therefore necessary that we say or the prologue of this book the sum of the word and the chapters where the wise man puts his understanding, and remain on the truth, so that those who have been proven may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
When fracture or dislocation or twisting or curvature comes to anyone, it is necessary that you treat the patient from both sides, unless anything prevents you, such as weakness of the body, or infants, or elderly people.
or if the time is not very hot, nor too cold; and do not eat cold meats, meaning cold joints, and boiled eye and shin meat, and drink no wine, nor consume any fatty meats, and do not fill oneself excessively with meats that fill the veins with blood, until you have doubt about abscess heating or spreading of matter to the member; if the patient returns to his former good government as he used it.
And when the broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary that you nourish the patient with foods that cause thickening, or those that are viscous like cooked wheat in water and meat, and beef, and mutton, and veal, and fish, and fresh eggs, and large wine, and similar things. For more frequent and quick healing of the bones, it is represented that nourishment is needed.
And know that the bones of the old and decrepit cannot well recover or heal as their nature dictates due to the lack of strength of the limbs, nor those that are too tender, such as the bones of small children.
But has no cure, reset on the broken bone, that is to say, large splints which bind and join the limb together, until it heals as it was before; and do not remove it completely from its work, and therefore feed it with large meats, as we have said.
And know that breaks are various in many ways.
For the break of the head is different from the break of the foot or leg, and I will tell you all the ways of break in this chapter. For there is a break that goes to a tree, and another while sharpening, as the tip of a feather for writing.
For there is a break that goes to a tree, and another while sharpening, as the tip of a feather for writing. And if there is a break with a wound, then it is a small fracture.
And in every way it has its tool and appropriate instrument for restoration, according to what comes in its place.
And the fracture of bone is recognized by twisting and opening wide, and it sounds when pressed with the hand.
And when it has no twist or touch [the affected part], and the patient does not feel great pain, if there is no breakage.
but it may have a twisting, or a crack, or a small break. You should not move it with your hand, but put on the medicine that comes after this, and then hold it firmly now.
And know that the breaks that are in the armpit, and the two dislocated parts, you should now adjust them equally, so that abscesses grow well.
And if abscesses become hot, leave them for some days until the abscess is calm. Then make it equal to the muscles that you can easily and skillfully feel, and know that the restoration of this is lighter than the restoration where there are bones; then hold it as needed hereafter.
And if the bones are broken in pieces, divide them into two parts, if it is hands or feet, or with your hand for small members, or with two ropes, or one rope and your hand.
and place the limb according to its natural figure, so that when the parts of the broken limb are separated, you reset with all means the additions into their original position and ensure that your work does not cause pain or injury to the patient.
And align well the two shoulders of the bones according to the best shapes.
And feel it with your hand if it seems not to be well aligned: straighten it nicely, and do not strain or press it too much, nor make it hot and contracted like those who bring about abscesses and contractions in the member by their work, as we have seen many times.
And when the member is set, punish the patient if he moves it, whether awake or asleep, turning, or in any other way; and watch carefully that the limb is so secure that it feels no pain at all. For when it feels no pain, it is not properly set, and you must put it in such a position that it feels no pain.
For when it feels no pain, it is not properly set, and you must put it in such a position that it feels no pain. and be careful that it is set correctly, so that twisting does not come about when it is restored;
and the qualities of the broken limb are as I tell you.
Know that broken limbs can be in various sizes and shapes.
For there are small members, such as arms and fingers, etc.: it is necessary to wrap them in soft and thin linen cloths;
and those that are large, such as thighs and legs: it is necessary to wrap them in a wide and hard cord, for the wide cords enclose the entire large member and tighten it equally on all sides, so there is no tear;
then tie light bandages around them four times or five, according to the member, and tighten your hand a little on the cord, then go above the break and tighten less than the break, then move away from the break a little;
And soften the ligament little by little, until you take a large part of the healthy joint, then take another ligament and turn it back right around the broken joint.
Then go to the part under the fracture and tighten it slightly, neither too strong nor too loosely, as we said in the first place above.
Then place pieces of linen or woolen cloth between the ligaments so they are all even, then tie it all up with one bandage, and then put your well-made splints on top if there is no abscess or swelling.
And if there is an abscess or boil, place something soothing on it and leave it for several days until it heals.
Then bind your limbs with a strip of cloth or rope about half the size of a finger, or with a plank used for splitting logs, or with palm fronds, in this shape:
but it is necessary that the bandage placed over the break be a little larger and thicker than the others.
and should be as long as necessary for the small or large limb.
Then hold above the rafters just as you did at the first station, then tie above with a thread coming from below, as in the first station on the fracture.
Then tighten more above, but not too much; and it is necessary that the thread be medium, neither too thick nor too thin, and be of soft flax.
because if the thread is thick, as I have seen in the work of fools who make their cords twisted with too thick flax, and that is a great error, for the binding cannot be even if it is too thin; moreover, there should not be less than two fingers' space between each rafter.
And if the patient has been struck by the heads of arrows in the shoulders after being reset, place linen or wool padding under them so they do not become inflamed.
When the wound is broken and the bone is shattered, I will explain the remedy below.
And know that it is not necessary to bind all broken limbs immediately on the first day. For when the limbs are large, no need to apply hot iron rods before 5 or 7 days, or more according to your certainty of the abscess healing.
And here is the method of old plasters for restoring breaks, dislocations, and twists: it is that you take flour which is kept near the mill walls, and mix it with plenty of egg, and apply this mixture, neither too clear nor too thick, and use it; this is the common method of the plaster restoring a break in various ways, and equally for women and small children, as it is not too hot or too cold.
Another method of plaster for restoring breaks, dislocations and twists: take aloe, linden, elder, asafetida, arabic gum and myrrh, all in equal parts; add aloeswood and mix with plenty of egg; if the patient's complexion is hot, use this plaster, as it has a good composition, and quickly restores broken bones to their place, and benefits many men.
Another method of plaster that is good for twisting: take mugat and vismalve, mix together 10; mirrhe and aloes, mix together 8; acaice 6; bolus armenic 10, grind well, and combine with vinegar or abundant egg white, and administer it.
Another method for joints and dislocated bones, to soothe the pain that has arisen, and to treat it with cutting and breaking: take new linen, moisten it in vinegar and cooked oil, and apply it on the affected area. This plaster does not restore [the bone], but it is good for soothing an abscess heat, and treating proper bone pain.
Another method for plaster that heals broken bones: take dried fig leaves and ground ivy, grind together, and make a plaster.
Another method of plaster for the restoration of bone fractures and to hasten the healing of an abscess. Take root of comfrey, chamomile, flowers of violets, flour of bean pods, of each one part; grind them and mix with wine, and when the members are scalded, mix it with coriander water or vinegar, and apply it.
Another stronger method of plaster when a hard abscess comes to the restoration of the limb. Take roots of comfrey, flax seed, broom, lupine, and sage, flowers of violets and chamomile, from all one part; grind them and mix with vinegar or brine water, or wine, according to the warmth of the member, and its rest.
Hippocrates says in his book that no other substance should be put on a broken limb to restore it except for a plaster made of wax and oil, neither too soft nor too hard.
And it appears Galen says one should place dry, warm things on the broken limb to heal, such as myrrh and aloes and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Another remedy for injury and pain: take the mugwort plant and crushed human hair or bird feathers, and egg yolk, all evenly ground, and make a plaster with it.
Then let the plaster dry a little after, and take care that the patient does not feel any pain, nor has the bone moved from its place; do not remove it for many days.
And if pain or itching comes to the place, or no rest is found or swelling occurs, hasten and dislocate it, and remove the splint immediately; then take a light cloth, and a moist sea sponge, dip in water, and lift up the place, until the itching stops, and the pain is relieved. Then let the limb rest for an hour, then put dry linen on it, dampened in water or rose oil, and bind up a hot compress on top, until you are sure of the abscess being heated.
and the inflammation of the limb should rest, and the pain be relieved, then resume the binding, but gently with a small amount of splint, and not too tight as before; and bind up until it is healed.
And if you see that the abscess is swollen and red and painful and inflamed, and you need to open it up and bind it, then repeat the process as you did before equally.
If no signs appear on the limb as we have said, do not undo it before 3, 4, or 5 days, and sometimes leave it for 20 days, according to what one sees, until the swelling subsides and the abscess approaches the skin.
Then hold it more tightly than before, and the flesh thickens as I said earlier; and if you see it dries out more than necessary, know that purulence cannot come in. Arise then from hot cold sweat, every time you dislocate it, and this should be done daily, and ease a little the ligament;
Then with this work, cut the swelling on the member and correct immediately what the foolish fool does, who leaves the member twisted: it is bad, and it is a dangerous thing to do, and I see nothing else but to tire oneself out and work correctly.
various ways of breaking Many kinds of fractures are, and various shapes, and their causes are defined;
For fractures are made by sword blows, and the hilt strikes the bone all the way through to the point below the bone, as happens with a cleaver or fist; this type of fracture is called 'cleaving'.
Or the sword strikes the bone from above piercing through, and this type of fracture is called 'complete'; and this is the break in the two types of bones, whether large or small.
And if there is a blow from the side, a crack or a cut by a stone, falling on a stone, or other similar things.
And if there is a persistent break, which approaches the membrane that lies beneath the bone, or it is above the bone, and this wound is either large or small.
And if the wound is healed to the bone as subtle as hair, and it is small, therefore it is called this break "capillary".
And if the wound is made by striking with stone, falling, or similar things, and causes the bone piece to enter within, and the fracture is closed as a blacksmith does when heating above a fire, then let the arrow penetrate it within.
And this occurs more often in those who have or a moist skull bone, as in the case of an infant's head;
And it happens in all these ways of breakage that small fragments are dislocated, as is the case with bones; and I shall speak about it in its place.
We should know all the ways of breakage by traction over them, and the inquiry with probing, and the corruption of the flesh that is on top.
The hairy resemblance is known by this: when the bone is exposed and scraped over it, if the break is blackened, it appears.
In the treatment of fractures, take care of the patient's conditions; and if you see any bad signs such as vomiting of blood, loss of consciousness, swelling, paleness, high fever, hairs growing and turning red, or other signs in different positions, it cannot heal without doubt.
And if you do not see any uncertain signs, and you hope for a cure, then begin the treatment.
And when the splinter first comes to you, and it is in winter, it should be removed before the fourteenth moon (which is about 28 days).
And if this is the case, hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the tissue beneath the bone is corrupted, and the complications mentioned come about.
And if the bone fracture reaches the tissue covering the brain, it is necessary to cut the broken part in such a way: and it is that you take hold of the patient's head, lift it up, and expose the bone in every possible way, and on the shape of the wound as much as you can.
If a flow of blood comes to reveal the bone or an abscess opens up, help him with what is necessary, and it is that you fill the place with damp cloths soaked in rose oil. And make the wound rest until the abscess subsides and bleeding is assured; then start to remove the bone around it, and this is done according to two ways of work: the first way is that you cut narrowly in front, and this is the form:
And then make another incision larger than the first one.
And the second method is that you have various incisions, some narrow and others wide, sharp and made with iron instruments; and work lightly, so as not to cut the main part.
And if the bone is forced and hard, then you must pierce it around, in such a way that you provide measurements with tapers, not making them so thick that they penetrate beyond the bone's edge, and above the point it should have a margin or circle, which doesn't allow the point to pass beyond the bone; and you should have more than one, so each comes at the correct location on the bone's edge, so you have tapers for all sides; and this is the form of the four kinds of tapers:
The qualities for piercing around the broken bone are that you put one taper on the bone and turn your hand until you feel that the bone is pierced; then move the taper slightly aside, and do this all around, then cut the space of the bone between the fracture lines as subtly and lightly as possible, so that you draw the bone to your hand or any of the instruments that you have such as pliers or tweezers; and be careful not to touch the brain or the marrow.
And when you have the bone pierced and trimmed, it is necessary that you reset the sharpness that is remaining of the bone with all other similar instruments resembling a cutter, but it should be thinner and more delicate than the other cutters.
And if there remains anything of the small bones, no scales, gently remove them with instruments; then heal the wound with bandages and ointments as we have said.
And another way of work is the one that Galen mentioned, which is more sure; and he praised it much, and this is his word. First, you must expose a part of the bone where the fracture opens up; so that when you have exposed this part, place beneath it the head of this incisor chisel, as shown in its form:
And do not cut through entirely, and the part is sharp on two sides, so that the cutting is towards the bone; then strike with a small hammer above, so that you gently pierce the bone all around, and be careful of the cloth that is underneath.
If it is pierced to the bone, strike lightly, for one can break the bone senselessly and out of fear.
If the bone does not break through to the cloth, and the bone is only cracked from above, and there are small pieces, then one should smooth it out afterwards, and remove the scales with a sharp rasp of various sizes, in order to provide the most suitable amount in each place, according to the work and the figure of the fracture.
If the king [or leader] shaves his head closely first, then afterward with something more subtle, and does not stop until it is well done.
In each other kind of haircut and breakage, it is necessary that you bring about the result according to his discretion; and this is not something that can be answered by one who has put his study into this art.
And if the wound is open, it is necessary that you take one linen cloth, according to the size of the wound, and wet it in rose oil, and put it on the wound. then take another cloth doubled in 2 or 4 layers, and wet it in wine and rose oil, and put it on the first cloth; and do this more lightly than you can, so as not to burden the wound, then provide another ligament, but do not tighten it more than necessary to cover the wound.
And let it remain for a day or two until the abscesses have calmed down, then release [the patient], and administer medicines like root of lilies, wheat flour, incense powder, Aristolochia, and similar things; and from these things make powder, and put on the wound, and immediately administer dependable medicines without bitterness.
Keep the wound always clean, do not leave any ointment or bandage there, for when a linen cloth is applied to the brain tissue, it will corrupt and rot, causing great harm to the patient; for when something biting is put on it, it will cause pain from underneath.
Therefore, take care that no unfortunate accident befalls the patient, as we have said, it is doubtful with great uncertainty.
And if blackness does not come violently except for medicine that we have put on it, which has this virtue, then you should take a part of honey and 3 parts of rose oil, and in glue, put one piece of linen, and lay it on the wound. Then cure it with methods of treatment as required, until it is healed.
Know that sometimes the two parts of the nose above are broken, or one alone because there are two bones; and the one below is cartilaginous and does not break, but instead causes swelling or twisting, and then heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, you must press your little finger or thumb into the nostril, and insert the breakage inside the index finger, and to the pocket through the back, until the nose regains its natural shape. and do this gently, and be careful that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
If the breakage is in the upper part of the nose and the finger cannot reach it, you must insert a small stick into the nostril up to the root.
And if the fracture is in two parts, repair it as such, and hurry to restore it within a day, if you can.
If it is not in two parts, then after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscess has subsided, then bind to the head of the needle threads of linen, if the fracture is in one part.
Tie two threads of opposite parts, if the fracture is there; and let the threads be as thick as they fill the pores of the needle.
And they said any restorative that one should moisten the threads with butter, and to soften each day. I do not think it is good, but it should be moistened in a mixture of egg yolk and flour; then leave the thread, until the bone is hard, and the cartilages harden.
And sometimes feathers of goose are inserted in place of tendons, and if one layer of linen is around it, and the breakage is held, then blow the patient gently through it; do as you see fit.
If an abscess comes to the opening as you are working on it, put beeswax or cotton soaked in rose oil, or a pinch of alum.
If an abscess does not come out, put plaster on the outside, made of wheat flour and incense powder mixed with egg yolk, then place light compresses on top, but do not bind the wound.
And if the break in the neck is small, and it is broken into little pieces, pull them out with suitable instruments, then seal the wound with materials appropriate for that purpose, such as plasters and salves.
If there is no wound within the neck, then treat it with bandages and apply planks of wood until it heals.
Of the fracture of the jawbone
When the mandible is dislocated below, and there is no wound outside, and only the break is visible, but it has not been broken in two, if one knows it easily, then it is recognizable as a corbel inside.
If the break is on the right side, place your index finger in the patient's mouth; if the break is on the left mandible, place your right index finger from outside and push it gently inside, and align it with the other hand from outside.
And if the break of the mandible is displaced at two points, then you must administer an extension of two parts until it is equal.
And if there is movement of the teeth or fracture, hold them with a gold, silver or silk thread, then place a broken-baked mandible on top, and put on one double cloth; and place on the cloth a large and well-made stitch, or an equal piece of leather, long and wide according to the jaw, and attach it where you can, and command the patient to rest, and give him light foods.
If you see the figure change (dislocate), dislocate it again on the third day, then reset it where it was dislocated; apply a plaster of milled powder with egg or flour of wheat, after removing the broken bone; and put on the plaster a light linen, and if the plaster sets and the patient's condition does not change, leave it until it heals; many times it heals in four weeks.
And when an abscess comes, bring what we have said many times.
And if there is a break and wound together, be careful not to remove any piece of the bone when extracting it; use tools suitable for this purpose with caution.
If the wound is narrow, widen it as necessary with fire.
And when you have removed all the pieces, if none remain, then sew up the wound, if it is wide, and apply one or more suitable dressing for healing until it is healed.
of the arm The force is broken many times towards the shoulder, and the fracture occurs in three ways: either it is broken and dislocated at two places, divided into parts, and is the lightest to restore; or there is a fracture with an open wound.
And the operations are when the fracture is without wound, you shall have two helpers, so that one holds the shoulder where the force is broken; and the other stretches the neck towards the part; then align the fracture to your fingers, so that the shape is as it should be, and has neither appearance nor deviation.
If you need to stretch more, place a round bandage of cloth or linen around the patient's shoulder and make it thick as needed; then stretch and bind the force, and pull the bandage tight with your hand, aligning the fracture as it should be.
And if you cannot draw the head of the dislocation from its enclosure because it comes in fully, then the patient should lie on his affected side, and put a small pillow under his shoulder; and push the ministers (assistants) the shoulder downward until the bones of the dislocation are raised.
Then direct the fracture to your fingers, and if you find that it is broken, then it is necessary that you cut through it; and draw apart the pieces gently, and if the bones cannot join due to any hindrance, strike one of the incisions that you have made; but place this instrument under the dislocation to keep it in place:
and resemble a spoon, not convex, and be of such a size as it needs to be, according to the size of the bone and the power of the work; and have two handles, if you see, and one be wide, and the other narrow, like the opening of the wound that you made when you treated the bones:
And when you are assured of the abscess heat, if it opens, and if the wound is small, or you doubt about the abscess heat, then use linen cloths and bandages, according to its size.
And if pus comes from the abscess heat, then soak a linen cloth in rose oil, wormwood and wine, and put it on top.
The binding of the bone, when it is painful and swollen, is that you place the plaster made of mill powder and egg yolk on top of the bone, and put light poultices under it, and place a splint under it if needed. Then take a very large bandage, one palm wide, then put on a double cloth padding and wrap it; then take a thin needle of three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around the bandage so that the end of the bandage hangs down. and place the needle through the break, and turn the bandage around the neck, and below the patient's jawbone, and below the sick person's jawbone; and pull from each side, and when you see that the fracture aligns properly, and you clearly see that the needle does not move over the broken bone, then hold it every day, and when the swelling subsides, restrain it.
and make the patient lie on his back, and put a small pillow under his jaw while he sleeps to raise the shoulder; this will align the fracture by the alignment of the shoulder, or tie the arm to the neck, and do not untie it unless a bad accident occurs, for up to twenty days.
Then start the treatment, if it is needed, and hold it steady and leave it in place until it is restored; and it is usually restored within 28 days, and less in some cases.
of the shoulder fracture
If the shoulder is fractured or dislocated, it may not heal on its own, and only touch can be used to feel it; then set it according to the shape of the fracture, and reset it according to its natural form in all ways that you can; then put flour from the mill with an abundance of egg and light bandages, and put two layers of cloth over it; then put a wide and thin splint, slightly larger than the shoulder, on top and make sure that under the splint there is no part of the shoulder protruding, if this happens use flax bandages to fill in the gap so that the splint fits evenly; and then bind it tightly with a large bandage so that the splint does not move from its place and watch the wound every day; whenever it softens, bind it again, and make sure the splint is even if it has moved, and have the patient lie on his side; and the shoulder will be healed in 20 or 30 days, and when this number is complete, remove the bandages, but be careful because it is not bone that moves easily.
And if a piece of the bone protrudes in front and not beneath the skin, raise it up, and cut the bone, and do as we have said in the treatment of an abscess to cool the heat.
of the fracture with this method
Sometimes a limb is broken in the middle, but it happens rarely; however, it often breaks at the end. And when it is broken within, it sinks downwards, and the patient feels great pain, and lack of alignment, and immediately vomits blood, and the opening in the broken bone appears wide open, and it hurts a lot.
And the restoration is that the patient lies supine on their back, and one places a cushion between the shoulders, then presses the shoulders, and assembles the ribs of the two sides to your hands, and carefully align it in all ways possible, so that the bone figure is as required; then place poultices and pouches filled with salt or another light substance on top of the broken bone, wrap it in one cloth, and attach it to the broken bone so that it does not move; then turn the limb round and round, and tighten it gradually, and check every hour whether the fracture has healed, and if it softens, tighten it again; and if it is necessary to dislocate it, due to corrosion or inflammation that comes to the place, or pain or abscess, you hasten, and dislocate it, remove the poultice, and direct those who have come for treatment; then reattach the poultice, and tighten it until it is healed.
of the rib fracture
Know that the fracture of ribs only occurs in large ones after the back and at the chest, and they bend only when they are slippery; and it is felt well by the examination of the fingers.
And the repositioning is that you make it equal to the break, as necessary. Then put the splint, and hold it with a stick, if needed.
If the broken rib is tilted inside, the patient feels intense pain and shortness of breath, like with pleurisy, because the bone pierces it; and he goes to points, and quickly vomits a large amount of blood, which is a serious illness, and they have used great ingenuity for it.
And if there are those who say that it is necessary to administer foods that swell the belly, to push the broken bone outwards.
We do not let hot compresses come, if they have not arrived. And if they have arrived, let them be applied.
And it was said by some that vents are placed on the wound to drain pus, and this seems reasonable; however, doubt exists whether the vents attract superfluous matter to the wound due to its weakened state.
And some said that the wound should be covered with damp linen dipped in hot oil and a tourniquet placed between the ribs to make it even; then it should be cured with the cure of pleurisy, meat, and medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot endure from the broken bone and fear is present in the patient, it is necessary to make an incision over the broken rib, and it is necessary to put one instrument underneath for support; then you should cut the bone lightly, and pull it gently, and then sew the two edges of the wound, if they are large, and dress it with plasters until it heals. And when abscesses come, place moistened linen soaked in rose oil on top, and on the broken rib; and treat the abscess over the broken rib while the rib is healing, and lie him down frequently on the side where it should be, until it heals.
of the break in the neck
Sometimes there comes a fracture of the bones in the neck, and so it happens with the spine of the back. And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if they will be healthy or not, take care if you see their hands becoming soft, swollen, and dead, and they cannot move or extend them, and when you prick them with a needle, they do not feel it. Know that they are mortally ill in many positions, and if they do not speak or feel well when squeezed and pricked, know that the jointure of the bone is saved, and that the patient will be cured, if treatment is applied.
If such a thing happens to the spine of the back, and you want to know if it will be healthy or not, take care if the feet are swollen, and if there is an accident involving the hands, and the back has sudden weakness and involuntary movement; and when it is brought onto the stomach, it still moves involuntarily. And when it is pressed on the back, it cannot be sat upon. Know that it is mortally ill: do not labor in its cure.
If this accident does not happen to them, then it is a lighter matter.
And the cure is that you anoint it if there is an abscess burning, place oil of rosemary or egg yolk oil on it until it calms down; then put a comforting and drying plaster on top, bind it with a thread, and command the patient to rest; and let him not sleep on the part where he feels pain until he is well. If any bone is dislocated, you should cover it with some oil; cut the bone, then join the two edges of the wound together with stitches if it is large, then heal it with healing ointment for as long as it is well; and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called "the head of the cow," you should put your left thumb in its place and make it equal to the right hand, then apply a plaster and bandage on top if necessary; then bind it, and if there is any dislocation, correct it; and heal the wound until it heals.
of the break in the leg bone
It often happens that the bone of the thigh is broken, and if it does happen, there is only slight reduction in pain at the site; it lasts for a long time, declines towards the opening, causes pain and swelling at the location where it breaks.
And the restoration is that you extend your hand above, as long as you are over the break; and feel which is the break and its shape; and if the break is only at the head, then equalize that break so it returns to its natural shape.
And if the break is long or it declines inside, then make the patient lie on their stomach so that the restoration of that break can be done. And when you have set it (the dislocation) straight, place the plaster on top, then place a stick or a splint over it, and hold the break still so that it does not move; and apply the joint underneath the ribs until the fracture is even.
Instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy side or back.
If an abscess should burst, do not touch it until the abscess has healed, and place what we have previously mentioned on it; then return to the treatment, hold it as needed if there is no bad accident, and that's the method.
Of the dislocation of the shoulder
The shoulder joint is that which is between the chest and the neck of the shoulder, and if it is broken, it should be restored according to one of the two ways: of which one is that you take a rod filled with coarse linen, in this form:
And tie the two limbs and the splints together with two ropes, and suspend them above; then place the patient on a chair; then lay the broken arm on the rod, until it reaches the correct position, and have a small amount of rod in between; then suspend it to a heavy object or the assistant holds it downward; then the healer puts the break in the correct position with both hands together, until the break returns as necessary.
And the other way is that they restrain the patient on their bed, and tie the hand to the neck, then command two attendants that one presses where it is broken with their hands, and the other presses all around completely, and extend each one to its part.
If the extraction is more forceful, then tie one cord below the break and above the break, and each attendant extends to their part. If the break is near the head of the shoulder, then put a medium cord below the buttock and another toward the back, both below the break; and similarly if the break is toward the back, then put a light cord without pressure until the break is level with the place, and with the back; then make it level, as required, and hold it, unless an abscess does not come.
If an abscess comes out, do not hold it for more than seven hours, and put a soft cloth soaked in oil and linen on it until the abscess is calmed; then hold it, and the way to hold it is that you place the cestui (the instrument) on the break, then raise the arm toward the shoulder or chest; and tie the bandage and hold it on the shoulder and arm so that the arm is in a straight line, if nothing prevents it, or if the bone is not moving.
And if you doubt that the bone moves, use splints, and place a larger and stronger splint above the fracture, with one inch of space between each splint, and let each splint be so large that it spans the fracture two inches from each side; then hold the splints in position, as I said at the beginning of the chapter about the fracture, firmly and less in alignment.
If you see the position of the splints and the strapping, as we have said, during the time when you are resetting the broken limb, and you doubt the abscess is hot, leave it to heal for seven days, as we have said; then look at it every three days, to ensure that swelling or inflammation does not occur at the site, nor does pus come to the limb because it is too tight. Follow these instructions.
If no such accidents occur, do not remove the splint for less than four days or more; let the patient rest on his back, and place his hands on his stomach; place one piece of linen cloth equally under the shoulder, and observe every hour of the day or night that the figure of the broken limb does not move or the strapping becomes loose; follow this instruction by the power of medicine, and give him the meat as we have previously mentioned, in such a way that the meat is at first subtle; when it begins to recover, it should be coarse. And it is customary for the shoulder and leg to be reset within forty days of the whole thing; then it should be removed and a bath and ointments administered to the wound to heal it. If the incision is ugly and swollen, wait longer to remove it, up to one month.
of the break of the arm
The arm consists of two bones, which are called the "ulna" and the "radius", of which one is small, and this one forms the little finger; and the other is large, and this one is below, near the little finger joint; sometimes only the larger ulna bone breaks, or only the smaller radius bone, and sometimes both.
When only the small ulna bone is broken, the restoration is easy and the healing; but when the large bone is broken, the healing is bad, and more difficult than when both bones are broken. If it is only the small ulnar bone that is broken, then it must be slightly extended, and aligned properly.
And if it is the larger bone that is broken, then it must be pulled more strongly; and extend it by one cubit, and raise the finger of the hand higher than the others, and the small fingers lower than the others, and the patient should cross himself on his own, and place a cushion in front of him higher than himself, so that the patient does not suffer any pain; then stretch the assistants arms below to the part under his hand or one joint, and another assistant above. And then align the bones according to their best form.
And if it is broken in pieces, put each part back into its place, and if none of them can be properly set, cut off the bone, as we have said before.
And if with the breaking there is an open wound, I have spoken of it in the specific chapter; take care of the wound.
If in the beginning of setting there are pus-filled sores, apply a thin cloth made of rosin and white wax, neither too hard nor too soft; cover it subtly with one cloth until the sores have subsided. Then remove the rosin, and put the plaster of flour from the mill along with egg white on top, then place the splints; make sure that the splints at the site of the break are slightly longer and wider than the others. Remember that there should be seven or more splints in various positions: whether the break is in one bone or two. Tighten the splints more above the break than elsewhere, and do not loosen them for too long, as I said at the beginning of the chapter; ensure that the cloths covering the break are soft and moist, and neither hard nor rough; and let the threads, which secure it, be of linen, not too thick or too thin, as we have said. And examine the member and the ligament after several days. If any bad accidents happen to a member, such as itching that happens in a member, then you must irrigate the member with hot water until the itching is alleviated; and let the member not rest. Then begin the binding again, and if the ligaments are worn out and the bones are dislocated, and similar things, advise accordingly.
If the narrowing of the orifices cannot come to the member because it is too narrow, then you must soften it a little, and let it be for some days until the narrowing passes, and then bind it.
If none of the things that we have mentioned come to the patient, then do not loosen him for up to twenty days. Or if around that time, his hands go to his neck and his necks are equal, and he guards against movement and displacement, and sleeps on his back; know that this break is restored in thirty or forty days, and possibly in twenty days, according to the compositions and complexions of the virtues.
Of the fracture of the hand
The fracture at the back of the hand and the fingers happens rarely, but it often occurs many times.
And when the palm of the hand is fractured or bent, the patient should lie with his back straight and evenly on the ground; then place his hand on a cloth stretched out, and the attendant should extend the broken bones and align them with mirrors so they are well joined; apply the plaster and bandages if an abscess does not form, then insert a splint according to the size of the fracture, and wrap it in one linen cloth.
And if the fracture is around the side of the palm near the abdomen, make a splint from cloths and instruct the patient to strap it to his fractured hand; then bind it with a long cloth, and make the splint as wide as the palm of the hand, and tighten it as necessary.
And if the fracture is at the edge, it should be that you place a splint above, and another below in the heel, so that the hand remains open and straight, then tie it all around the hand, and bandage the ligament between the fingers.
And if the fracture occurs in any of the fingers, whether it is the thumb, it should be equalized as needed; and hold with the heel, and if you see that you place a small straight splint to lift the fracture, and do not let it move; and if the fracture is in other fingers, such as the index or one of the others, equalize it, and bind it with the healthy finger that follows; or tie them all together in one place, for movement is worthless, or place a splint on top, such as a thumb; and take care in the healing and positioning of the abscess, and treat what comes, as I have said.
broken ankle
The bones of the thigh are often broken, and it is clearly seen when it twists forward and backward; and the restoration is as follows: one ligament above the break, and another below. And the patient lies on his face, then each minister extends his ligament equally to its place; and this is when the break is within the bone.
If the break is near the root of the thigh, one ligament should be towards the shin, and the other ligaments below the break. And if it is near the knee, then the ligaments should be located at the knee, and the extension should be down; then adjust the bone with both hands so that it is in its natural shape, and then apply the splint, and bind it, unless pus comes out.
And if there is an abscess that is hot, let it cool down first, then return to your work and treatment; the procedure is done in this manner. You should bend the leg upwards, bind it firmly in two or three layers, and leave the excess material outside. Then rotate the leg so that the heels come to the root of the thigh, put one long pin between the thigh and the leg below the knee, remove the knee cap, and bring the tip of the pin above; then rotate the leg upwards on both the leg and the thigh, bind the splint again, and place a splint over the bone of the leg; then use woolen fabric to make the binding equal around the area where the leg is bound, then start tying four or five turns around the splint. As you progress higher on the splint, loosen the binding. Take the two pins that you inserted between the leg and thigh, bind four more splints over them, then go back to the bottom of the pin, dislocate it if necessary so it doesn't move from its place, leave it like that; there should not be any abscess or swelling, or other such things.
If there is a fracture, straighten it and align what comes out, as we have said many times; if there are pieces of bone that protrude, they should be cut off if possible; if not, the area should be broken and the fragments removed; treat it as we have said until it heals.
And sometimes the thigh is broken in such a way as if iron stakes are inserted into it, just like the shoulder and arm; however, in the restoration, this does not alarm the patient.
Know that the thigh is restored within one day, or a little more or less, according to the various complexions.
of the groin area
Know that in the groin area there are few breaks, but it dislocates many times. And if it breaks, it is not only a fracture, but rather a fissure or rupture, and it involves all wounds, has pain, and this is felt very much.
And the restoration is when one equalizes that which is rounded at its joints until it can be moved assembled; then place the splint, and put in a round peg, if you need it, and tighten it as needed, then check all the arrangements we have said in other breaks, such as abscesses, boils, and other similar ones; put at each accident that which is needed for it, until it is healed.
of the leg fracture
Know that the leg has two bones, of which one is called "the humerus" directly and the other "the radius"; and it happens just as a fracture in the arm occurs, and therefore the restoration is similar to that of the arm, and the work is all the same.
And if both bones are broken together, then the leg turns in all directions.
If the thin bone is broken, it turns forward.
If the large bone is broken, it causes great pain and can be seen; it turns underneath. Then apply traction, make it straight, and tie the splints equally; but if the fracture is misaligned or has multiple pieces, the traction should be less and lighter, and align it according to your skill.
And when you have completed your task, take two fists full of straw that will brace the leg on one side and the other, and be as long as the leg from the knee downwards; then wrap it in two layers, one above and one below, and tie it in a knot so that the leg cannot tilt to the right or left, and thus it is good; and no one should administer one bandage of straw for the length of the leg, and it should be tied together, and the leg will be immobilized for movement, and properly made at the break where there is injury; move the leg every day to see if there is an abscess or another accident; heal it until it heals.
of the broken bones of the foot
At the ankle, there is no breakage, but the bones of the foot sometimes have a break and the toes may be broken, and there is no fear but they are crushed in many positions.
And if there is a fracture in the bone of the foot, and you see one bone rise above the other, then place the patient on his back as if he wanted to walk, and then place your foot on the patient's stomach where the bones are elevated, and press as much as necessary until they return to their places; then place a splint and padding on it, and place a small board with two flat cups under the affected foot, then pull the bandages around it, and do other things that you need.
And after four or five days have passed, undo the bandage, for you will find the bones aligned, either fractured or dislocated.
And if either of the bones is fractured, restore it as we have said for the fingers of the hand; then place a splint on the fractured bone according to its length, and it should be slightly wider; then place under it the board that I mentioned, and pull it towards the fracture site; and if there are two or more fractures, break them, placing a splint on each fracture, wrapped in one linen cloth, and secure the board under the foot; and ensure that the top of the board is facing the abdomen of the foot, covering it well.
And you must not forget other things that I have said about other fractures, from what we have said; and treat each accident according to its need.
of the bone of the finger
When the female bone is broken, let her sit with her thighs apart, then incline her to the back part and hold her from behind; then fill the hollow of the nature (pelvis) with cotton, and put as much as a large stone in it; then spread her legs, and lift up the buttocks little by little, and push the cotton until it reaches the entrance of the nature (vagina), and the bone returns with the stone; when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has urinated, replace it, and do this for 7 days or more: the fracture will be restored, and if you see, take a bladder of a goat, and tie a string to it, and push the entire bladder into the nature; then blow into the string forcefully, so that the bladder inflates within: the nature will return to its place; then fill it with cotton, and leave it like this for some days until it is healed.
And when the bone of the thumb (for man or woman) is broken, restore it as we have said in the "humerus"; and these breaks should not be hidden from him who puts his study and skill to use regarding them and pays attention to my book. For the fractures signify many different ways of restoration: therefore, take note.
In the arm, when it is broken, take an owl's gullet and insert the arm into it; then wrap cloths around it, and leave it for three days or so, and it will heal quickly.
of fracture with wound
It is necessary for the one who has a fracture with an open wound, whether it is large or not, such as the bone of the leg or shoulder or similar, that it should be set now, as the testimonies of the healings that we have mentioned show.
And if the wound is healed, then apply vitriol to it, if you have nothing else; then begin to set the fracture in that same hour, or continue on that day, if no abscess comes.
And if abscesses arise, wait until the ninth day, allowing them to be pacified, and do not touch it on the third or fourth day, for you will bring about a bad event.
And if the bone breaks and appears exposed at the surface of the wound, it should be set gently with light pressure and in a slightly extended position.
And if the tendons are not prepared for setting in an equal position to your hands, you must align it with this tool made of iron, which is 7 or 8 inches long and the width is according to the size of the wound; therefore, the mirror should grasp 3 or 4 fingers, according to what is needed in each bone-setting procedure; and let it be round and somewhat large so that it does not bend under pressure on the member during your work, and sharp at the front and thick from the middle forward, like this:
It is called "palainche", which means that the curved bones should be placed on top of the bone's exposed surface; then push it once until it returns to its original position and align them with each other. If the fracture is subtle, and the tool cannot firmly grasp the bone, it may be necessary to cut the bone's tip, so that the tool can hold it.
And if you cannot reset the bone as we have said, strike it with an appropriate instrument, either chisel or saw, within your power; then remove that which is immobile in the bone with sharpness and small shavings.
When the bone is reset and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place. Do what is necessary until it is in its proper place, then moisten one linen cloth in black stitching vinegar, and clean it properly if it is summer; do not put any oiled cloth or other substance on the wound, which would cause rot and corruption; then administer ointments when you have restored the bone, leaving the wound open, and cover the surrounding area, according to the size of the wound, and be careful that the wound is not tightened with a fracture; and many times have foolish surgeons done this, and have caused either death or rot for the patient, and may the bandages be softer and more pliable than other fractures.
If the wound is large or bad and you fear that there may be a mishap, as we have said, and you find pain at the site, do not apply ointments; but wrap around it, instead of ointments, hard linen cloths and bind them. And after one day or two, if you see swelling at the wound, remove what you had placed on it and put on healing balms such as tetraformula and similar.
And it is necessary that you dislocate the member twice a day, in the morning and at evening, until it is healed and healthy.
And the limbs should be set straight in this manner so that the bones are aligned lightly downwards.
And if it passes many days and the bone cannot heal but instead bows back, since there are small pieces of bone, therefore you must try to open the wound and remove all the loose pieces that cause pain.
And if a fistula or some other form of corruption occurs, you must treat it according to what is mentioned in the previous chapter. When the bone is broken and open on the limb, such as the thigh bone or shoulder bone, or similar large bones, do not drain it, for many times death may come; however, leave it until it can be drained; perhaps it will heal by itself after twenty days or thirty. Then, if you can, cure the wound; and if you cannot, let it be.
The arriving bruises on the sore
Often times after the breaking of health, especially near the joint, it is a horrible sight to see the figure of the limb; and by chance, the limb cannot perform its natural work.
Take care then of yourself: if we are to administer medicines such as aloes, incense, myrrh, and sarcocola, acacia, and similar others, in such a way that you take one of these things or all together and crush them with sharp wine or with vinegar or egg white; and put it on the sore in poultices, and press it well, and do not remove it for many days; then you dislocate it, and repeat another, as long as the nodulation is removed; or you strain over a piece of plank well made; because the property of the plank is that it removes all swellings from the limbs. And if the nodation has already become hard like stone, and it needs to be removed, you chop it off, and make the superfluity apparent; or you shave it with a sharp razor, as long as it is removed, and cure it until it is healed.
When the bone fracture is restored and remains after the members are weak and delicate, it happens for many reasons: one of them being that it was tied too tightly and not as needed; or because there were too many ligaments, and the nutrients could not reach the member; or due to excessive arrows; or due to excessive movements, not at the right time; or because there is little blood in the body, so it is weak.
And the treatment is that you make the patient eat, and make the body become thin, until the blood multiplies in him; then administer a bath, and give him joy and pleasure; afterwards put ointment on the member, so that the ointment attracts great nutrients to it, and the sore often gets hot with cold water, until the nutrients reach the member; and return to its natural shape.
twisted limb after health
When the limbs are twisted after restoration and the bones broken open, and the shape of the limb is ugly, nevertheless its natural function does not perish; do not believe the foolish who say one must break the limb anew, and many fools have done this in our land; and this practice is blamed, and it brings great harm, and perhaps death; however, if the nodes and tortures are fresh, then they should be soothed with hot water or softening herbs such as comfrey leaves, radishes, medicks, and similar things; also, make a poultice of mollifying medicines such as daqiu, and take musk from the comfrey plant, mix it with gum elm or sesame oil, and apply a poultice; or you may take ripe figs, grind them with wheat bran, and similar medicines that alleviate pain.
And sometimes the node is removed by rubbing continuously and for a long time with moist hands. Bring movement to the limb every hour.
And if the tortuosity is growing and hardening, as stone, it requires to be cauterized, it should be covered up to the bone, making a subtle incision gently; and place moss and cotton in the treatment.
Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation occurs to someone, it is now necessary to return it without delay.
For if one delays, the joint swells, and perhaps it can be reset to its place; therefore, it is not advisable to move it until the hour when it has subsided: many times it causes pus and other pain.
Furthermore, when this occurs, you should clean the patient, then let it rest until all abscesses have subsided; then raise the limb with warm water and oil, then gently reset the dislocation, and heal each member according to its location.
And I have arranged the chapters on dislocations of the neck down to the feet.
The jaws
It sometimes happens that the jaws are dislocated from their places, and the dislocations of both are according to two manners: either they are somewhat disjointed from their places and softened a little; or they are completely dislocated, hanging towards the lower part, and causing the saliva to flow out of the mouth which it cannot hold, nor can it close its mouth, and envelops its tongue with speech.
When the dislocation is small, it often returns by various means.
And if it is complete and fully developed, you must quickly reset it, without delay;
And in such a way that the attendant holds the head of the patient, and presses one of his hands into the root of the dislocation of the lower jaw within the mouth, if the dislocation is in two parts; and the other hand should be spread out, to make it even; and instructs the patient to soften, his lower jaws, and move them in all directions.
And the hand is made even, until it returns to its place.
And if it is difficult to return, it is the same if it is both lower jaws together, you anoint them with hot water and oil, until they are easily reset; do not rush to return, as we have said.
And when they are reset equally, the patient's mouth should be closed and warm oil and wax paste (balm) applied to cover it lightly with many threads.
and the patient should sleep on his back, with his arms between two pillows so that they do not move to either side nor make an effort to move, but he should take light meat until the pain subsides, and his jaws should be tied.
and then he should eat lightly as he wishes but not strain himself in opening the mouth to eat or drink until the jaws are bound and healed.
And if the two jawbones cannot be set right again within an hour and are not returned to their places, fever and common sweats come, and possibly abdominal rupture, and possibly vomiting of clear bile.
And when you see this, then know that it is destruction; and many times he who experiences this dies within eight days.
of the collarbone
The forceps cannot dislocate inside the ribcage due to continuity and pain, and it is occasionally dislocated outward, and this is felt.
And the restoration is that the patient lies supine on his back and extends his arms; then presses the joint with your palm and it will return; then put on the traction device (emphaustrum) and bind it tightly.
And the shoulder that is facing towards the side cannot be dislocated; if it can, and if it occasionally dislocates, then reset it to its place as we have said; then put on the traction device (emphaustrum) and bind it tightly, and instruct the patient to rest until he is well.
And likewise, the head of the shoulder is returned when it is dislocated from its place.
The dislocation of the shoulder
Know that the shoulder is dislocated in only four ways: one is when it dislocates at the socket below; and the second is at the hip part; and occasionally dislocates above, but this rarely happens.
and it does not dislocate behind the shoulder, nor inside through the nerves; and it often dislocates below towards the socket, particularly in those with little flesh, for they can easily dislocate it; but in those with enough flesh, it dislocates little, and returns little.
And sometimes happens to some men, a blow or fracture occurs, and the shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and they think it is dislocated by this.
Therefore, you must verify it, as long as you are certain; then begin the treatment.
Dislocation is known when it is turned towards the socket, and there is a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find obvious differences between them. And you will find in the shoulder blade a hollow, and under it press gently on the head of the shoulder, as if it were an egg; and the patient cannot return their hand to its place, nor make any movements.
And if it is dislocated upwards, do not cover it up, for you can verify it by pressing on it;
And this method of dislocation is not difficult to reset when it is new or if the child is ill.
And the manner is that the minister raises the patient's hand high, then places his palms underneath it, and forces the joint upwards to its place; and the minister raises the hand, and extends it upwards, then puts it down; it will come back quickly.
And if it does not come as we have said in hands for several days, then the patient should be bathed in hot water; and bring him a soothing and comforting salve, such as a decotion of althea and fenugreek and melilot in water, and give it to him.
Then lay the patient on his back, and place an equal piece of linen under it, neither too soft nor too hard, then the physician should put his foot on the linen, and correctly pull the head of the shoulder out, and pull the hand of the patient.
And another minister ties down the head of the patient so it does not move forward; that shoulder will return immediately, and if you see that you can reset it in this way:
and be present one man who is larger than the patient; and be straight towards the cost side, and push the shoulder under the patient's armpit, and raise the armpit upwards, so that the patient hangs on a rope. and another minister pulls the hand of the patient towards the belly. And if the patient is too light, then take some weighty thing with him, and the dislocation returns immediately.
And it is also reset in another way: and it is one long needle that is inserted into the ground, such that the head of the shoulder is as round as a pea, and not too thick nor too thin. Then it should be placed under the patient, but with soft linen over it, and the patient should be standing upright; then his hand on the other side should be stretched out in a form, and the joint will return to its place quickly.
and if it does not return with all these things that we have said, then perform this treatment: take a needle of two hands width long and four fingers wide, which has a rounded head for entering deeply under the joint, according to this form:
Then lay the patient on the bed with a soft pillow beneath, so as not to hurt him, then place the patient's shoulder under the patient's armpit; extend one arm above the post, and hold the dislocated shoulder above the post, and the arm near the wrist to the patient's head, then place another arm on one side of a broad beam of a door, and let the hands hang down below, and leave the body hanging from the other side; the joint will then be put back in place.
And when it is in place, in whatever manner that may be, you must put an equal-sized cloth under the armpit, then sprinkle the splint prepared with mill powder, along with incense and egg yolk, all over the shoulder and around it, then tighten the bandage under the armpit accordingly, and twist the cord over the splint, and embrace the hand at its neck, and let the hands remain in this position.
And it must be fed a little amount of food, as long as the limb is comfortable, for it will heal faster; and then feed more after 5 or 7 days, and move it; and if it remains firm and does not become soft, it is healed.
And if the joint is out of its place due to moisture or for another reason, then you must administer three cauteries as stated in the chapter on cauteries.
And if you do all this, and it dislocates again after 7 days, and the joint does not stay in place and cannot lift the arm above, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is either compressed or stretched or weakened; and know that the joint will never be set in its place.
The dislocation that is toward the hip, and the buttocks or backside, is caused by impact and stretching of hands, and another treatment may be applied; and care should be taken until it heals.
And after the healing of the member comes swelling, and it moves slowly, then let the patient use baths many times, until that swelling subsides, and returns to its original state.
The cost of dislocation is...
Know that the dislocation of joints costs [to] be dislocated at points, and it costs [to] return to its place; and if it has been dislocated from all sides, and both before and behind, and the dislocations are not repaired because it is clearly seen and felt; and it is dislocated according to each figure. And when you join the diseased joint with the healthy one, then it can be seen clearly. For the joint is dislocated, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch the shoulder at all.
And it is necessary that you reset [the dislocation] thus when abscesses come, for if abscesses come, it would be difficult to reset; and perhaps it cannot be set back into place entirely, especially when it is at the rear; it is worth more than other dislocations, and it is of greater pain, and perhaps death comes there.
And the restoration is such that you stretch out your hand to your two hands; and the arms should be spread out, and the hands should be placed on the mirror according to the outline around it, above and below, and push the joint to its sockets or root of the palm until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is at the front, it will return when you fold your hand over your hand and push from the root of the palm that is dislocated.
And if it does not want to return to its place, administer strong traction; and it is that two ministers extend the arm, and they mark it with two ministers, so that it does not move during traction; then turn the arm on both sides, then when you have wrapped a double large cloth around it;
and when the minister joins the joint with his hand, oil it to soften the jointure, then push the jointure firmly until it returns.
and when it is in place, put dry plaster with egg on it and hold it firmly, and wrap the arm around the neck of the patient, and leave it for some days, then release it.
And if the joint is in its place, break the ligament and leave it; and if you see that the joint does not hold well, repeat the manipulation and the ligament, and leave it like this for some days until it is firmly set; then release it.
And if there is pain after the repositioning of the joint and it becomes swollen, bathe and rub it well and press until it is soothed; or place a woolen bandage around the joint, leave it for one day and one night, then remove it, and make it enter a bath. and when it weeps, rub the joint gently, then place the bandage back on, and then enter into a bath; and do this 2 or 3 times until it is healed; and if you see, place warm moist sheep's wool with butter on it, and hold it in place; it will return to its position.
The dislocation of the hand
The dislocation of the wrist is light, more so than other joints; it should be returned to its place quickly, immediately when it is dislocated, unless the limb is swollen or there is hot abscess nearby.
And the repositioning is that you place the affected hand on a table, and extend the fingers of the hand, and align the mirror so it matches, with the palm facing the appearance of the jointure, and push until it returns.
Therefore, you must make sure it is in the right place; then the patient should place the back of their hand on a table for extension and repositioning. And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, place the patient's hand on the table, and make the affected person put their other hand on the appearance of the joint. If it returns now, that is good.
If not, apply a plaster to soothe and heal the abscesses, and let it remain in this way until it begins to improve.
And if the person cannot tolerate it and you cannot put it back in place after some days, then the dislocated joint remains displaced.
And the patient must not feel heat except as long as his hand is paralyzed and cannot grasp anything: therefore know that the nerves are cut or the arteries; there is no other means of healing but to tighten with fire cautery in this case, and perhaps nothing else has value.
And when the hand is in place, place the plaster that we have said upon it, then press and leave for five days, then release and leave so.
And if it cannot move well and there is no swelling, wet with hot water and rub until it is healed.
Of the dislocation of the fingers on the hand
The fingers on the hand are occasionally dislocated from both sides, occasionally at the back of the palm or the front.
Then bend the finger and push the dislocation towards your palm until it returns, then hold the finger's head and turn it towards the part where it is dislocated.
and leave it for two days, then equalize it on the third day; and bind it, as we have said, and loosen it from time to time, make it move, and tie it again; do this frequently until it is straight.
And similarly do [the same], if it is dislocated in the abdomen of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it heals; and similarly do when it is dislocated from another place.
for the dislocation of the vertebrae of the back
When the vertebrae of the back or neck are dislocated, if there is no cure for it, then death quickly approaches the patient.
And the signs are that excretions leap out involuntarily, they cannot be held in, and many times the limbs become swollen, such as the two legs or the two arms or one.
And many times the spinal column moves at four parts; that which moves towards the back is called "gibbosity".
The cure is that you check if gibbosity has come from childhood; if there is no remedy or healing from it at all.
And that which comes from falling or blows or similar things, the old ways of healing used to be spoken of in grand words, but it has not proven to be of great benefit.
However, I have shortened (abridged) it according to my intention and have created instruments in various ways.
I say that in the gland (or swelling) which comes before, there is no remedy nor health.
and the same one that comes directly in two sides, and there is no cure for it except the one that comes at the back, as I say;
and it is that the patient should be extended on his face in one even position, and have pressure under him to prevent him from bleeding;
then insert one pin into the head of the patient in the ground and another at the feet, and tie a rope around the ankles, thighs, knees, and shins of the patient;
And two ministers know the ligaments, one at the head and the others at the feet, among the four tendons;
And let them be well closed, the tendons as we have said, and the mirror place his hands on the spine, until it returns.
And if it does not return by this treatment, take a board four arms long and rounded at the bottom, and place the patient on his side, and push the end of the board under the bottom, then put the middle part of the board on the spine. And place the mirror's feet on the other end of the board and press hard until it returns to its place; and if you see that it does not, use the wheel that turns by hand.
And you insert two splinters into the head of the patient's large arm and towards the joints of two others, and between each splinter, inside and out, a palm-width space.
And in each splinter, there should be a pin, or a turning key, and the splinters should be firmly fixed in the ground so that they do not move; and between two splinters should be another splinter rotating, like keys, and in two rotating splinters, there should be two small pins of a palm-width length to turn the dislocated joint.
and then tie the rope that is among the joints to the dislocated joint toward the head, and another rope toward the joint at the other dislocation, and each of the servants turns their dislocated joint with all the rope, and the master sets the splinter equally as we have said.
And when it is even, place a drying plaster on it with abundant egg, then bandage it, and then apply a hot iron rod of three fingers in length, which penetrates the area of swelling and the healthy part of the spine, then tie it with a rope, as we have said, and use the patient with gentle heat until it is healed;
and if anything comes at the end of healing, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines along with the iron rod as we have said before; and sometimes a splint is also used.
and sometimes the appearance comes at the back of the spine, and it is believed to be dislocation; but this is the bone that opens, so one should not make any presumptions; for by chance it might bring death.
of the shoulder dislocations
Note that dislocations of the shoulder and the joints of the arm only come from dislocations, and not in other joints; and the joint of the shoulder is dislocated in four ways: inside and outside, front and back; more on the inside, and less so in front and behind.
And the knowledge of its dislocation inside is that when the sick joint (shoulder) is joined with the healthy one, it is longer and more open than the healthy one, and the sick person cannot bend their knee at the fire. And it is the loosened shoulder joint that becomes inflamed from abscesses due to this cause, because the hip joint comes there.
And the sign of him to whom it happens to swell, is that this incident is contrary to those before.
And the signs of him whose leg is swollen, are that it is straight according to the completion; however, it does not double at the knee due to pain, and if you wish to make it walk, it cannot do so beforehand, and it retains its urine, and when he walks, it passes over the heel.
And the signs of him whose back hurts, are that he cannot stretch his knee or bend it, and this leg is more twisted than the other, and the ankle is swollen, and the hip is located under the ribs.
The corrections for this type of dislocation are as follows: examine if the dislocation is old and remains in its position without treatment; and there should be no presumption about it.
And in the case of fresh dislocation, which is of four types of dislocations, you should act quickly by turning the joint and pushing it inward and outward, and move it left and right; if it returns, it will not need any other treatment.
If it does not return in this manner, then you should call upon one strong minister and hold the leg firmly with two hands, or tie a rope around the thigh. And another minister extends his hand over it in such a way that he presses his hands beneath the buttocks, then tightens a rope-like thing on the calf; and another grasps the head of the rope.
And they all extend upwards and downwards at the same time, until the patient is raised from the ground once, and remains hanging.
This manner of extension is common for the four similar cases, and if the dislocation returns, as we have said, it is well.
If the shoulder is not dislocated, treatment for its similarity is required. When the dislocation is at the front, you should remember to elevate the patient on his unaffected side, then place the rope around the root of the thigh and the joint that is beneath the armpit, then pull the rope upward towards the armpit and towards the shoulder;
Then take another assistant by the hands and embrace the swollen thigh of the affected shoulder, and stretch it out forward in this manner: it will return to its place now; and this method of dislocation is easier than others.
And if you cannot fix it in this manner as we have said, then you must tie the two legs of the patient together with a strong rope above the heels and knees, and the affected leg should be extended two feet more than the others;
Then let him be suspended by a rope around his neck and above the ground there should be two long arms; then instruct one servant to embrace the thigh, and another servant holding with the patient, who will hold the thigh in place, for the joint is coming back quickly now.
And when the dislocation is on the outside, let the patient lie down as we have said in that which has swollen up, and draw one cord around the sick leg properly, and also around the thigh.
Then place two cords, one at the head and the other at the feet, then insert one cord between the thighs in the patient's groin area; And place moist cloths around it to prevent the patient from bleeding, then extend each of the limbs towards him, and with one hand equalize the dislocation for the other.
If it returns, that is good. If not, place him on a table, press as we have said in the swelling, and lie the patient on the healthy side.
And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to extend the sick leg as quickly as possible, and according to what I have said; and put the hand on the sick angle, then press with the other hand, and move it downward towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is at the back, it should not be extended downward nor raised above ground, instead, it should be as if the patient were lying on a bed with both shoulders dislocated, as we have said in the treatment of double-shouldered patients. and lie on his back, and the limb should be extended as we have said before, and it must press against the joint at the table.
and when the patient extends his legs and they are even, then adjust the knees, place the splint, and bind with a strap so that the shoulder does not move.
And it rests for three or four days, then dislocate it, place a splint on it; and if you see that they are even, hold steady as before, and let it be. For three days; then dislocate it again, and make it walk well, until the limb is comforted.
Of the dislocation of the knee
The knee joint is dislocated in three ways: inside and outward, behind; do not dislocate it forward.
And the signs are that you instruct the patient to bend his leg at his knee, and if it does not bend at the knee, understand that it is dislocated.
and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit straight, and extend his leg if he can, and put your back on his front side, and place his foot on your feet.
then take his knee with your palms, and pull it between your hands, then fold the two sides of the knee in half; and another servant extends his foot until the knees return to their place, and the signs are that it bends his leg at his knee easily.
And apply the plaster on it, and make the leg straight to the thigh, and bind them together tightly for 3 or 4 days, then release; and do not let the patient walk, until the limbs are comfortable.
And if the limbs are not straight, administer strong traction, as we have said in the treatment of the hernia, until it is healed.
of the ankle dislocation
The heels are sometimes crushed, and sometimes fully dislocated, both inside and out.
And the signs show that the ankle is swollen, and it tends forward towards the part where it is dislocated:
The reduction is slight, and it should be done gently when only crushed.
And when it is fully dislocated, you must have the patient sit straight and hold two assistants on the leg above the ankle.
Then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and then with your left hand twice, then lift it up, and push the foot upward firmly.
And do this twice as we said, pulling and pushing the foot; if it returns, that's good; if not, start over, for it will return.
and if it still cannot return in this way, place the patient on his back on the ground and make a firm hole in the ground between his knees, and tie strips of cloth around so that the patient does not bleed.
Then the ministers mark the thigh, and another minister extends the leg to his hands or to the first joint, so that he lies on top of the leg's neck; Each minister extends equally, and the patient should remain between the thighs of the ministers to hold the patient when stretching him.
Then the doctors equalize the dislocation in their hands, and another minister holds the healthy leg below it, and the dislocation will return quickly.
And when it is in place, put the plaster and cotton on it, and press firmly, tie the leg to the thigh, and watch the nerves that are above the calf, so that the ligatures are not too tight.
Leave it for 2 or 3 days, and if the ligaments soften, hold them tight; then release it on the third day or the fourth, and make the patient walk for four days; And if it goes past that term, it is not certain that it will not dislocate again.
And if an abscess has come, it is necessary that you appease it, as we have said elsewhere, until it is healthy.
The two (hands/arms)
When the limbs are dislocated, they must be very carefully extended without any effort, and it is an easy matter.
And if the dislocation is in any part of the back or the thighs, you must make the patient sit on a flat surface or table upright and place your foot against that part where the jointure opens. Then press firmly with your foot until it goes back into its original position.
And when it is leveled and there is no gap, if you place a table with two legs under the sole of your foot, press firmly on it, leave it for four hours, then release it, and let it rest until it is healed.
of wounds and dislocations together
When a wound comes with dislocation, and it is to be restored, many times the patient dies.
do not be presumptuous in the cure, unless you are wise in the art and have used it for a long time, and if you are not compassionate, merciful, and patient, do not be bold.
and first use soothing ointments for abscesses that are hot, and leave the patient in the hands of God if you see no hope of health. And when you see hope, then reset the limb to its place, so that the abscess heals.
and when the limb is in place, administer things that soothe the abscess, and treat the wound, as needed, with hot poultices.
If with the dislocation there is a fracture and small bones are displaced, fix them, and do as we have said in simple diseases.
And keep away from entering into fear, as I have said, for it will harm you according to your Creator, and for the wisdom of your arms and body. Amen
