I have completed this book for you, most dear son, which is the conclusion of the science of medicine together with its contents, and I have finished it by means of explanations and declarations. And it came to me in a vision that I would complete this for you with this treatise, which is the work of hands, namely "surgery".
And because the work of hands is prohibited in our region and foreign to all things everywhere, the science and art are perishing and decaying, and nothing remains of it that the hands have not changed from the ancient descriptions in books. And from this comes errors and vanity, and intentions are closed and knowledge is distant.
It seems that I will bring it to life together with the arrangement of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will come together with the forms of fire cauterization instruments, and other tools of work along with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation of them, as necessary.
And because no good master of hands is found in our times, the art of medicine has grown distant. And one who undertakes this must be summoned in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, until he knows the judgment of limbs, their forms and connections and separations, and have knowledge of bones and nerves and joints and the number of bones, and the movement and rest of veins and arteries, and the location of their exit.
And so Hippocrates says that "nothing with nothing is something," and the same applies in the art of surgery.
We tell you in the opening of this book that one who is not knowledgeable about the aforementioned things should be careful lest he err and cut men; as I have seen many times those who engage in this science, abandoning their science and sense.
For I saw a foolish man who cut one abscess from the neck of a woman and cut the arteries of her neck; hence so much blood came out that the woman fell dead in her hands.
And I saw another man who pulled out a stone from an old man, and the stone was large; with it, he took a piece of his bladder, and the man died within four days.
And I had already been called upon to treat it, and saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and knew well that if they cut into it, he would die.
And there was another doctor who treated a duke of our land who had his leg broken, and with the break there was a wound; and the doctors in ignorance set the break above the wound by strong force, and did not leave any splint at the wound, and left it in this state; and he commanded that it should not be released; and it remained like this until the leg swelled completely and the feet came to ruin.
I was summoned to come to him, and I hurried to come and release the leg; and when I released it, it was peaceful and felt no pain.
But the corruption of the limb was already confirmed and could not be healed; and the corruption did not stop going through the limb until the entire limb was destroyed.
And a second person who collapses an abscess, enlarges it, and then sets it on fire due to the wickedness of his authority.
For a chancer, when it is filled with melancholic humor, one must not touch it with iron unless it is in such a place that all can be removed that has been corrupted.
And for this reason, dear son, it is necessary that you know that the work of hands is divided into two divisions: one in which there is danger in many positions; and I will show in each part of this book where there is fear and danger.
Because it is necessary that you take care of yourself, so that foolish people cannot speak ill of you.
Take your weapons in custody, and begin with your patients gently but firmly, and use the best method so that by God's grace you come to salvation and be praised; leave aside diseases full of great suffering; remove your weapons from that which causes doubt, and have faith within you so that you can come from this world to the other of glory.
Galen warns in some of his admonitions: "Do not take care of evil disease, lest you be called a foolish man."
I have devised this treatment according to three chapters.
The first chapters are on fire cauteries and counter-cauteries for ague, and they are arranged from head to foot; also concerning the shapes of instruments, and the tools for fire cautery, and everything necessary in this work.
The second chapters are about cutting and piercing, and about draining and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things; also arranged and concerning the shapes of instruments.
The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; it is ordered from the head down to the feet, and the forms of the instruments.
Furthermore, as we remember of the work, it is necessary that I tell you the quality of the aid and the harm of each complexion.
I say that the qualities of the aid and harm are the longest words and subtle science and secret answers; and many wise ones spoke of this, and agreed on it; and they do not satisfy much by their words, for I will shorten the length.
I say that cautery helps universally in all constitutions where there is matter, whether it be of the two constitutions: namely hot constitution with matter, and dry constitution with matter.
In the hot and dry constitution along with matter, some have spoken and said that cautionery is of great help; and others say the opposite: that cautionery is not useful for disease caused by heat and dryness.
For the nature of fire is hot, and should not be used to cure a hot disease by heat or dryness; and he who said the opposite stated that cautionery provides great help for hot and dry diseases in human bodies. For when you examine the body of man and its heat to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
And I agree with this statement. For I have found it to be true on one occasion through experience.
And every way, do not interfere unnecessarily except for those who have tested it and know through long experience the chapter of cauterizations, and the diversity of the complexions of men, and their dispositions and causes of illnesses, and the occurrences and duration of time; we are not afraid of other complexions, especially in cold and moist illnesses. And all the attendants assembled and agreed upon the cautery.
And know, son, that a fire cautery is one of the secrets of healing, and of greater goodness than a burning medicine cautery.
For fire is simple, and it affects only the member that is burned, and it harms no other member unless named.
Burning medicines come from one member to another in spreading, and they bring diseases of severe healing to the sick member; and perhaps they kill the patient.
The fire for its high temperature and the goodness of its substance does not do it if there is no excess.
And this I have found by experience and through the length of service and study that I have put in the art, and it was above the truth about things; and for this reason, I excuse myself from the length of speech, since I do not want to deprive you of the secret which is hidden concerning fire, and the quality of the work, how it vanquishes diseases of the body, as the philosopher says in demonstration; now receive it in your thoughts.
And know, son, that they agreed on what time the cauteries should be performed and chose companions.
And I say that cautery is appropriate in all times, because the harm occurring is hidden below with the help of cautery; and especially if the cauteries are necessary for pain that cannot be delayed until a greater evil may come to the member.
Do not ever think, dear child, as the foolish do; for a sickness that is healed by cautery has no return; and they say it thus; but it is not so as they believe, because cauteries are not only medicine that changes the complexion, but also dries up the humors that cause pain, and its power is quicker than medicine, and by the virtue of its work and authority.
And sometimes the sickness comes according to the complexion of the patient and the nature of the disease and its power; and superfluidities are collected within it by the consumption of foods and similar things, unless cauteries are administered in that location where there is little superfluity and moisture, such as cauteries for pain, and similar things; but this does not prevent the pain from returning, but it happens rarely.
And many people do not understand why cauteries are called the rear of medicine, but this is true; however, they do not believe that cauteries are useful after medicine, but their beliefs are false, and cauteries are the rear of medicine because when we administer methods of cure in any disease and they do not work, then we administer cautery, and it works. Therefore, it is clear that cauteries are the rear of medicine, not according to the beliefs of foolish masters.
The ancients said that cauteries made of gold are more effective than iron, and they did not say this because of the quality of gold or the nobility of its substance; rather, they said that the metal of a cautery does not promote pus, but this is not true, for I have tested it, and found that it is true in some men; and cauteries made of gold are more effective than iron, as they say.
And in any case, when you heat [something] intensely with gold, you do not know when it is heated by the color of the gold, and soon it cools down; and if it is overheated, it burns; thus there is enough hindrance to it.
And for that reason, we use the fire cautery which has been fitted to our work.
Here I order you this chapter on the head down to the feet, so that the way is easier to find.
Hot oil cautery
This cautery is beneficial for both heat and cold in the brain, and it is used to treat a disease called "soda," and various humors that descend from the head to the eyes, ears, and numerous dreams and pain in teeth and throat, and similarly for all diseases caused by cold such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar diseases.
The form of this cautery is that the patient is purged with a soluble medicine, cleansing the head for three or four days, according to what the patient's strength and the medicine's properties and the patient's accustomed can bear; then heat is applied to the back of the patient's head.
And next make the patient sit cross-legged between your hands, and place his hands on a pillow; afterwards, place the root of your palm on the root of his penis between his two eyes; and where your thumbs meet, it will bleed. Then heat the cautery called "olivare", which is described here:
And put it on the place where it bleeds, and draw and tighten your hand little by little while turning it; then remove your hand immediately, and look at the place to see if you see a small bone; and if you don't see it, continue heating the cautery as I have told you until you see the bone. Then take one pouce of oil, put it in soft and warm cotton within, and put it on the place, and leave it for four days; then put moist cotton over it; and let it remain until the burning is removed; afterwards, heal the wound with the ointment called "tetrafarmaçon" until it heals.
And the ancients said that when a wound remains open longer, it purges more; and because of this, they aid movement.
And they said to some that the fire cautery should be left so long that a part of the bone is burned, and then reset the burnt part of the bone, and heal it.
And they said to the others that the cautery should be left so long and pushed in as deeply as a verduil, which are the width of women's needles because the humors come out moist; and then it should be left open for a long time; afterwards, it should be healed and sutured.
And these two methods of cautery do not seem good to me in all things, except for those with fear; and it seems to me that I should leave them; because the chies are weakened by continuous solutions of nature, as we have seen in other members; and also when the chies of the sick person are weak by nature, the first appearance of cautery seems more beneficial and useful to me, and from this usage, I work for salvation.
From the ancient pain of the head
When chronic and long-lasting pain comes in the head, the patient should use wormwood and pills called "cochie", and of purges for the head and oils and plasters; and if they do the fire cautery as we have said before, it is not worthwhile.
Take care that the patient's head is of strong nature and not too cold; then cauterize it with a little bit more of the cautery than we have said before.
After doing the cautery on each corner of the head as we have said before, and do one cautery or two called "vasselz"; there is one leek in which ventouses are put; align your hand so that you do not see up to the bone: the patient feels much more pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak of it later; and the cauteries on the corners should be more subtle than those done on the middle part of the head, and this is its shape:
The fire cautery of the head When sudden pain occurs in one part of the head, and the illness extends to the oil, and the head is purged by medicines that cleanse, and other treatments have been performed as I have said in the division of diseases, and all this does not help: then cauteries are applied according to two methods, namely with medicine that burns and with fire.
The cautery by burning medicine is as follows: take a piece of aloes and remove the bark and cut it into two halves, one for each cheek, then make an incision in the temple where the pain is in such a way that you can place the aloe under the skin; and when it is placed, hold it firmly and leave it for twelve hours; then release it and apply the juice of the garlic to the aloe-wound, leaving the wound for two or three days; then put cotton dipped in butter on it.
After the application of ointment until it is healed; and if you see that such burning medications, which I have written or twelfth treat the burning medications, are used.
The fire cautery is of this kind. Heat the cauter iron to the shape:
And it is called "closed" because the tip is shaped like a claw or has about one finger of curvature, and in the middle it appears small; and place it on the painful spot, and hold your hand and make the iron pierce slightly, until half of the thickness of the desired depth is burned; remove your hand so that the artery does not burn, which is outside, and let abundant blood flow.
After placing cotton on the wound, leave it for 3 days; then put dampened cotton in butter, and afterwards cure the wound with ointment until it is healed; and if you wish to cauterize this migration with the cautery called "cultellare", at the tip of the blade, be careful not to hit the artery in this migration which should not be old.
from the migration
When curing migration as we have previously said in the division of diseases and it does not improve, and you see that cauterization beforehand does not help at all, then it is necessary to heat the cautery called "cultellare" until it becomes white; and hold it against the side of the wound for half a finger's length, and press once with your hand, ensuring not to hit the artery or reach the bone; be careful not to damage the jaw that cannot move when eating, and not to irritate nerves, nor for spasms to come to the patient, and beware of arterial blood leakage when it is cut, or fear greatly, especially those who do not know it, and are not studied and experienced; leave the procedure in progress; but I will tell you how to stop the bleeding when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it should be done in this book.
And if you see that this cautery does not help the illness and the patient is suffering, cauterize it near the neck as we have said, and treat the wound until it heals; and if you see, administer the cautery that we have said in the chapter on artery extraction, with a cautery having two blades; this cautery is better than that one and more helpful.
of the pain from the ears due to coldness
When the pain in the ear due to coldness persists despite medications and other treatments as we have said in the division, then heat this cautery called "poins" according to its form:
After marking all around the sick ear, or around the two where the pain is present in both, move away slightly from the root of the ear as you have indicated the spot; and place ten marks around each ear; after curing the spot until it heals.
of the torture of the mouth
A torture that is to be cured by cautery is not applicable to those that move due to phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of diseases; and do not perform a cautery on the similar conditions that come from secretion and spasm of nerves.
When you treat this type of torture that stems from the flow of idres and purges of the head and throat, which is not effective, then you must cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one in the root of the ear, another slightly beyond the temple, and the third at the corner of the lips; place the cautery in the healthy part and make it cauterize near the top of the ear a little below the skull's horn, and another in the temple as long as a finger; leave the cautery until the middle of the charcoal is burned; and this is the shape of the cautery:
And this is the shape of the scalpel that we have mentioned, but it is slightly more subtle and the blades should be a bit thicker; after curing the wound as I have previously said, ensure it is healed.
And if apoplexy is long-standing and you treat it as we have said, but it does not help, and the patient has no fever, then make four cauteries: two on the two horns of the head, one in the middle of the head, and one where the wound is called "vasselz" as we have mentioned before, and the last cautery on the mouth of the stomach; cure it as we have said before.
of cautery
For this disease, give the patient large year and pills made of refined cereal; then anoint the head of the patient with a plaster made of mustard seed, which is written or explained in the plasters chapter; and this is the method of cautery: if you do it as I said.
If it is healthy, it is good; and if not, make him undergo four cauteries of emmer at the head starting from the neck and leaving a space of two fingers between each cautery; and treat as with other diseases, and if you see any improvement, apply one cautery in the middle; and if necessary, apply two more on the temples, and treat until it is healthy; and let the cautery that is called "olive oil" be as I have previously said.
From the coldness of the head The head of the patient should be cleansed for years and as we have previously said; after that, cleanse the head of the sick man, then make a cautery in the head and one on each horn, and one behind and three on the spine of the neck; and if you need more, and the body is wet and the sick person is enduring pain, and the disease is out, make four cauterizations on the spine of the back; let it burn until the most painful part is burnt, then rinse your hand; afterwards, cure him until he is healthy, and let the cautery that is called "olivare" as we have previously said.
From the epilepsy
Epilentics should not use fire cautery except for those who are fleumatic, and it is necessary first to purify the brain of years and other treatments that we have mentioned in the division when the patient is old and suffers from taking medicine.
And if it is an infant who cannot endure it, make gargarism and frequent mastication for purifying the brain with good foods; afterwards rub the head well, and make one cautery according to what we have said earlier, and one cautery on the navel, and on each horn; and if the patient is out of breath and able to endure it, make cauteries as I have said to him who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and the neck, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped according to the manner that I have said.
If the patient is an infant, make one subtle cautery in this manner:
When due to melancholy there are excessive or corrupt humors and thick phlegm, then the fire cautery of such cauteries should be applied as we have said to those with paralysis.
And if due to melancholy the humors are declining towards melancholy and the body of the patient is moist, then give them something to drink by which the brain may be cleansed, as has been described before in the divisions.
After the king (the physician), make one linen bandage well made, like a circle, and place it around the head of the patient; cross the patient, and keep them well held from all sides; then apply the leech, which is worth mullein root of old age; heat it gently so that the patient can bear it; then empty the circle from within the head, and let it cool; do this to the patient once a week with good governance until they are healed.
If you wish to perform cauterization, make multiple pricks all over the cautery. This method of cauterizing helps the brain greatly; then place moistened cotton in butter and linseed oil on top.
of the eyes When the eyes come first with the signs that I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient something cleansing the head, keeping it away from all moisture, and make him sweat or bathe multiple times while fasting.
After the patient bends backwards, have a fire cautery applied to his head, and make two cauteries on the two temples where the wound is located or where there are two wounds together; or if there is only one wound, apply the cautery to it. Close all the veins and arteries beneath the skull with the cautery, and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple; be careful not to let blood flow out, and if you see too much blood flowing, stop it as you are able.
I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and incision of the cautery how to stretch it; sometimes a fire cautery or some other instrument is made under the two bones at the back.
the heart of tears
When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are on the veins, or open the arteries that appear outside the head; and it is seen that this is excess cold fluid, then do the cauterization that I have mentioned at the beginning of the awe descending to the eyes: i.e., cauterize in the head, and 2 cauteries on the 2 temples, and 2 cauteries where the temples are below the 2 bones; and if necessary, cauterize skillfully over the eye with a small cautery.
inside the body of the eyes
When you treat according to what we have said in the division, and it does not help, then give the patient 4 cooked roaches; after that, give him a head of cabbage or an olive oil cautery; and make 2 cauteries called "clavilis" above the eyebrows, a small amount under the hair; beware of the artery you do not cover. And this is the shape of the cautery called "clavilis":
When the paper of oil is softened by disease and moisture, then the cauterization of this cautery called "olivare" should be done. This is its shape:
And if you wish to do two cauterizations on the same two scorptions as long as they are; and do not leave the hand except when the third part of the paper is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
of the hair that pricks the oil Sometimes the hairs of the eyes are converted to tears and prick the eye; and it makes fire or burning medication cauterization according to two methods: namely with fire or with medicine that is hot.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they have grown and are even, then place the patient on a clean surface; afterward, on top of the eyelashes, draw a figure like the fennel seed, and start from the base of the hairs; then put cotton soaked in egg white and musk oil over the eye, then heat the cautery with this form:
After cauterizing the figure that you have pointed out several times, let the sores be burned in that place; and the signs of the healing of the wound are that you see the papyrus recede, and the hairs rise at the tip of the oil; then lift your hand, and leave it like that for 3 days, then put cotton soaked in butter until the burn is healed; after that, apply ointment until it is healed.
And if afterwards the hairs appear and the papyrus becomes soft, then start the cautery on that same place again, as you did before; and if the hairs are falling out, cauterize it until the papyrus rises to its natural level and is even, and the hairs do not prick at the oil.
The burning medicine is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make a parchment in the shape of the myrtle leaf; then take French soap and hot chalk, of each one an ounce, and grind them together well; and make it quickly so that it does not cool, then spread it on the parchment in the same way as the myrtle leaf, and put the hairs on top; and if the patient has only one sore, it should be worked on one, and if both are affected; and place cotton soaked in egg white under the oil; and the patient's hand should be clean and place your finger showing over the medicine, and press a little and move all the time when the patient feels burning of the medicine, for it burns like fire. When you have done this (i.e., dislocating the limb), apply the medicine to your shoulder. Once the dislocation has passed, lift up the limb and check if you see the paper lifted in the same way it was raised by heating or incision; if it is like this, then it is good. If not, apply more medicine on the shoulder or where the medicine hasn't worked yet, as long as your efforts are equal and your fingers are positioned correctly; then put cotton dampened in butter on top until the burns have healed, afterwards cure the limb with the ointment called "diaphenis" and others, until it is healthy.
And if it is necessary for you to guard yourself well at your work so that the medicine does not prick the eyes, and if the paper becomes soft afterwards, and the hairs prick in the oil, then restart the medicine on that limb which has been made moist by the paper properly, as you have done before; afterwards cure it until it is healthy; and this is the form of the fennel seed:
And know that the eye of man is diverse in size and smallness, according to your constraints; do not deviate from the correct path for him who is studying this art.
On the treatment of fistula by cautery
When you treat a fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and your treatment does not help, then it is necessary that you perform cautery according to this manner.
Instruct the patient to place his head in your lap; and hold his head between your hands so that it does not move or turn aside; after that put cotton soaked in egg white or in jujube oil over the area; after heating the cautery, place it on the head in such a manner as the shape of a feather from a quill, together with the cautery itself; if you see, it should be pointed from one end to the other, and if you see, it should also be like a tent; but regardless, this which is placed on the head serves for your work.
After pressing the fistula if it is open, remove the pus and dry it; if it is closed, open it, remove the worms; after that place the hot cautery on top, and hold your hand on the cautery at the part of the neck near the oil, so your hands do not slip; and put the cautery in the oil fat and corrode it.
If you start the cautery up to the bone, that is good. If not, continue the cautery again once and another if needed, and let it rest for 3 days; after that put soft cotton in butter on top and cure it with drying ointment until it is healthy, and if after 40 days it is still not healthy, put corrosive medicine on the bone as directed by your king according to his chapter.
And here is a method of cauterizing a fistula that none of the ancients said. Listen to the meaning of the word "fistula" and imagine it as if you were cutting it open, then put one subtle camphor stick (as follows in its form): And they apply the amount of a pound's weight; hold your hand or grip firmly, and let the patient not move at all, so that the lead does not scatter from its oil; it is necessary to put cotton moistened in egg white or oil on top of the oil of the patient: the lead will heal the wound, and the healthy part will recover marvelously.
If the wound is healed by the cautery that we have said, it is good. If not, it is necessary to administer hot poultices and bring the wound back to the heat of the body as it should be in its own place.
cavities in lips Often, cracks appear in lips which are called "hairs," and the same happens with children's lips.
When curing these cracks as we have described in the sections above, and the treatment does not help, then heat a small cautery scalpel in this shape:
And apply it immediately to those cracks until it reaches the bottom, then treat the area with cerote (cerotum) until it is healed.
of the abscess of the neck
When an abscess comes to the root of the throat or the eye, or the palate, or the roots of the teeth, after becoming pus-filled and growing and turning into a fistula; and you treat it as we have said in divisions, but it does not improve; then it is necessary that you have .i. cautery according to the size of the fistula; after closing or sealing the fistula, keep your hand until the iron becomes hot at its point and at its base; and do this once or twice, after treating as we have said in treatments, until it is healed; and if it is healed thus, it is good; and if not, then you must find the location and remove the rotten bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
the slight movement of the teeth
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you cure it with medicine but that does not work, then put the head of the patient in your lap; after heating the cautery so that its form will come here in this manner: you place a cane on the tooth; and put the hot cautery inside immediately, and hold your hand until the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; after removing your hand, repeat the cautery as desired; after filling the patient's mouth with salt water and holding it for an hour, rinse thoroughly.
And in this manner, the teeth that are moving should be immobilized, and the gums softened, and the moisture corrupt dried.
of the tooth pain
When tooth pain comes from cold or there is cold or fever, and the remedies of medicine are of no use, then it is necessary to use cauterization according to two methods: cauterization with butter and cauterization with fire.
Cauterization with butter is as follows: you take butter from a cow, and the end in a iron or copper spoon; afterwards take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a tent, and wet it in boiled butter, and put it on the painful tooth quickly and hold until it gets cold; and do this frequently until its effect reaches the root of the tooth, and if you see that the cotton and linen are wet with cold butter, put it back on the tooth, and put hot iron on top until the heat comes to the tooth's apex.
The fire cautery is made with a rod of iron or steel, large enough that the heat does not reach the patient's mouth; heat the cautioner, causing the shape to come afterwards, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautioner is cooled; do this often, as the pain will be alleviated the same day or the next. It is necessary that the patient fills his mouth with good butter in the hurry of this cautery, and then blow hard; this is the shape of the cautery.
When the scrofulas are of fever and cold moisture, and do not respond to medicines for digestion, then heat the cautery comb as described next, make two holes for smoke to exit from the other part; place the hot cautery on the abscess once, or twice if needed, until it reaches the base of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, apply cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it thus for three days; then put soft cotton soaked in butter on it until the pus is gone; afterwards, treat the area with ointments and plasters until it heals.
When cold moisture prevails over the intestinal channels, and especially when it comes from a cold complexion, then the patient should first be cleansed with soluble medicines; afterwards, make a cautery at the root of the throat, but do not go up to the throat and be careful not to burn it too much; afterwards, make one other cautery at the joint of the neck to the head of the spine, and use the cautery called "clavile" as we have described before; and treat the area until it heals as we have said earlier.
Toast (noun) When all and diseases of worm are from cold moistures, and the patients do not have fever nor heat, and it is an old disease, make two fire cauterizations on the shoulder blades; and one other cauterization between the breasts; and let the cauterization that is called "clavile" according to the shape mentioned before.
And if you see, make a cauterization by piercing the entire cauterization that is called "poins" of this shape in the disease of ears; and let the piercings be up to 30, or less around. After curing the side as mentioned before, let the cauterizations be at four intervals according to this shape:
And because these cauteries are lighter, because you make four of them.
of the dislocation of the shoulder When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. After placing the patient on their back and on their side; after feeling the cavity within the chest with your left hand, if the joint is dislocated inside, heat up the cautery of the shape shown below:
And cauterize the pancreas up to the costal margin, and the figure of the cautery will come together with four cauteries; and this is made with the cautery that has three nerves, because the figures of cauterization are four cauteries; and these nerves are according to the subtlety of a tendon and this is the shape of the cautery that has three nerves.
And sometimes it is joined above this one nerve, because there are eight cauteries.
Afterwards put on the cautery that is broken with silk; afterwards let the patient rest, and do not move the limbs for a long time until he is well comforted.
And if it is dislocated above (the shoulder), this happens rarely, then perform a cautery on the thick part of the cautery rod or many cauteries in pricking. For the joint is closed, and the moisture is removed and the patient becomes healthy.
for the treatment of pleurisy (inflammation of the lining of the lungs)
The ancients said that for pleurisy (inflammation of the lining of the lungs), one should make cauteries using roots of aristolochia (a type of plant), and in this way: take a long root of aristolochia, as large and long as your thumb; moisten it in oil, heat it over the fire, and perform a cautery. Make one large cautery between the chest and neck, and two small cauteries a little lower in the area under the beard; make two more cauteries between the fifth and sixth ribs, slanting downwards slightly; make one cautery on the bladder and another on the stomach, one between the shoulders, and two more on the sides of the abdomen, near the cautery that is between the shoulders; do not press your hand tightly, but make it open as when you are sniffing.
And they said that any ancient man uses a cautery like a razor, and heats it up and puts it between the ribs until it reaches the abscess; then the pain leaps away, as we have said in the abscess of the liver. But in this work, there is fear or the patient dies immediately, or a fistula comes that cannot be cured.
And they said that any ancient man uses a pestle like a razor...
When you treat the disease of the pestle as we have said in the divisions of treatments, and it doesn't help, then they suggest four ways of cautery that are all good.
The first sentence to translate is: "From which manner it is that you make 3 or 4 cauteries, aligning them according to the length of the vein, according to the shape of the cautery for the liver that we have said before; and do not press your hand on the entire cautery, and let the patient be aware on his back."
And another manner of cautery is that you heat the cautery with two nerves, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and carve the groove that is towards the vein, where the patient's artery comes from the left, and raise the elevations from the groove according to the groove, according to the length of the body, and the cautery should be according to the width of the body.
Then insert the two nerves and heat them until the grooves are pierced from the other side, and then pull the cautery through, thus there will be four. And if you see, if you cauterize with a single nerve, then cauterize the entire cautery at four nerves. After the cure, when it has discharged pus for a long time, it is better to use the other remedy mentioned before.
From hydropisy
The fire cautery is not effective for hydropsy, except in the manner called "asclytes". When you cure it according to the ways we have said in the divisions, and your treatment does not help, then you must make four cauterizations around the bladder, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the spleen, two behind the back near the spine, and one near the kidney; and let the cauteries be close to the swelling.
After the cautery is opened to purge pus for a long time, do not abandon the treatment of the patient after the cautery; and healing will be hastened, and the two intentions (i.e., the patient's health and the cauterization) will come together with God's help.
The shape for the belly cautery is like a key that we have shown before; and for the back it is olive-shaped, as mentioned earlier.
of the swelling of the feet When the feet are swollen in a person who is edematous and full of yellow water, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the foot between the little finger and the ring finger; and lower your hand with the cautery without turning. And do not enter too deep, so as not to hurt the yellow water, and let the cautery be in this form:
After making two incisions in each leg with the scalpel, place two cauteries at the tip of each incision; and let the cautery be long, one under the thigh in front and the other behind, within the leg; and leave the cauterized areas to heal, as needed; after healing all the other treatments mentioned.
From the dislocation... (Dislocation is the main topic of this sentence)
When the inflammation of the stomach results from cold and moisture, retaining and digestive qualities that are in the stomach and intestines are weakened, and cannot be cured by any means; and you see the patient suffering greatly and with strong pain, make one large cautery on the stomach as discussed earlier (cautery of the stomach), around the circumference; and four subtle cauteries around the navel, one thin cautery at the navel, and two cauteries on the flanks.
And if you see excessive moisture and the patient suffering, apply a cautery on the joint, one cautery on each sore, and two small cauteries on the stomach in front of the larger one, for the cure is beneficial where there is good help.
Of the cure for hemorrhoids
When the hemorrhoids are rooted or multiple and old, filled with thick cold and moist corrupted humor, and are treated as mentioned in divisions, it does not help if cauteries are performed: four on the spine of the back, one that is completely removed below the anus pointed triangularly, and one below the buttocks. Two cauteries should be done;
If you think that his stomach is chilled and the meat does not cook, and swelling is observed on his face, then a large cautery is applied to the stomach as previously stated, and another to the liver, and another to the spleen with all the cauteries being held together; leave the cauteries open for a long time. After healing the place where the cautery was applied until it is healed.
of the sores called "thelul"
When you treat thelul, if the cautery seems like a razor, heat it and then place it all around the treated sore; leave your hand there so that the cautery reaches the base of the vein, so that it burns; do this once or twice, and if there is much thelul, cauterize each one as we have said; after these cure with healing ointments until they are healed; and if you cauterize a large cautery on the charcoal, it will have more aid.
of an ill-healed wound
When the patient cannot endure incision or opening, as we will describe in its place, comes a disease that can only be cured by cautery.
When a fistula comes and becomes swollen with putrid matter and corrupted moisture, one should investigate it thoroughly and be certain of the depth to which it has penetrated. After heating the cautery that appears as if it were a shaver, insert it into the fistula according to the thickness of the tissue that it has entered, and continue the cautery until the body becomes burnt and corrupted, once, or twice, or thrice, depending on the amount of tissue needing to be burned; beware of burning the nerves and large veins. If the fistula goes towards the bladder and intestine, be careful in this area, and do not perform this procedure outside of a charnel house, and believe that it is not sinful; after curing the area until it is healed, if the area becomes septic and matter has been removed for a long time, then know that the area is healed completely; if the matter has not been removed, know that the area is not healed, and burn the bone to make it heal. As we will describe in its place, one of these procedures.
of the disease of the kidneys When pain of the kidneys comes with cold and large wind, and does not take on the form of a woman, then you must perform cautery on the kidneys from both sides with a cautery iron as we have previously said; and if we perform cauterization in the middle (of the body), there will be four cauteries in a line, and it will provide more aid.
of the bladder If the bladder is soft and weak due to cold and moisture, causing the patient to retain urine, then perform cauterization on the part outside the bladder, where the pubic hair starts, one on each side, and each cautery should be as long as the knuckle of your finger; and perform one cauterization behind the back, or two if necessary; and make sure the cauteries are shaped as previously described.
of the marriage When the marriage is cold and moist and does not allow conception, and the flowers are corrupted and their term is delayed; and when they come, it causes great pain: then it is necessary that you do four cauterizations around the womb, as we have said in the caution of the bladder, and two cauterizations behind the back; and let the cauterization be sharp, as we have said.
of the infection
When viscous humors descend into the joint of the hip, and for this reason it becomes immobile from its place, the signs are that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and the limbs are found to be out of their socket, if you need to cauterize the patient over the joint of the hip with a circular cautery, facing in front of the joint around the socket so that the joint is within the circle; and if the cauterization is like those used for the stomach.
And if this cauterization is not available to you, make four large olive-shaped cauteries and make them as sharp as all the others; and use it until it heals.
of the pain in the hip When pain comes in the belly of the loin (lower back), and it is due to coldness and moisture; and the patient is treated for this as we have said in the division but the cure is not effective; and the disease is old: then you must purge the patient of the gross humors with fetid pills or other good-seeming pills.
After the fire cautery; and the method of the cautery is according to two methods: namely with burning substances, and the fire cautery. The fire cautery is according to many ways, one of which is as follows: you shall cauterize on the belly of the loin four triangular cauteries according to this form, and make good depth and width; and there should be space between each cautery the size of a dove; and the cauteries should be olive-shaped. Sometimes, the cautery is made in the middle of the lower back, so there are four according to this shape:
And if you see, if the cautery is made at the circular cautery that we have mentioned earlier in the dislocation of the loin; but do it in this way so that the circles encompass the entire loin, and all the spaces of the kidney are burned.
And this is the method that is done in sciatica, when the pain remains in the lower back and does not reach the thigh or the leg. If it reaches the thigh and the leg, two cauteries are applied where the patient says the pain lies, and one cautery above the ankle at a distance of 4 fingers from the left side; and whether the cautery is cutler's or arsenic is applied to the sore spot; and if the patient feels that the pain extends to the level of the foot or close by, the cauterization should be done where they feel the pain - three points or four at the cauterization point called "points."
If necessary, more are done; and if the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, a cautionery of cutler's or circular cautery is applied, and take good care in all your cauteries not to leave the cauter too long that you burn the nerves and large arteries, and do not make any greater harm and contraction to the patient.
And I myself have seen more who applied caution on the ankle of the foot, and they left it too long that the leg was all swollen, and the feet as well, and they were pierced and corrupted through all the toes. After a belly solution in which they died.
And if the pain is in two places together, perform cautery on one and the other, following this manner. The wise shall say about the caution of the hunchback, as follows: make one nail of iron and be as thick as a finger of thumb or slightly smaller, and either between-the-cheeks or from one between-the-cheek to the other with a distance equal to the size of a nut of walnut; and let the between-the-cheeks be across two parts, and let them also be like nuts, and have one handle of iron well made; and this is its shape:
And scald until it is all red and blisters, then place it on the hunchback's patient's side, turning it towards the healthy side; and cauterize one time with the iron once and let it rest for four days; then apply a plaster of butter, leaving the wound open for a long time; afterwards cure with ointment until it heals.
Albucasim says that we use little of this cautery because of the fear of its gaze, and few who use it; however, this is one of the good cauteries, which can be borne by those who can endure it, and where it is applied.
From the pain of the back
When the back pain comes from falling or striking, excessive bleeding, or similar causes of cold matter spreading, none of these cases are suitable for cauterization except to the one who is affected by the infusion of cold matter.
It is necessary that the patient be emptied of poisonous pills or similar substances, which are placed on the back where the pain is located, marked with three lines and in each line five cauteries or more according to their strength and quantity that the patient can endure; and the cautery should be made according to the cautery called "poins"; and if you see, make four cauteries or four using a medium-sized cauterizer in this form:
Many times this disease comes to small children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have narrow anus when they strain, fearful; and you can find it in the lower spine of the back and in the appearance that appears above the other spines.
When you see this and want to cure it, you should cauterize it with the cautery of that part according to this form.
The cautery should enlarge each part of the spine equally. If you see, then cauterize around the spine with a pointed cautery .2 lines or .3, and the points should be close to each other. After curing the area until it is healthy according to what has been said, beware not to apply the cautery in gilbositeit which is in nerve spasm.
of the pain of the joints
When pain in the joints is due to swellings that occur on every member of the body, and when pain comes in feet, which are called 'gout' properly, and when it is due to cold and medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cautery in this manner: make the patient lie down with a cautery around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to this form:
And if it is necessary to pinch on the face of the foot, make a cautery all over the cautery called "point". And if the pains come up to the knees and other joints, and this happens many times, make a cautery on each knee four times or four on each side, with an olive-shaped cautery; and if you need more, do so, but not beyond that point where the edges of the burn are burned.
1. And if the pains descend to the genitals and back, administer the fire cautery as we have said in its chapter.
The next sentence is: "de la routure dou syfac." Without additional context or comments, the translation of this sentence into English is: "Of the dislocation of the shoulder."
When the dislocation of the shoulder occurs in anger, and the arms descend towards the chest and this is new, then when you see it to be treated, it should not eat anything that day; and use things which loosen the stomach, so that the farts decrease from the stomach; afterwards, make the patient sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his elbow as long as the dislocation remains, and reposition it at your fingertips, and press down firmly over the dislocation above the joint of the shoulder; and use a sign that is similar to half a circle above the chest; then heat the cautery in the shape shown here:
Keep the hairs long and even while it is white and it exudes pus. Then move the shoulders back into place; and the attendant holds his hand above so that they do not return; and work well on the thighs of the patient, and put one cushion and one bandage on the thighs, and another on the affected part which holds the hands; then place the cautery on the mark all over your hand, hold it straight and keep it until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, start again as long as you come to the bone; and be careful that the boil does not burst when you perform the cautery; that you do not burn it; and that through this the patient does not die, or other harm.
And know that if you do not come to the bone during cautery, your work is worth nothing. It is necessary that the cauteries for children be subtle according to their size, and those of larger people also large according to their measure; after four days cure the wound from the cautery with butter until the burn is healed; after that, cure with other ointments until it is healthy, and let the patient lie on his back for forty days until the wounds are well healed; and it is necessary that his dressings be left long, so that the boil does not burst when he is ready to leave the room.
And after forty days, when he wants to get up, bring him a well-made bandage and let it be for another forty days; let him have good rest, so that he does not work too much or strain himself, and avoid excessive drinking, eating, and shouting; and if he follows this teaching, he will heal completely. And I will say more about the surgery in its chapter afterward. Of the hernia of the belly
When hernias occur in other bellies and are recognized as not growing any more, do this. Apply one fire cautery according to its size, and burn the third part of it; afterwards cure as we have said; and no old man has said that it should be cauterized at four angles according to this form:
Mark the position of the hernia and make a line above it in its width, and another below it, and place your hand all along the cautery rod. But the first cauteries are lighter and more mobile.
Of old pain in any limb When pain comes in any member, whether from falling or being injured, and this pain lasts for a long time, and the medicine does not heal it, then it should be cauterized with the cautery called "poins", and the cauteries should be according to the length of the member, its size and weakness, and its virtue and location of twists and its pain. If it is healed from the first cauterization, that is good; if not, repeat one more cauterization on top of it, as this custom is that it must change in the nearby member, so you should perform the cauteries as long as the patient is not healed.
To mix medicines.
The remedies are sometimes helped by cautery with great aid, and especially those illnesses that come from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy. If you see it being cauterized, take care if the sickness is at the beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and neither bleeds nor remains, and you doubt that the corruption does not spread throughout the entire patient, then perform 5 cauteries on the head: one on the neck, and another towards the front at the end of the hair; two on the temples, and one behind the ear; and leave your hand so that the cautery reaches the bone, and so that the scabs come out from it, allowing the vapors of the gross humors to escape; and cauterize the private parts according to what is before.
And if the disease is scattered everywhere; it will certainly perish, you must then burn it with the cauteries we have mentioned: one cautery on the neck, two cauteries on the spine of the neck, six cauteries on the spine of the back, one large one on the shin and another on the ankle, two on each shoulder; two on the hips, two on the tendons of the feet, one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; be careful not to burn the nerves that are above the heels, you should not burn them; never apply a cautery on the bone of the thumb, and one other on the bone of the stomach, and one other on the liver.
Know that the more you use cautery, the more help it provides and it benefits him; and know that the sick do not feel pain from the cautery as the healthy do, because the body is already completely corrupted. It is necessary that the cautery be large and small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in manners of iron. After curing the wound with flour several times with honey and other remedies until it heals.
inflammation or swelling
When a swelling appears in any member and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, but it is not healed, then you should perform cauterization on the limb according to its size and the smallness of the limb; and the cauterization may be a small incision in the thick part of the skin. Then you heal it with unguents until it is healed. Sometimes cauterization is done on the hand, foot, back, at the nerve issue that immobilizes the limb, and in such a case the swelling is removed; however, no one should interfere unless they are knowledgeable about members and the issues of moving nerves in the body.
When a sore appears on any member and it is treated with medicines, ointments, and plasters, but it is not cured, then you should perform an incision (albaras) on the limb according to its size and the smallness of the limb; and the incision may be a small cut in the thick part of the skin. Then you heal it with ointments until it is cured. Sometimes an incision is done on the hand, foot, back, at the nerve issue that immobilizes the limb, and in such a case the sore is removed; however, no one should interfere unless they are knowledgeable about members and the issues of moving nerves in the body.
When the disease called "albaras" becomes mature and the medicines do not work, then cauterize it with a deep cautery (according to the thickness of the skin), until the white spot is removed and its color changes; then heal it with flour and lentils mixed with rose oil and banana leaves, and ox blood and eagle blood, in equal parts; and mix everything together, tie it up in a cloth, and apply it to the place until it is cured.
The treatment of syphilis by cautery.
When syphilis begins and you wish to stop it, if you cauterize with the cautery that appears to be one circle around the syphilitic sore; and although the wise say that a cautery should also be applied in the middle of the syphilitic sore; yet I do not think this is good, because I fear that it will become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have seen it happen once before; and more proper is that it be cauterized with the "circular" cautery, as we have said in the discussion of cauteries.
The swelling that cannot measure (grow)
When someone has a disease called "adubelati", which is slow to heal or because of the excess it causes, or because of the age of the patient when they are decrepit (meaning too old), and have little blood, or because of the time; and you see it hastening to heal: then cauterize it with many small cauteries, pricking around it; afterwards leave it in this state. For it will hasten to heal.
And if you see it being pierced with the entire cautery, heat the cautery in the form described here:
And place your hand in the middle of that disease called "adubelati" as long as the cautery pierces the core, and make sure the cauteries are such that the patient feels them outside in this manner so that the flow of the pus is even. Afterwards cure it until it heals perfectly.
The fire cure by iron
Another kind of disease is called "corrodens," and it is nothing but a rotting of the limb, for it eats away at the limbs just as fire burns dry wood. If you see this disease in a place where a fire cure can be applied, then heat the irons, both large and small, according to what is required in the place or location of the disease; after heating all parts until all corruption is reached and nothing remains of it, that everything corrupted is removed. And then leave it for three days, and apply soft cauterized ointment with oil as often as the burns from fire are healed, and all the corruption. After the healing of the wounds, generate char. And if after three days you see that healthy char does not grow, that's good; if not, repeat the cautery on the remaining corrupted parts. And this rotting is sometimes cured with ague medicine instead of fire cure; however, fire cure is of greater help, and I have already said the cure for ague in its division: take as much as you need.
swellings that come to the feet
Often, toes suffer from a disease called "clos" according to our understanding, which is a large swelling that hurts the foot. The cures for this disease are in two ways. One is fire cautery, and the other is hot water cautery. Fire cautery is when you heat one iron cautery like a feather of a raven, made of good iron so it can pierce the nail from all sides, and it should have fine margins; after that, place everything hot on the nail, turn your hand entirely around the nail until it comes to the base of the nail; then leave it for three days until it begins to discharge pus; then make a plaster of wild herbs crushed with oil, and leave the plaster on it all night; the nail will shrink and be uprooted from its roots. Then cure the area with soothing ointment until it heals.
If they are converted on the outside of the body (meaning external wounds), and it often happens in hands and feet, you must provide hot water cautery; and it is done like this: take a cane made of iron or a raven feather, and place it on the nail and burn blisters (meaning boils); then place the cane so that it surrounds it completely, then put a little hot water, hold your hand firmly, and press your hand while turning so that the edge of the cane reaches the root of the nail, and let the hot water penetrate deeply to the root; allow the patient to bear the pain of the hot water for an hour; then leave it as it is, and it will uproot itself from all its roots. Do this again until you have heated all those on the body, then treat them with ointments that soothe.
the trembling cures
When someone shakes with cold or from quartan fever or something else, it is necessary that you make 4 or 5 fire cauterizations on the spine of the back, one between each spine; and 1 cauterization near the navel, and 1 on the stomach at the olive oil cauterization site; this will stop the shaking and hasten the recovery from the cold disease.
pus-filled blisters (boils)
Sometimes the body appears to be bathed with boils, which come from corrupted matter. It is necessary, at first when they appear, that cautery be made over each head of the boil: a subtle cautery from myrtle stick, so that it can grasp fire, or from long root of aristolochia, or cauterize with lenticular cautery. Sometimes they are cauterized from the beginning when they appear in this manner, and they cannot grow further, but the superfluous matter which comes from them is discharged, and they become healthy; however, it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
When the artery is cut Often there are great outflows of blood from the artery that is cut in the wound or at the abscess incision, or during cauterization of the limb, and similar things; it is a very serious matter to cause bleeding.
Moreover, whenever this happens to anyone, you should quickly put your finger on the wound vein and press it very hard until the blood is stopped from flowing; then take olive oil cauteries, both small and large, until they are all red; then take one (either large or small according to the size of the wound and where the artery is located), and place the cautery on that vein where your finger is placed, and hold it there until the blood stops flowing.
And if the vein suddenly jumps when you hold your finger on it and the cauteries go out, take quickly another of the cauteries that are in the fire.
And do not stop doing this one after the other until the artery is closed; and beware not to burn the nerve that is exposed, and let no other harm come to the patient; know that when the artery dries up, it cannot be well kept closed when the artery is large, unless it is by one of the four ways we have said: either by cauterization, or by extraction when it has not been treated, or by strong binding with thread, or by medicines applied that can keep blood from flowing; and let it be tied and tightened accordingly.
Whoever applies a narrow binding tightly with cloth or places hot things on it, or similar things, if it does not help, it does not profit.
And if this happens to anyone and he does not have medicine present, he should put his index finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and stretch it out well until it is closed above the wound and the vein; and it must not be moved, but the wound should be cooled with cold water often so that the artery becomes frozen, thickened, and closed; and make inquiries about cauteries and medicines ahead.
We have told you in the first chapter all kinds of diseases where it is necessary to use fire cautery or burning medicine, and their causes and instruments and forms of cauteries; I have placed that chapter in its entirety up to the feet, and I will go into this chapter through the same path because it is easier to understand what you are looking for.
And so, as I begin this, it is necessary, dear child, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of the cauteries, and because of that, it requires greater caution.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I warn you not to undertake folly. For many kinds of people come into treatment. Some of them arrive with such illness that they die quickly due to the frenzy they find in their disease, and from the greatness of its malice; and fear is deserved from these. And from these there are those who give you counsel and say: "Wait, I am cured"; but the illness is deceitful. It should not be that you consent to those who come to you who have this manner, but put more trust in your honor than in your desire, and do not rashly but wisely from those of whom you are certain, and from which you can take and lose; and use prediction and indication in the treatment of your patients so that health may be converted; and this will help you to acquire good reputation, and glory, and memory of praise.
My dear son, may Our Lords grant you good understanding and righteousness, and if you wish to aspire to the holy inspiration of His hand, Amen.
I have organized this chapter in sections, following the sequence of the cauteries that I previously described to you from head to feet, because you will find these easier to understand which ones you may need.
full head with water (meaning swollen)
Know that this disease often comes to children during birth, and when the vagina contracts too strongly around the child's head; and sometimes it comes from causes that are not known.
And I have never seen this disease in adults, except for children; and all that I have seen, death hastens; and because of this it seems to me that I should abandon the work in some treatments.
And I have seen a child whose shoulders were swollen with water, and his head grew larger every day until he could no longer support it; and the moisture was so great that death was believed to have occurred, and this moisture is collected beneath the bone and between the cartilage and the bone; and if the moisture is between the cartilage and the bone, and the abscesses are small, then you should make a large incision in the head, extending as far as two fingers, and follow the shape of the spatula:
If the moisture is deeper and the abscess is larger, you should make two incisions in a cross-like manner, according to this form:
And if the moisture is under the bone, and you see the joints of the head opening on each side, and the hollow gap jumps when you press it with your hand inside, and it does not respond; then you must cut the head open in three places as follows:
After the incision, remove all the moisture outside. Then bind up the wounds with linen and powders, and put vinegar and oil on it, and let it be as such for five days; then unbind, and treat the wound with poultices and ointments, and keep the head stretched out until it heals well, and give dry meat of the moisture to the patient so that the member is comforted and becomes healthy.
And another way of incision is that you look where the abscess swelling is greatest, and the opening of the wound; for sometimes it is in front, sometimes behind, sometimes on the right, and sometimes on the left.
Therefore, open the abscess or wound and drain the pus, and do as you can with it; but avoid covering the artery; and let some blood flow, so that the patient may die from bleeding and evacuation of moisture in a proper manner.
Repeat the procedure.
When there is any disease called "catarrh" among the eyes or at its worst, and the disease is old, and the medicine's cure does not help, then the last resort is the cautery, by which two arteries will be burned.
Therefore, when you cover their eyes, the patient must lie down on their back; then rub the area with a rough cloth until the arteries become visible, then grasp the patient's neck with one rough cloth; then look for where the veins meet, and the joints of both sides are behind the ears, and the shoulders are returned to their original position; then mark the places of reattachment, then pierce one and the other with a sharp spatula of two parts. This should cut until the tip reaches the bone, and this should be at the base of the neck.
And when you pierce, push the spatula under the artery and strike above it, cutting as deep as two fingers.
When the vein is struck, it should jump up repeatedly out of place.
And if the artery does not open on its own, it is necessary that you measure the space of three fingers, then incise and cut up to the bone; and the quantity of blood that must be let out is about 5 cubic centimeters, and by chance a little more or less, according to what the patient can endure, and the swelling of the artery; then examine the wound: if it remains above the bone without spreading, then the pus from an abscess does not come, then hold the wound closed and bind, and apply ointment until the wound is healed.
And in moving (the dislocated limb), if it cannot be returned to its place without pain, then it must be moved gently with a warm cloth or a small hot iron, and then immobilized with bandages so that it can rest until the swelling subsides.
When an old dislocation comes and acute catarrh occurs, due to moisture from tears and heat in the temples and other similar conditions, and it is treated by various means of medicines but does not improve, then we should open the arteries of the temples and cauterize them as previously mentioned.
And the manner of extraction of these [things] is that the patient should shave their temples, and pay attention to the artery which opens in the temple, for it opens well by beating, and is not easily responded to except in some cold individuals; and if it is responded, the patient should tighten their neck with some cloths, then rub the area with a harsh cloth, and warm the area with hot water until the artery becomes apparent; then take the spatumile of which this form is:
Then lightly scrape the skin to see the artery, then pull it up towards the prongs and carefully separate the cloths on both sides; and if the artery is thin, turn it at the tip of the scissors, then press that part according to the size of the two heads. For if it is not pressed, it will not open by itself entirely.
And draw the blood from 5 cubits, up to 4; and if the artery is large, you must tie it with two strong silk threads, so that pus does not come out before the wound closes, and there is a flow of blood; then cut off the excess between the two ligatures in that same hour itself, and if you see, you cauterize the cautery cutter up to the bone until the heads are separated; and this is the muddling work, if the patient does not have a fever and they are of a hot complexion.
For the cautery is aid in healing moisters: therefore it is of greatest aid to moisters. For the extraction of arteries, it is necessary that one fill the area with old cotton and place good bandages over it; and when they are to be cut open, if it is cured with dry medicines that cause heat, and bandages, until it heals; and if without a tourniquet from the artery as you operate, hurry to cover it with cautery or use vitriol on your hand so that the area does not bleed; and if this is not present, place your finger over the area until it congeals, and rub the area with cold water until it stops bleeding, and bind it as necessary; and that which is softened and lighter in the extraction of the artery, you should cauterize the vein from this sharp cautery cutting two parts, but the cuts should be thick to keep its heat longer. For when the strings are too thin, it holds less its heat. And it should have between the 2 incisions, one deep and wide apart, and then when you have signed the incision of 2 places, and heat the iron hot above until it reaches the bone, and cut through the vein in 2 places; and they must be separated between the 2 heads because it is not bonded all over with this cautery; and this is the form of the cautery:
And the tears
When the tears of the eyes are flowing from veins located on the forehead above the head, and it does not benefit from any medicine that is applied, and you see the patient writhing in pain as if with fever; and when they are thin and moist to the point that hair falls out like paper, and the skin around the eye area is burnt and scorched by the tears, this requires this kind of treatment.
And they called the ancients "cure contuse", and you shall do this to the patient who has this disease: shave his head from the front, then make three cuts or the same length on the forehead according to the length of the forehead; one cut should be like two fingers below the eyebrows going straight down until the nose, and the other two should be in the temples above the eyebrows, and avoid cutting the arteries that are in the temples above the eyebrows; keep your hand away from the connection of the jaws, and each wound shall have the size of three fingers together.
from the incision that is at the temple up to the second incision; and scrape all the cartilage that is between the two cuts along the entire bone, then continue from the middle incision up to the other second one, and then pull out this spatula.
Push the instrument called "cultellaire" into the first opening. It is very sharp on one side and soft, not sharp, on the other side, and it is shaped like this: Then cut the vessels that descend from the eye to the hairs, until the incision is continuous up to the opening of the wound, and then make another incision on the other side; and then drain the blood equally, and press the area for the blood taken; then put a piece of old cotton in each opening, and place damp linen soaked in vinegar, oil, and asafoetida over it, and ensure that no pus comes out; on the third day, remove the suture, and apply great heat from mustard plaster, then the treatment with ointment of basilicon with rose oil, and other treatments for wounds until it is healed.
The root of the hairs
When anyone comes with an acute catarrh, you often see the eyes swell and become small, blur vision, burn paper, hair falls out, and a headache ensues at great pain; and the patient coughs; then recognize these signs that such materials and this catarrh do not come from anywhere but from many veins, and the remedy for the cure is in it, if it is this.
And command the patient to recline their head, then make a large cut on the back of the head, and another deep one. Then start from the incision of the left temple to the right temple, and let the incision reach the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move when eating; and when the bone is exposed, suck out all the blood with a sponge, and then apply cotton between the two edges of the cut and bandage it with linen; then place damp linen cloths on it and guard against hot abscess; when the bone is removed, you must rub the bone until char begins to grow, then treat with things that encourage char growth.
In this way: take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony, and make a poultice with it; then administer it to the wounds to encourage char growth everywhere.
Of the stoppage of the ears
Anything that falls into the ears is one of the four things: grains, beasts, stones or similar items such as iron; or seeds, peas, beans; or something flowing like water and similar substances.
If a stone or other foreign object falls into the ear and does not fit properly in the ear, or it becomes swollen in the ear, place the ear in the sun. If you can see the stone, apply a few drops of violet oil or camphor oil, then administer extraction; and make the patient sneeze with ginger, and plug the nostrils when the sneezing comes, and put pieces of cloth or wool around the ear; and hold it upwards. Many times pus is produced by this cure; and if it does not produce pus, use fine tweezers for extraction as follows:
If it jumps out at the hinges, that's good; if not, introduce extraction with a subtle hook of small thickness; and if it doesn't jump out by this means, make a thread of wax and push the head of the thread or earplug strongly, stop the area around the thread with melted wax so that the air can't enter with the thread; then pull firmly, for many times it comes out as we have said; and if it doesn't come out in this way, take some glue and catch the animals, and put any suitable instrument on top of it; and place a piece of cotton around it; then press the glue on the stone or something else, and pull firmly. And if it doesn't jump out from all the things we have said, then hurry to cut the ear when abscess pus comes and spasms; and the method of cutting is that you first anesthetize the patient with a head anesthetic, draw blood according to the measure of its potency, then make the patient sit between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small cut in the root of the ear where the fat or skin depends; let the cut be like a crescent moon until you reach the bone, then extract it with all your might, and suck it quickly into your mouth; and heal it until it is healed. And if it is grains that have entered and swell, apply extraction; and if it cannot be extracted, apply a thin, fine spatula in this form:
And make an incision in that grain. However, do not do so if you think the grain is moist due to moisture from the ear, until you have made many pieces; then extract it using fine tweezers and a sucker, as we have said, to ensure the extraction is aligned.
Then the patient should use ear drops of strong condysum and stuff the ear with old cotton. The patient must lie on the same side where the water has fallen. If it jumps out because of this, that is good. If not, take many small and light pieces of straw, heat them slightly in the fire; then have the patient put one end of the straw into his ear and hold the other end with a pair of tweezers from the other side, and press another piece of straw onto the straw in the ear; continue pressing the straw against the straw in the ear until the water jumps out completely, and when you see it jump out, take one thread, insert one end into the ear, and burn the other end with fire as much as the thread is burned; then repeat this process with more threads until the water has all come out, as we have said earlier.
In the removal of the beast (insect), if it is small, like fleas and similar creatures, treat it as we have said earlier; but if it is large enough to feel, then use extraction with tweezers; and it is easier to remove what is in the ear with lighter tools.
In the extraction of worms in the ear, when you treat it as we have said in the division and where to administer distillations, if it does not improve, you must observe the ear in sunlight; if any worms open, remove them with subtle tweezers, if no worms appear, take a string of this shape:
Make it narrow at the bottom and wide at the top. Push the most subtle part of the string into the ear according to the severity of the patient's pain, then pull the entire string; do this repeatedly until all the worms come out. If they don't emerge, stop up the string with cotton as I said earlier; if no worms protrude as we have mentioned, administer distillations that the ancients have tested in the treatment of worms, and you will find them where to administer distillations or treat distillations; and if you distill your oils and medicines into the ear with this device as shown, you will find it here:
And let it be of silver or brass narrow at the bottom with one small opening and wider on top for distillation; and to press within the distillation, use a well-made device made of brass; if you see, take a scraper and wrap cotton around the tip; then pour your oil or liquid and whatever medicine you wish into the string, and place it in the ear. Then push the scraper with all the cotton inside to press the medicine and distill the oils or liquids from the ear. The patient will smell it inside, and let the distillation be one heated pot as when it is distilled in the ear; but make sure it's not too cold, for the medicine will not be as effective.
Of the stoppage of ears
No child is born without any perforation in the ears; and this same thing happens to adults due to ear injury or pus coming from within the ear, and this perforation sometimes occurs completely inside the ear if it cannot be seen; and sometimes there is only a small hole perforated and it can be easily seen.
Therefore, if the perforation is not visible, it is difficult to treat in various positions, and in this case you must place the sick person's ear in the sun and look inside. If you see the opus (pus) appearing, then open the perforation with this spatula shaped as follows:
And it should be cauterized and incised in front and behind completely, so that it does not touch the ear; if the opening is of cartilage or bone of the ear, hold it with fine tweezers and lightly crush it until all the cartilage is crushed.
If the opening is at the front of the ear, take a fine and sharp razor and heat it slightly over the fire, then place it in the cartilage of the ear. If you feel the opening from which the patient feels pain in the ear, make a small incision, but be careful not to injure the nerves of the ear; then put a bandage of appropriate size into the ear and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.
Do this every day until the wound heals, or take a bandage and moisten it with rose water and powdered vitriol broken; if you see the ear swell, then it is necessary to pull out the bandage and insert another bandage moistened with cerote made of rose oil and beeswax until the swelling disappears; then treat it until it is healed.
And when bleeding comes, dip a sponge and cloth in cold water, put it on the ear, and use other treatments that stop the bleeding which are either to treat distillations.
of the charcoal from paper (this likely refers to a substance used for healing or treating wounds)
This althelul that comes from paper leaves when they are moist and dry should be stretched with tweezers and forceps, then scraped with a spatula at its roots; then place it on the wound covered in vitriol (a type of acid).
And if no incision is made, the subtle lancet cautery should be used on the cauterized spot, and it is beneficial to cauterize after the incision; and many times they heal, since nothing remains from their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
Of the hailstorm
Many times hail-like things come in papers that appear similar in shape and hardness, and because of this, the disease is called "grandine," which is a thick collection of moisture on the paper above and below; the remedy is as follows: Take care if the hailstorm becomes muted from one side or the other, and it is an easy thing to know; then make an incision on both sides, then peel off each part lightly, take it with the tweezers and squeeze. If you cannot cover it without piercing the paper a little, do not worry the patient; and if the tear is large, gather it in stitches, and cure it until it is healed; and if it is small, do not apply force because the oilmen restore it soon and cause pain.
And if the grains (small particles) are descending within the ear towards the upper part, turn the paper and hold the grains with tweezers, and press it from both sides; and if the paper is moved by the incision, it doesn't matter; and when the grain is pressed, apply salty oil to it, and heal the wound of the one who suffers pain until the patient is healthy.
from the fat of the eyes (eyelids)
Exinach is a fat rendered in paper-like cloths, and this happens more often with children than with adults, and it causes them great pain, and they come down with catarrh at mornings, and cannot bear the light of the sun because their eyes are watery; and therefore they lie on their faces immediately, and sleep on top of it, and their paper is damp under their eyelids covered by the exinach that opens in oil. And when you press the place with your fingers and feel the exinach between them.
And the method of the work is that the patient places their head on a pillow; and then takes one linen cloth, and prepares a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity that contains exirnach from each part, then puts it below; and presses with your hands on both sides, so that exirnach is assembled inside the circle; then they make an incision in the middle of the moisture with a sharp spatumile, but not too large than the wound one makes to open a vein; and cut the skin completely until you see the exirnach; and in many positions, exirnach comes out from the incision, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Then stretch out a piece of folded cloth between your hands and turn your hand to both sides until it is spread; and be careful not to injure in the incision, that you do not go too deep with the spatumile, that you do not cut it open.
If the exirnach does not open at the beginning of the incision, then slightly raise the incision to make it appear; then stretch out as we have said, then wet cloths with oil and water, and place them on the wound, and hold down bandages.
And if such men break the seal and put it over to corrupt that moisture which has remained. Then cure it until it is healed. If it comes to an abscess hot, then heal it with poultices soothing until it is healed.
the hairs of paper
When hairs grow from paper other than nature, and are nurtured, they harm the eyes and bring about ways of diseases such as common tears and albugine, until it is a cause of destruction of the eyes; and there are four methods of cure: either by cautery together with fire, or by medicine according to what is before in this chapter on cautery, and it is done either by incision and stitching or by caustics, according to what I will say.
It is necessary that you place the patient's head on your side, then turn the paper with the oil on your left hand; if it has been converted, it is good; if not, insert an awl through one of the holes; and it should be pierced through the edge of the paper where the hairs grow from those hairs, and pull one filament across the entire paper, then shave the paper; then make a hole in the part beneath the paper, below the hairs, completely filling the spatula, from the large rim to the small; then pull out one filament, and put a small tent of cotton and linen on top of the paper under where the figure is drawn, as the thorn of the myrtle; and it is necessary that the figure is according to the quantity which you wish to raise the paper that has been designated for all.
And if it is necessary to apply a large quantity of the paper according to the softness of the paper; then make a hole in the entire spatula along the two lines that you have drawn, and start from the large rim to the small; and let one of the slits be near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then insert the awl into one of the corners of the keyhole, then scrape it all; then sew together the two lips with a needle at one filament of fine linen, and squeeze out the blood, and make the superfluous filaments adhere to the two scissors with anything sticky, if you wish to do this; and if not, do not care about it, then leave the sewing and the filaments for 2-4 days; then treat the wound without sewing with drying and constricting substances, because the paper revives at the edge of the wound and gathers it, but the sewing is rotten (as the ancients say), and this is laborious work without fear.
And if in another way: and it is that you draw the paper of a figure as the thorn of myrtle, as we have mentioned, at four openings spaced according to the form shown here:
Then bind that which is above the small forces equally according to the form that is here:
And if you have no power to hold the pincers and the things are not even, take a needle with one thread, and put it in place according to the figure; and put another thread of the large armhole, and the second thread of the small, and assemble the threads equally between your hands; then lift your hand equally, and lift the entire skin over what you have marked, as we have said, then sew the two lips of the wound together by stitching, and let it heal until it is healed; and if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with ointment and similar calming balms.
And sometimes the hair of the papyrus is transformed: if you need to use what we have said about incision; but sewing in one and the other is more artificial.
The treatment for dogs is as follows: First, fold the paper and place it inside as I have said, then make two cords of equal length and width similar to that of the paper and the diameter of a spatula; take the heads of two parts where you hold the strings; next, assemble one and the other subtly on top of the paper with oil, and bind the two cords from the two parts; leave it like this for some days, and the skin that is bound will die, rot, and fall off, leaving a wound.
If it takes a long time or if you need to force it, then treat it until it is healed; and when the wound is closed and no more hair can be found; this is the form of the two cords that you will make according to the figure and quantity of length and width:
the work (ovraiges) is such that you take a fine needle and insert one silk thread of the same size; then assemble the cords (chiés) and align them carefully, and the length of the threads should be about one palm; then arrange another fine silk thread briefly, attach the head of the thread, put the patient's head in your hand; expose it to sunlight so that the work is done under clear conditions, as this work is subtle and small; next, insert the needle into all the hair (chasse) along the root of the hair (ajosteit), and pierce it through the paper quickly until you pull out the natural hair; then draw out the hair up to the head of the thread, and attach that hair to the thread, if there is one or two or three or more hairs; then draw your hand until the hairs come out completely from the paper along with the natural hair.
And if the arrow has been expelled but hairs do not come out with it, draw out the arrow to the end you have ordered, until the arrow comes out from the wound and you see it through the oil vision; then draw out the arrow and the hairs, and let the oil close for 2 or 3 days, until the hair grows in its place and the skin forms over it; if the hairs are small, let one long hair of natural origin accompany it, and let it grow along with the one you left, until it is elongated and then remove it.
The decay of oil
When this disease called "alecrati" or decay comes in the oil, it happens in two ways: one natural and the other unnatural. It occurs suddenly from a wound, an injury, or a burn, and similar things.
And the method of work in it is that you cut the joint, separate the ligaments from it, put tent-like strips of flax inside, and let it heal until it is healed; and it should not be used in its treatment with things that dry and restrict. For if you do this, the disease will be worse than the first one; but the work of softening things, such as fenugreek, and the juice of water or oil and flax seeds cooked, and immediately cool down some oil, and wrap a tent around it, and cure with these.
And the treasure of your cure is that you do not let it heal in its original form; and this treatment which we have said is not helpful unless addressing the disease in this way so that it does not return to its original form.
of the fat coming in the oil
This sickness that is below is truly called "axacrati," and it is both natural and accidental. The accidental part comes from wounds, cuts, burns, and similar things; the way of treatment in it is that you take a needle with one double thread, and pierce it through the flesh, entering from the left tear duct to the right, so that the threads come out in two cheeks of the flesh; then the flesh is raised above the whole needle, and it is covered with a large spatula.
And if the shape of the paper comes back as it should be, that is good; if not, take a rasp and place it in the wound, turn the paper, and make two wounds where the skin is inside the paper; and let the corners of the two wounds be at the angles of the incision that you made, and let it form an angle so that when they are assembled, the shape will be like the letter that has no "greek y," then remove that flesh, according to the thickness that its edges are curved underneath, from where the paper is; then join the two separated parts, and sew them with a thread of linen; then treat as we have said for the medicines softening, and tenting, until it heals.
And if the sickness comes from a wound or stitching or cauterization, it is necessary that you make a shallow cut below the hair on the paper, as described before; then separate between the two leathers of a tent, as I said; and the work should be done according to the shape of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and wise masters adapt devices with all possible skill to bring the figure back to its natural form; and patients themselves, according to what is necessary for work and instruments in various positions.
The swollen pain of paper (literal translation)
When such swelling occurs in the hand of a man as described above, where the paper is swollen with white oil and cannot move or perform its natural functions, it is necessary then to cut the point of a razor under the paper and lift it upwards; keep it between pliers until you find that which protrudes at the spatula-like part (subtle spatula), which should not be too sharp nor too deep, so that the patient does not suffer from a too sharp spatula causing injury to the oil; make your incision, from which you scrape the assembled matter, gently, so that the paper returns to its natural form; and heal the entire assembled matter, sometimes making the oil sour and adding sweet warm collyrium; then put a linen tent between the paper and the oil, and place damp wool over the oil abundantly with egg; after three days, use the collyrium and other healing substances until it is healed.
The nail of the oil (literal translation)
Know that the nail has two types: one is nerve-like and resembles hard wax, and another which is not nerve-like but resembles frozen white moisture; when it is touched by iron and cooked with tweezers, it cannot be removed; and both seem to start towards the large root, and grow little by little until they cover the entire view and light and the movement of the oil.
And the method of incision is that the patient places his head on your healthy hand, then you pull out the nails; and tear off the paper with your hand, then take tweezers to remove the nail, and hold it above; then take a needle, and put a horse hair or ox hair, or strong thread on it, and double the tip of the needle slightly and poke it into the nail, and pierce it all through with the needle, tie the nail with the thread and hold it above, and scrape off all the hair from the side of the nail that follows the cuticle and the silk to the hair up to the head, then chip away the remaining in the root of the big toe with a small chisel and fine tools, and leave the natural flesh or big toe as usual; and sometimes the nails are set on the incision only, and along the fillet, as we have said; then scrape off all the soft tissue from where this shape is formed:
And ensure that the soft tissue does not touch the skin and tear it, and that the cuticle is not pierced; and after incision, drop a little bit of crushed oil in the wound, and let the oil of collyrium made from litargirius remain until the next day; then treat whatever is necessary until it is healed.
And if the nail is not nerveous and you cannot insert the needle, and the uncines cannot enter, many times this appearance of the nail is cured with medicines; and they grow as I have told in the division, and if you see it covered, it works the oil of the patient, and take the spatumile lightly pointed according to this form:
Then gently lift the nail and if you see it does not thin out or reduce in size, apply pressure to it. Then distill from your mouth into the oil of collyrium made from litargyre and red collyrium and pulverized, and anoint the oil until the next day; then repeat the procedure as before until it is completely removed.
If nothing is contrary to it in the oil (as with an abscess), then lait (milk) should be applied and the abscess should be treated hot until it is healed, then continue the procedure as before until it is healed.
And if the appearance of the flesh near the armpit harms in oil greatly, suspend it at the neck, and cut a part but not too much, so that tears do not come; then distill in the oil collyrium which is made from litarge.
of the flesh which grows above the eyeball
The eyelids of some men sometimes grow red flesh, and cover the eyeball and press upon the paper and turn it outward, and seem like a rosebud from a balustrade; and the remedy for this is that the patient should place his head in the bowl, then open the eyelids, and remove all the red flesh to the appropriate uncinations (eyebrow areas), and hold it with force; then cut off the first layer of the red flesh, and continue cutting towards the razor until the end, but be careful not to wound the oil during the procedure; and make the incision with a spatula as mentioned in the treatment for the nail and the small bones around the nail, as described by the form after this chapter.
And when the incision is completed and all the flesh is cut, apply the oil of seil crushed or you distill red collyrium and similar corrosive medicines, and put cotton soaked with egg white on top to ensure proper healing; and if anything remains, and the wound becomes cold, and you doubt whether it is properly healed, leave the oil and heal the wound with things that calm inflammation; then return to your work until it is sound, and do this whenever a wound is treated in this way with oil by this means.
Nevertheless, you must reduce the treatment of each oil by natural means; and in case of accidental work with iron, do not put your hand into any of these works until you see that this limb can bear that work.
of veins of the eyes
The first red veins which are covered above the eye, and it reveals its work and weakens the oil every day. Therefore, it is necessary for you to first examine whether the oil, where the red vein is, is healthy or if there is any other disease except the red vein; then instruct the patient to put his head in your hand, then press those veins all along their length according to one's wisdom, and let the pressure be subtle double according to this form:
And there should be two degrees of pressure in one fold according to this form:
Then press those veins subtly, and squeeze out the blood hour by hour until you see the veins moving away from the oil; and make sure not to prick the oil with the tips of the lancets, and perform this procedure at noon before the sun, and be very warm in your work so that you do not spoil the veins; and when you have completed this, if it distills green and red oils, it will correct those who are affected by the sebel.
And if you cannot bind all of it in that hour, apply a plaster on oil of calming things to the pain of the eyes, and leave it for some days until the pain is alleviated and assured of healing, then resume as before according to this method until it is healed; and this is the form of forces.
of the fistula of oil
The sore called "arissati" fistula: when you cure it by cautery and burning medicine as I have previously said, and it is not healed, there is a trick in it that you should cut open the abscess where it must rot, and drain all the moisture that is in it, until the bone is exposed.
And when the bone is exposed, and you will see corruption and blackness; if it needs to be scraped with all the tools mentioned here, it is called a "rough head," and should be scraped circularly once with a tool shaped like a chisel and pointed like a limer.
And place the level over the bone corruption, then turn it between your hands and press your hand slightly so that you feel that the corruption is removed; do this once, then restore the level of healing balms.
If the joint is sutured and char comes out, and the bone of the bow is sutured and remains so for 40 days without reverting or becoming abscessed, and no evil accident occurs (knowing that it is healthy); if this does not happen, there is no other remedy but to return the fistula to the point of the navel according to this form: you must expose the bone a second time with iron, and with healing medicines, and when it is exposed, take one awl according to this form, and make the head of the awl at four angles, and let the shaft be attenuated up to the tip as you see here.
Then put it on the dislocated bone of the elbow, and move your hand away from the oil (ointment). Then turn the whole instrument all the way until it penetrates the bone and the patient feels it if they hold their hand on the affected area; and then restore the joint with dry medicines as I have shown you, and when the flesh grows and hardens, the matter goes to the affected area; it is easier for the patient.
of the dislocation
When the eyes are fully open in all places and do not move at all, there is no need to bind it (the patient); then clean it, then put on poultices or hot irons for healing, then apply oil made from acacia and aloe and incense and saracocolla, and hold the oil, and anoint it with bandages and cloths; and the manner of the cloths is that you take soft cloths, fold each one in four, and put one on top of another according to the size that the eyes require; then bind them with a strong bandage, and repeat the poultices for healing without injuring it; then remove the poultices and leave the oil held tight day and night, and if the liniment becomes soft, you must bind it tightly; then remove the linen after the day and night, and if you see the eyes heal, that is good; if not, repeat the anointing and the cloths and the liniment until it heals.
the bursting of a water bladder
When rupture occurs in the water bladder, it bursts and paper-like matter comes out like a grain of resin, and is very frightening to see; then if you cover it, the treatment is such that you push an awl into the root of the affected part all the way up to its top, then push another awl or double-filed needle from the edge of the bladder area; and make it pierce through, leaving the first awl in place according to its position; then bind the end of the double filament with a piece of linen and tighten, then remove the awl and put moistened flax oil on it; and leave it until the filaments stick with the bladder, then treat the oil with healing substances until the wound is healed; and sometimes the wound is kept closed by the bladder on each side of a circular piece of cloth, until it is healed.
And if the eyes seem to be large in appearance, pierce them with a thin spatula that comes from oil and cure the moisture and pus, then insert some immediately; then remove it when healed.
Of the bone of the oil
This disease called "alcunnati" is not caused by anything other than the bone in the oil assembly resembling an ulcer and it is not an ulcer; its appearance during surgery looks like a seated patient. Then you should take hold of his head with both hands, make him move so that you see the bone come up to your eyes. Then it should be fixed, and let the light shine through and let the patient see things as he usually does. If it does not discharge below, know that it is an ulcer, and if the discharge from the bone is not properly arranged as we have said. Place the seated patient in your hands, then take the thin spatula and place it under the corneal sheet and the crown, along the continuous junction with the corneal sheet and the crown, until the bone protrudes. When it is issued, it will distill into hot oil mixed with honey or ulcer-healing herbs boiled together with honey, and then it should be treated with another remedy until it heals.
of the waters in the oil
We have the appearance of the artery in division, and that which is required to pierce; proceed according to health. You must make the patient sit between your hands crossed, away from light due to the sun, and hold the oil clean and press it very firmly; then place the paper of the oil on your left hand if the eyes are on the left, or on your right hand if they are on the right; then take with your right hand, if the eyes are on the left, the instrument called "almagda", or your left hand, if they are on the right; then place the point of the instrument near the corona through the thickness of a nail in that part of the oil where the minor tear is, then push the instrument called "almagda" firmly, and hold your hand as long as it pierces the oil, and feel that almagda comes to the empty place; and it must be that the measure of the path of almagda should be at the full depth of the measure of the space from the pupil to the end of the nose; and this is the corona of the oil; then you will see the bone in that paper due to the clarity of the corneous cloth, and then place the instrument up to where the artery is, then press it down a path after another. If the artery is still there, the patient will see before him and the instrument in his oil.
After a short rest, and if the artery rises again in the second way, apply the force with the instrument, and when it is fully inserted and does not rise anymore, gently turn almagda around your thumb; then place another small amount of gemmed oil on it, and squeeze out this oil from within. Then put damp cloth or moistened linen soaked in rose oil and abundant egg yolk, and bind with the clean oil. We, and those of our time, put on top a layer of crushed matter with an abundance of egg yolk.
And if almagda cannot enter the oil due to its hardness because some people have too hard eyes, then it is necessary that you take the instrument called "alberit", of which this is the shape:
Therefore, pierce the conjunctive only, and do not go too deep, but make one shallow incision, then apply alum, as we have said; and when the work is complete, prepare a draught for the patient, in which he sleeps on his back in a dark room; be attentive to all movements, and give light foods, and let him not move his head neither to the right nor to the left, and tie him as necessary until the third day; then untie him in the same dark room, test his vision, and let him see some things, and then rebind him for seven days; do not perform this, however, during the time of the cure or immediately after the incision, but you should alleviate it, because the pain increases quickly.
If an abscess comes, you should untie the oil before the seventh day and direct it towards that which soothes abscesses; and when it is soothed, then you should untie the eye and put on it one eyelet to cover for any length of time, and stay in that dark room. Then slowly leave the house a little at a time, and turn to his case; and know that no disciple should interfere in this case.
And one came to us who was from Iria, who told us that in his land they pierce alum, so that the pain subsides, but I have never seen anyone do it in our land, nor have I ever read about it in old books; and perhaps this is a new thing.
And these are the resemblances of the forms of amalgam, because those who do not recognize them will see them; and they are properly of arsenic:
And the heads of these are of the same subtlety, and the bases at four angles intersect:
of the skin over the nose
There are never born or nasal skin growths that appear different, of which there are some that resemble scorpions with many legs; and if it has a swollen char of such color, and a soft char of good color. In the case of these chars that are soft, but not swollen, you must make the patient sit between your hands in the sun; open his nostrils, and pour the onion juice over those growths, and pull them out; then hold what can be supported with a spatula thin and sharp from one side, until you know that the char is completely removed.
And if any thing remains that cannot be covered, you shall open it all with subtle and light instruments, so that there is nothing left; and if there is no abscess, or the abscess is closed, help as needed; and if the abscesses are malicious, hurry and cauterize them until the pus is drained and all the charred matter is removed, then pour in oil, water, or wine.
If the opening does not work, and moisture comes up to the palace (meaning head), know that it is healthy; and if moisture does not pierce as needed, know that there is charred matter in the bone above, which the instruments do not come to cut: then you shall take a large linen thread, about two fingers' width apart; and insert the threads into the patient's nostrils up to their power, and pull out smelling it until pus comes from the nose into the mouth; and many times children in school do this, and it is easy for those who wish to do so; then hold one head coming from the nose with one hand, and the other head coming from the mouth with the other hand, and know each other's turn as we are the ones holding the threads. Do this until you know that the threads have rotten the char; then pull out the thread, let the blood flow, and moisten the thread in Egyptian ointment, and put it back into the nose as before; do this for four days or more, until the ointment corrodes everything remaining of the char; and then put a reed of plaster in the nose for some days until it is healed, and if there is need for drying medicines, use them; and this is the shape of the instrument to purge the head, as one distills oils and medicines in the nose.
And it shall be made of silver or tin, resembling a lamp with a handle, like a cane, and guide it so; and if you see, make a closed cane, and the instrument shall be full to purge the head; and have one handle on the head to hold when heating the oil or any liquid.
About the skin near the nose
Many times a disease called "telul" arises near the nose, which grows and becomes large when seen; therefore, it is necessary to treat it at the beginning and completely excise it, then apply heat or burning medicine to it; if it is delayed until it becomes large, take care if it is hard, dark in color, insensitive: do not touch it with iron because it is a swollen abscess, for when it is touched once, it brings great harm to the patient; and if the abscess has soft contact and is not discolored, you can completely cover it, the patient must be warned and treated with dry remedies and binding substances.
when the nose is cut and sutured
Know that when a solution of continuation comes to one of these cartilages, it is of little use, unless in some men. Therefore, if such a situation occurs in anyone, check if the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then bring the two lips together into a stitch, then treat it until it heals; and if the lips have already separated from both sides, you must scrape all the parts of them until they heal, then bring the two lips together into a stitch, tighten it, and sprinkle powdered dragon's blood powder on top, and incense pulverized; and place some plaster of strong or other plaster over the powders, and leave it until it dries, then treat it with ointment until it heals.
The method of stitching is that you gather the solution: either with needles, as I have told you in the abdomen stitching; or with thread, as I have informed you.
of abscesses of lips
To the hands of men happens an abscess hard within the lips, resembling grains of various sizes, both small and large; then you must turn the lips, and cut on each side, and take it with the forceps and crush it in every part; then apply the leeches after the incision of vitriol powder, until the wound is cauterized; and then cleanse the wound with ashes, and cure the wound with dry things until it heals.
From the jawbone
Many times an abscess arises on the jawbone that the ancients called "albulus"; then you must hold it with the forceps and crush it at its root, and let the pus flow out; then apply vitriol powder or other powders restrictive and drying to the wound; if that abscess returns after the incision, and repeatedly occurs, crush it again and cauterize it; it will not return after cauterization; these are the shapes of the instruments for covering (it).
From the sores
Sometimes, sores are gathered at the head of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, rough and harsh scales that are ugly; and sometimes the teeth are black and yellowish and curved, until corruption comes to the gum, and the teeth stink; you must make the patient sit between your hands, with his head in your lap, and remove the sores or scales that are visible, as long as nothing remains; and in the same way do for the blackness and greenness, and yellowish and other spots, until they are removed; and if you remove what is there at the first reason, it is good; if not, start again on the second or third day and let him have everything removed; and know that the teeth require different types of instruments to be cleaned, according to what the worker demonstrates, because the tool used to clean the teeth has other forms than that used between the teeth; and these forms and others should be prepared for you.
You should wait as long as possible when extracting a tooth for its pain, because it must not be done immediately; because this is a high substance up to which there is no excuse for shaving. Then, when the patient is constrained to extract a tooth, it is necessary that you are certain about which one to pull. Many times the pain deceives the patient, and believes it is a good tooth, and pulls out the bad one; however, the pain does not go away until the bad one is removed, as we have seen in the past; and when you are certain about which tooth to pull, you must scorch around the tooth with a strong spatula to protect the gums from all sides; then grasp it with your fingers or delicate pliers at the very root, and gently rock it back and forth until it is well loosened, then firmly hold the pliers; and keep the patient's chin in your saint (or hand) between your knees, and hold it still so that it does not move.
After pulling the tooth properly without breaking it, if it does not come out, take one of these instruments and gently push it in from each side, and move it as you have done before. And if the tooth is pierced and eaten away, it is necessary to fill it with cloth, where the rotten parts are; then carefully pull it out with pliers so that it does not break while being pulled; and work very carefully around the gum to remove the tooth.
And be careful not to break it and leave a part behind, causing the patient greater pain from the root. Be careful that you do not act like ignorant lords who sometimes break the cart by their haste and recklessness, and do not bring about what we have mentioned; but they sometimes bring about disease through the roots that remain or the cart that is broken, as we have often seen; and when the tooth is pulled out, wash the area with wine or oil and salt; and if bleeding occurs, which often happens, use vitriol powder; and if it does not work, cauterize.
The forms of the instruments, with which one mutes (silences) the teeth first, should be of long points and thick handles, so that they do not double when you extract the tooth; and these are their shapes:
They should be of thick handles so that they do not bend when pulling (extracting), and they should be of good iron and toothed for holding (clamping).
of the root of the teeth When the root remains drawn out, you must put on it soft cotton wool in butter for 1 day or 2, until the wound heals, then insert the tongs called "algefri", which resemble the beak of a tweezers; and inside them should be made like a chisel and that is its shape:
If the roots do not want to come out with these tongs, you must uncover all the flesh around the root, and use the instrument called "althali", which is known as a plaster, in this shape:
And it should be thick and large so that it does not break, and if the root jumps out through them, that is good; if not, help yourself with all the instruments, from which the forms come afterwards:
And if one helps himself with this instrument which has two prongs, here is its shape:
and other iron pincers which are in front of the teeth, and of this instrument that resembles large tongs, whose shape is as follows:
Let this instrument be made such that it cannot break, and know that many iron pincers are needed; and also other instruments, which are not counted here; and the wise masters find their own instrument by themselves according to what their work and the illness requires, for there are such diseases where the ancient did not teach an instrument due to diversity among them; and if it breaks a chariot or any other bone, where it could have helped, then let him seek the instruments that he needs, as I have told you, and help with movements, whose shape is as follows: And let them be large and firm to hold the bone so that it does not slip, but can be held and removed; and then restore the joint with the appropriate medicines, and if there is pus in the bone, which is small, use this instrument to clean it all:
When teeth appear not according to natural form and the shape is ugly, especially in girls, if you know that the tooth has not yet grown after the dent, and it is not properly aligned, and cannot be filed or trimmed: remove it; and if it is near the gum with the tooth, take this instrument with the shape of a small beak, and made of sharp iron on the end:
And the sharp-pointed instrument is used for many hours due to the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the others, and if it appears that it can be filed, file it with a flat file shaped like this:
And so it is like the lime with which they make needles; and in the lime, the tooth little by little wears down gently, so that it does not move until it wears away completely; then the flat surface is smoothed out with any file, and if the dent is too sharp and pierces the tongue, it is necessary to smooth the sharpness until it is even, so that it does not pierce the tongue or corrupt the speech.
when the teeth are loose
When the teeth become loose, either from percussion or falling out, and the patient cannot chew food without it falling out, and you treat them with tightening medicines, it is not effective; rather, they should be tightened with a gold thread. Silver threads become green and moldy, but gold does not change. The thread should be neither too thick nor too thin, according to the space between the teeth. If you want to align the teeth, take the thread and double it between two healthy teeth, then place the loose teeth in between the healthy ones, whether there is one or more, until you reach the healthy tooth on the other side. Then, continue covering up as far as you started, and hold your hand delicately and skillfully, so that they do not move. Your knot should be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape. Then, take the loose teeth with tweezers, assemble them, and place them back between the healthy teeth, ensuring they do not pierce the tongue. Leave them in this position for as long as possible, and if they slip or the thread breaks, tighten it with another thread; if it lasts and serves for a while, it is the form of the tooth and the alignment of the two healthy teeth and the loose teeth, as you see:
And when the tooth falls out, if one puts it back in its place, freshly, as we have said; and let no one interfere who is not wise and patient, and sometimes a bone fragment of an animal's tooth is shaped to fit, and one places it at the site where it is missing, and holds it in place as we have said, and lets it stay for a long time.
To cover the ligament of the tongue
Sometimes there arises under the tongue or nearby, a ligament that is not naturally present; or by accident due to a sealed wound. The work involves opening the mouth of the patient and holding his head straight, then lifting the tongue. Next, you should separate the nerve-like ligament widely enough for the tongue to be dislocated from its place, and if it is tough or hard, and caused by a sudden wound, push in the uncinate bone and tie it off widely. Make sure the cut is not too deep, as there is an artery underneath. Once you have done that, lift the swollen area with rose water and a soft cloth, then put a linen tent under the tongue. The patient should bite on it each night to prevent it from healing. If there is discharge of blood, apply vitriol powder; if the wound breaks open, cauterize it with the slow-burning cautery (which is good for this). Then treat it with another remedy until it heals.
And if the swelling appears dark or hard to the sight of the sick person, do not touch it because it is a cancer; and if it is declining towards decay, and there is moisture, throw onion juice over it, and pierce it with a thin spatula from both sides; and if it resists your work, place powdered vitriol above it until it becomes dry; then remove the lees and the pus, and treat it with other remedies until it heals.
for abscesses in the throat
Sometimes there come into the throat boils called "godath", and they are properly called the two almonds. When you treat them as we have said in the division, and they do not heal, be careful: if it is a hard abscess of small size and dark color, do not touch it with iron. And if it is red and the root is thick, do not touch it with iron for fear of bleeding; but let it remain until it softens, and then you will cut it open, or it will burst by itself; and if it is white in color and the root is thin, prepare the instrument to cover it, but first check that the abscess is calm and pacified. Then have the patient sit before the sun, and his cheeks should be in your hand, and he opens his mouth and you take the servant between his hands, and press the tongue under the entire instrument, as follows; and it should be made of silver or thin brass like a knife:
Can you press the tongue with this instrument and observe the abscess? If so, take the awl and poke it into the abscess and draw it up above as much as possible; do not bring anything from the linen with it, then strike it with the instrument in the shape of a cross or a forceps; even though the head is bent, and one part is against another, and they are sharp, they are made of iron or bone.
And if you do not have this instrument at hand, strike it with pliers, in the shape of which is a cross or forceps.
And it should be cut through on one side and named on the other; and when you have struck one of the abscesses, strike the other in the same way, and after the incision gargarize (cleanse) the patient with hot, sharp, and acidic material, and if bleeding occurs, gargarize the patient again or use scorched pomegranate rind or myrtle leaves, and similar things until the blood is stopped; then cure it until it heals; and at times other abscesses than the two will appear in the throat, strike them in the same way as the two equally.
I will treat a woman with an abscess inside her throat, meaning a small abscess; it had already been very tightly closed the entire throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the blocked passage, and could neither eat nor drink, and would have died within a day or two. The abscess was so large that it had filled two hollow spaces through the neck. I made a hole immediately, and pierced once, then pulled it out, and took out a large piece of pus; then I sewed up the other opening in the throat, and opened her mouth and pressed her tongue; afterward, I pierced the abscess again, cut off a part of it, and only a little blood came out; and thus the passage was unblocked from the woman's throat, and she began to drink water and then wine, and did not stop cutting away at the abscess for a long time; the abscess grew back again, filled up the space that I had seen, until it became very large; then I tricked it and cauterized it inside her throat: thus the growth stopped; and I left those parts alone, and may God do what he will with them afterwards.
a woman with an abscess
1. When the anus retreats into the urethra and is long, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is swollen and round, it is called "urethra". When it is treated as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not improve, and you see that the large abscesses are subsiding, and it is subtle, you must cut it; and the one that is rounded and not long; and it is red or of a dark color or black, you must avoid cutting into it. For there is great danger for the patient. Therefore, when you see it, according to the method that I have said, of its shape and length, you should make the patient sit before the sun, and press his tongue with the instrument that we have mentioned earlier in this treatise; then pierce the anus, draw it out, and cut it at .i. to .ij. places that I have mentioned in the incision of the two wounds. And you must not cut beyond the natural boundary; for if you do so, it will cause pain and words. After the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the two wounds, and treat it until it is healed. And if the patient fears to be cut, you must use an instrument for cauterization to alleviate his fear. The method of cauterization is sharp and hot. And it is that the patient puts his head in your hand, and then presses his tongue with the instrument that we have mentioned or chapter of caution, and hold it with hot coals, so that it is not too thick nor too clear; and use the handle of this instrument, which has this form:
And have a hair or some medicine, like the handle of a spoon, and place the instrument with all the medicine on the anus; and let the patient lie on his side so that saliva and mucus flow from his mouth into the medicine, so that it does not enter the throat and the bladder; then hold your hand over the entire medicine and press it on the anus, for the amount of half an hour, until you see it swell and the bites of the medicine are alleviated; and if you see, take cotton and wrap it around some instrument, and moisten the cotton in the medicine, and stick the instrument with all the cotton into the sheath above, so that the cotton adheres to the anus; and do this often, until the cauterization is perfect, then let it dry, and wait for 4 or 5 days. And if you need to start the cauterization of the medicine again, start it again, and after the cauterization, suck out the pus around the anus, with a cotton swab dipped in butter, and clean what is around the medicine; and wash it with cold water, and treat it with gargarisms until it is healed.
This cure is more effective than incision, not just cautery; if it is treated by fumigation in this manner, take camphor and hyssop and origanum and rue and chamomile and wormwood and similar herbs, gather them all or some of these in one pot, and put it all inside, and let it boil; the pot should be well sealed with strong clay, and within the pot have one hollow instrument like this: And it should be of silver or brass, and the one end should be inserted into the mouth of the patient as long as the vapors rise to the eye through the tube until the eye is deadened; afterwards repeat often, until the eye dries up, and make sure not to do this at the beginning of the abscess's hot stage, because many things may happen; and do not do it if there is no hollow instrument present. If this instrument is not available, take a tube and place an eggshell crack within the patient's mouth so that the patient's mouth does not get too hot; for the eggshell will not let the vapor weigh on the mouth, and it is good cure combined with health.
Many times it is necessary to insert into the throat a bone or fish spine, or any other object; therefore you must pull out what you can see, and press the tongue against the instrument until you see movement in the object; and if it does not open up and remains lodged in the throat, you must make the patient vomit before the meat is cooked in the stomach; by chance, this may expel the object through vomiting. Or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of wool, or a root of lettuce, or one morsel of dry bread. Tie a thread to the sponge, and then swallow it. When it reaches the place, it will adhere, and you will pull it out; and if it does not come out as we have said, take one plunger in this shape:
And let the instrument be curved at the top so it can more easily enter the throat, and lift the head high; watch that you do not touch the epiglottis, for it should not come loose or push the bone inside; it is better that the patient pushes the instrument, because they are able to move or the thing is already moved; if it goes down, or you pull it out all the way to the instrument equally, until it comes out.
From the throat incision
Sometimes medicine is used on the throat, as I said in the division, by means of medicines; and when this does not help, then look at the throat of the patient in the sun, afterwards press the tongue with the instrument I told you about. If you see the throat, cut it open with a small knife or thin pliers that are suitable for this purpose. If this is not effective, take a hair-covered string, and put it into the throat of the patient, then push or turn a heated iron on the end of the string frequently. And anoint the patient with cold water all day. Then take a full glass of cold water, open the mouth, and pour it into the mouth without swallowing, and move it around with your hand often; and as soon as the throat feels the water, it will vomit.
And if it does not fall as we have said, then subdue the patient with asefetide in the instrument that I have mentioned for fumigation of the eye; do this many times, for it will be stubborn. The method of fumigation is that you take one pot or one containing charcoal, and cover the opening of the instrument with a perforated cloth; then pour your fumigation into it, and have the patient hold the head of the cane in their mouth, and close the mouth so that no smoke escapes, but comes only as far as the nose; and the nose will now be affected, and if it does not fall, repeat the fumigation many times; let the patient endure thirst, and eat salty and acidic foods, and drink nothing of water; and then it will be necessary for it to come out under this governance.
The form of the instrument with which one treats the nose, is, when it can be seen, resembling crooked pliers for entering the throat; and having the shape of a syringe, and having an asperity of lime, so that what it takes, it cannot release; here is the form:
The chapter of abscesses
According to the memory that comes afterwards in this book from one and another, many resemble abscesses, and they are diverse in perforation and cutting; and it is in two ways, of which one is like itself and depending on whether it holds moisture. And the second way is by the organs or parts where it is located. For abscesses of the head are different from those of the foundation, and abscesses of the charnut lews are different from those that come in jointures; and each one should have its own judgement in the work.
If one has abscesses, it should not be perforated until the bowel is ripe according to its accomplishment; and if there are those that require perforation when they are hardened, but do not die according to their accomplishment, such as abscesses that come from jointures. For when an abscess comes from jointures, and it is left until it is surrounded by pus, perhaps the ligament and nerve of the jointure become corrupted, which causes contraction in that member. Or the abscess is from the principal member, and if you delay perforation too long until it is ripe, it will harm the principal member; or it is from the foundation, if it is perforated before it is ripe; and it should not be perforated without accomplishment of digestion except for those that are from the foundation, which should not burst out and become long inside, and a fistula should form; and it will not heal in a great term.
And you should know the sign of the perforation of an abscess that is healed according to completion; and this is when pain is eased, and the departure of fever, and the diminishing of pain and redness, and the settling and narrowing of the head of the abscess, and other signs; and you should make it sit where the perforation is more dependent on the abscess, and where it has opened out; and let the perforation be along the length of the body, and if the abscesses are at the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all equal places or where there is no opening.
In those that close, according to the affected limb. And when abscesses are in fleshy areas, it is best to leave the perforation until it is confirmed in complete digestion, as we have said. For if you pierce it before this, the body will drain out from it, and it will be filled with much pus; and possibly harden the lips and deeply penetrate it. And for any abscess that are pierced according to the width of the body, according to what the limb requires. And you should bring forth small abscesses, small punctures; and in large abscesses, large punctures, and many slits according to the likeness of the size of the abscess; and if it is necessary to cover such abscesses, you should sew them; when they have become as thin as cloth, and are softened, it is necessary to do as with babies: and if there are those that are cut into four angles, and if there are those from which one covers like the myrtle leaf, as abscesses in joints; and if there are those where one makes a round incision, and other similar incisions and coverings.
Those without a head, such as a superficial abscess, it is necessary that you pierce it completely; and when the abscesses are large, and they have gathered much pus, and you pierce it, do not drain all the pus in that hour, but drain some part of it; then stop up the abscess until the next day, then drain nothing crookedly; do this many times gradually, until the pus disappears. This is especially necessary if the patient is weak, or a woman carrying a child, or small children, or elderly people in decline. For the pus sometimes jumps out with the drainage, which may cause the death of the patient, and you will not be at fault. Therefore, avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced your abscess, clean the wound, and check if the wound from the abscess is small; and if it is a deep wound, bring in strips of linen or old cotton; and if it is a large abscess, and there is much draining, it is necessary that you stick in a strip in each one so that they meet; and if you have sewn part of the skin in the abscess, and covered it around, it is necessary that you fill it with old cotton or woolen cloth without moisture, and bind until the third day; then unbind, and cure with ointment until it heals.
And if bleeding occurs during your work, bring cold water and apply it, along with a wet cloth, and place it on the wound repeatedly. If the bleeding persists, provide treatment and care, and use the powders I have mentioned in this book, and if it is winter, or the wounds or abscesses are very nervous, you must put hot tents and moistened cloths over them; and if it is summer, and the limbs are fleshy, you must put moistened cloths over them with cold water and oil, or cold water and cold oil, as we have said; and then drain the abscess and the pus and treat it, as necessary, until it is healed.
This also needs to be known universally in the treatment of abscesses: I have already told you how to proceed before the treatment of abscesses, and here is the chapter.
on ne devra estre en grant doutance a estre en grant paor de mourir; et se il n'est pas bien curez, li malaides moront.
1. For small abscesses that come on the head are handled in our practice, similar to grapes or blisters from a linseed; there are also those with moisture like pimples, and some are hard and stone-like at the base without any doubt that the artery does not oppose it. And the operations of the neck should be proven with all instruments called "entromissoire", from which the following form comes, what it contains. For if it contains moisture, it is to be done above the long one. And when the moisture is drained, scrape skin without leaving any remaining hair, for it returns immediately when left; then immerse cotton in Egyptian ointment, if present; if not, in water and oil, and apply the wound, and leave until the next day; those who are delayed by night will heal. And on the second day, repeat the cotton as before, and on the third, until you know it does not stay by night; then cure the wound with ointment as appropriate, until it is healed. And if the abscess contains one hard nut, squeeze it along this form, with long force; throw your nails into it, scrape it from all sides, and apply all your care to draw out the pus or where it lies; and if the artery opposes you, do as I told you before. And do the same for a hard abscess, and treat and heal as I told you.
And the incision on a hard abscess and the one with moisture is lighter because they have little blood. And if any of these abscesses or head has no moisture, and of these I treated an abscess or head of an old woman; I found the abscess as hard as a stone axe, rough and white, could not be broken; and if one had cut it with a knife, it would have made the same wound as a stone. In other abscesses coming on the head, unless those which come on the heads of children and at the roots of the ears, they should be opened always for the best, to let pus out; and they are to be treated as appropriate.
of scrofulas
Sometimes this abscess appears at the neck, under the chin, and in the groin, and sometimes it occurs elsewhere on the body, and they are large and joined together. And each scrofula is located within its own side, as the notch and the abscess of the neck, as we have said; and the appearances of these scrofulas are various. Some contain moisture, and some are malignant and do not want to obey health. Therefore, when you see a good disposition for treatment, and it resembles the color of the body, and is silent from all sides and not irritated at the nerves of the neck or the artery or the duct, and is not inflamed; if necessary, you must cut through the top, and peel off each part, and place the two edges of the knife on the incisions, as we have said in the abscess of the neck; and pull it out slowly, and be sure not to cut the nerve or the vein, and do not use a probe or lancing that might injure the hand, and look not too far ahead, so you do not injure what should not be.
And if you cut the vein or artery and it does not allow closure, put vitriol powder in the wound, or some powders that stop bleeding, and hold the wound closed; and leave it until the abscess is appeased and the wound softened and begins to drain. And when the blood is clotted, return to your work, as you complete it; then observe your indications if there remain small scrofulas at the root of the scrofula, cut them and wash them. If the scrofula has a large vein at its root, do not cut the scrofula at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread and allow it to hang down without harm; then use old cotton dipped in Egyptian ointment and heal the wound.
And if you have excised the entire scrofula, you must gather the two lips of the wound and stitch them now, as there is no need for superfluity due to the largeness of the scrofula. You must understand how to cover the root of it and draw pus, and then stitch as we have said. Those scrofulas that hold superfluity, pierce where there is a hole; and pierce it as the one mentioned above, depending on it, then introduce tents with ointment and similar things, so that it corrupts what remains from corruption; and when the wound is well cleaned, cure it with ointment enchanter char until it heals.
When there is no movement of the afflicted member due to a dislocation or fracture, tie a bandage around it tightly so that it remains motionless and the pain decreases; but if there is swelling, put a warm poultice on it.
The ancients spoke and wrote about the measurement of the throat; but I have never seen it done in our land, and this is their written word.
For those who have squinchy throat, the slit in the throat called "epiglote" should be opened; and no help can be given by those, because all veins and the opening of the mouth or throat or two glands are at those who have an abscess hot in the mouth, or in the throat or in the two glands. When the illness is in the channel of the mouth, it is necessary to cover the epiglotte to avoid the danger of strangulation that comes from the constriction.
Therefore, when we want to split the epiglotte, it is necessary that we split it under 4 circles or 3 small slits across, between the 2 circles or by the amount of the split at the tip, not in the cartilage.
And when the neck is tender at the incision of the epiglottis where there is no flesh, and the vessels are long from it.
And if the master is afraid, then it is necessary that you extend the skin of the throat to its entire length, then cut open the neck until you reach the trachea; and squeeze out the vessels of blood, if you see anything, and then sew up the opening, as we have said.
And it is demonstrated by the incision of the trachea that a bone has broken through the place which is broken, and by the lack of voice.
And leave the wound open for a while.
When the hour has passed where there is doubt of strangulation, bring the two lips of the wound together gently, and press it all around the cartilage; then administer medications that produce heat, until it heals.
Al-Zahrawi says that it should not be done until the throat is completely stopped up, and the patient has been judged dead, and the soul has departed. Then tie the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe, and they breathe through the wound, and thus it is guarded from death.
And for this reason, the ancients commanded to leave the wound open until the malignancy of the disease has passed, and it has passed in 3 days or 4. And then they commanded to stitch up the wound and heal, until it was healed.
And I will tell you what I saw. I saw that a maiden took one knife and stuck it in her throat, cutting part of the windpipe;
And I was called to cure him, and I found him as dead.
I found the wound and saw the blood flowing from it, and I knew that it had not opened nor conducted anything except the throat, and the veins were flowing through the wound.
I quickly closed the wound and healed it until it was healed;
And it did not happen to the lady except that her voice became red [swollen or hoarse], and afterwards she returned to her condition.
Therefore I say that in the case of the epiglottis, have no fear.
of the thick throat
This abscess is called "gullet hernia," and is a large one with a yellow color, and is much in women.
And it is according to two ways: natural and accidental; where the natural has no artifice.
The accident is according to two ways, one of which resembles fatness and the other resembles an abscess that comes from us through arteries; and it should have fear, and no force should be done except in that which is small, and the proof and search should be made in every intrusion: If you find it as hard as a knuckle, and it cannot move in any direction, strike it as one strikes the nose, and pull it entirely off if there is anything attached to it. And bind it well, and heal it as necessary, until it heals perfectly.
of the nose
Many ways of ours are, which I will say all their similarities;
and it is necessary that I say the entire difference that exists between a dislocation and a fracture.
I say that dislocation is heat and fever lasting until the swelling has passed, and then the pain subsides; afterwards, the fever and the heat subside.
With a fracture there is no heat or fever or pain, and it contains one swelling, which is its own sack and is the same as the body's color, and begins like a blister, and becomes large;
And they are of two types, either fatty or moist, and many-colored as I said in the classification.
When you come to treat the newt, it is necessary that you examine and test first all the instrument called "entromissoire," according to its form or the chapter that follows.
The method of the inquiry of the abscesses for us is that you take or more moist place than you find within the abscess and turn your fingers little by little, until you feel that the instrument has pierced the core, then according to the size of the abscess;
Then straighten the joint (or dislocation), and take care not to let it jump out again.
If the moisture turns black (or is infected), as I have said for other abscesses;
And if after straightening the joint (or dislocation) there is still moisture, know that it is fatty; then make a cross-shaped incision over it and take hold of the edges with the pincers and carefully remove the skin from both sides, and pull out the garment or cloth that covers it so you can remove it cleanly with the thread.
And if you cannot draw it out whole, then draw it out in pieces so that nothing remains.
If there is anything remaining, it comes back to us many times;
If a small amount remains and does not trouble you, apply some corrosive powders to the wound, hold the wound closed, place soothing hot things on it, and treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
And if the wound is large, make two lips of it, and treat the one that bleeds.
And if the wound swells against you or another thing happens and you are forced to use vitriol powder, leave it for two or three days until the wound heals over, allowing the boil to drain; then cover what remains of the wound with oil.
Here are the forms of the instruments for opening, and they come in four types: large, medium, and small; and there are four squares called "albaret", and one that is called "breb", and there are three types for encircling abscesses with fistulas.
And are also like the needles with which they sew witches, and are made of silver, or iron, or citron rind, and yellow ones are worth more, and those blackened are more experienced for surrounding the swellings of a fistula;
And are of three kinds: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the wounds.
The shapes of the wounds are much alike, as you can see here: large, medium, and small; and some wounds have two swellings of four kinds;
And if one has hunchbacks who have three bends and are of four types; and if one has hunchbacks who have two bends, or humpbacks of a single bend and they are also of four types; all of these are necessary in their place.
The tips of these [humpbacks] are sharp, and there is no need to cut them from any other side except where the vein or nerve is not to be severed.
And these incisions [made for treating an abscess] are tied up with lacerations so that the patient does not tear them open during the treatment of abscesses.
And there are three types: large, small, and medium, as you see;
And it should not be used except in charnu (charred) flesh, such as legs, arms, breasts, and similar areas.
And sometimes another small instrument similar to fistula scissors is made in this shape, to drain blood; \[...\]
And set it [the dislocated joint] in its place that heals with the covering of veins, and the arteries, and sometimes it returns according to this great form:
Sometimes the breasts of some men swell when they begin to decay, so much that they resemble a woman's breasts;
and remain ugly and swollen, and whoever wishes to cure them, must do so according to this form of the following line b.j. to .g.: then scrape the fat off, apply medicine soothing to the wound, then gather the two lips of the wound together for suturing, and heal it until it is healed.
And if the breast sinks downwards and is flattened due to its large size, as it often happens with women, then make two cuts on top of it, through two similar openings. so that one is held to the other at the end of each one, so that the larger line contains the smaller one according to this shape, from this line b to the line g; then peel off the skin between the two lips, remove the fat, and introduce the aforementioned suturing and powders, as well as whatever is necessary for the cure, until it heals.
And if the patient is not healthy or the incision is not completely made because the patient does not want to rest, or due to the flow of blood, then you must fill the wound with cotton soaked in corrosive ointment. And leave it until it digests the remaining flesh and fat, then heal it when it is drained.
abscesses of the buttocks
These abscesses that come under the buttocks are handled as cases of hard scrofula with ribs (or sides), and if they contain moisture within them.
Therefore, those containing moisture should be cut along this shape from line b to line g: And when the entire cavity in the abscess is emptied, use old cotton to fill the wound, and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and heal with ointment as necessary until it heals.
And if the abscess resembles scrofula, perform it as we have said in cutting out scrofulas, and if the wound becomes a cavity, apply caution as we have said before.
Of the rupture of the artery
When the artery is torn and the skin is sealed over it, there are often abscesses, and the same happens with an open vein and abscess;
and if one knows this about it [the artery], then the abscesses will be long-lasting; And when you feel it with your hands, if it feels dislocated; and if it is due to the vein, it should be reasonably displaced in appearance;
It is foolish to cover this abscess, especially when it is under the bones and near angles or neck and in many other places, and it is very large. Therefore, the iron cure must be avoided, and so should it be for those with head problems, and in those swollen with an artery, they must be punctured through the skin lengthwise;
Therefore, the iron cure must be avoided, and so should it be for those with head problems, and in those swollen with an artery, they must be punctured through the skin lengthwise; then cut open the wound along one edge, and carefully separate the artery from the membranes, until it is exposed.
Then insert an awl under it and make it pierce through to the other side, and hold the artery with a double thread for two inches, as I have shown you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples.
Then insert a probe between the two ligaments until it reaches the abscess and separate the abscess.
Then apply the cure that soaks a beech-wood bowl until the ligament is swollen. Then treat him with salve until he is healed.
and if the abscess is large, you must apply the salve to the entire skin surrounding it. then insert the needle underneath the skin you are holding with your hand, and make it pierce through, and have one doubled thread ready so that you can pull it from the other side. then tie the abscess, as I told you, or sew it with one of the two halves of the thread between the two shoulders.
And if you doubt that the thread has passed through, press another needle underneath the abscess at the incision of the first needle, and hold the threads in four inches;
then press the abscess so that the excess comes out, then cut off the pus and leave what is tied;
then put on a damp cloth soaked in wine and oil, then treat it with liniments and poultices until it heals.
From the abscesses of the limbs
As abscesses come in arteries and veins, they come in nerves when injured, or from too much work, and similar things.
This often happens in the shoulders and knees and in all limbs with joints, which is severe abscesses, and its color resembles the body's color, and it occurs in multiple forms of pain.
And when it is pressed firmly, the patient feels pain, but it is not throughout the body, but under the skin.
And it should be immobilized from all sides, neither going forward nor backward, neither above nor below, and one who is in the joints should not be covered by iron: perhaps it would cause contraction.
And if it is on the head or forehead, flatten the skin with a spatula. If the abscesses are small, hold them with forceps and strike at its root.
If it is large, suspend it on a hook, peel it off, then drill and stitch the wound closed, and let it heal until it heals.
Large boils hanging Sometimes it happens in bellies and nowhere else, and it is a disease called "fungus" because of its resemblance to mushrooms, and it has subtle roots and large heads; there are some small ones and very large ones.
And I saw one man who had two bellies that were more like mushrooms than anything else, and there was no difference between them, they were white, and had a thin root, and were split open, and moisture flowed out of them continually.
I found and weighed eighteen ounces in one, and five pounds in the other. The incisions show that if you look at the patient, they are moist, and the color of the artery is pale and moist with a subtle root;
if the wound is deep and wide, and in your presence the fire cautery is needed. For there are often excessive bleeding during slicing, and if it overwhelms you, hasten to use the cautery;
and if you see the patient trembling and afraid of the incision with iron, take a good-made thread, tie it around the artery as we have said, and leave it for two days;
and then hold it (the affected part), and do not stop applying pressure on the bandage until it feels the pain, and the joint starts to work; and if the roots are large, then be careful when pushing at the same time due to the abdomen, but you can easily push half of it.
Then cauterize so that it does not return; then treat the wound, and ensure that you do not press on the tumor which is of a dark color and poor sensation and liquid discharge.
For it is an abscess hardened, and I will come to the treatment of this scrofula later.
When the thigh (or leg) is injured
If the wound or cut on the thigh (or leg) is caused by cautery of an injury or incision, and it is above the belly and in some of the thighs, as happens in other routes, or from blood that cuts from veins or arteries according to what is beforehand, or from windiness;
If it is by the route of cautery and by the exit from the bowel, then the appearance of the abscess is similar to the color of the body, and it is a light thing without pain, and open with various issues. And if it is due to the bursting of an intestine, then it is more diverse. When pressure is applied to it with the hands and it collapses, then returns, and in some cases if it is sutured, and greatly swells at the entrance of the wound, and due to heavy work.
And if it is due to moisture, it is an easy matter, and it opens easily when you press it with your hand, do not force it; and if it is blood, it opens with these signs: the abscesses are large and hard, and are pierced according to a certain amount.
If it is due to windiness, it is suitable for touching. The signs to look for are whether the appearance is due to blood from an artery or vein, or windiness. It is necessary that you allow the healing to take place. For there is doubt and fear, as I told you in the chapter on abscesses, regarding the artery and the vein.
And if the appearance is due to the intestine or the abscess, you should command the patient to strain his anus, and stretch it out straight, then apply heat all around the abscess; then you command him to lie quietly between your hands, Then go around the joint that you have signed with all the splint. Then spread half of the abscess on top to the entire great spoon.
Then open half of the abscess spread over the cord, and push your index finger inside and search for the intestine. If you find it tied up with a cord, untie it, and push the intestines out of the abdomen through the incision.
And if you find the bowel, take hold of it at its thickest part, and squeeze out the excess.
And if the artery or vein becomes contracted, go around it, then return to your work and take two needles, and insert two fine threads, and insert the needles around what you have made in a cross shape that you make perforated.
Then press the abscess four fingers above the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and leave it for as long as possible, and let the dead flesh rot away by itself. or you strike when it is softened and breaks, then you treat what is necessary, and cover the wound as we have said.
or you strike when it is softened and breaks, then you treat what is necessary, and cover the wound as we have said. draw out the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the wound of what is necessary, and bind it up.
the boil
We have said in the division the likeness of scab, and how to treat it with medicines, and how to avoid iron cure; and we say that the scab originates in marriage, and great caution should be taken in its treatment, and the ancients said that when scabs are in a place where it can be shaved like a scab that is on the mamelas, and in the thigh, and in similar places, and it should all be removed when it is at the beginning; and when it is large and old, it is not good to approach it, for I never knew anyone to heal it; no one ever healed it before me.
And the work, when it is in a place where it can be removed as we have said, is that you purge the patient once with black bile; then make him purge if he has evident repletion, then shave the patient.i. one good piece of skin to do the work; then shave the scab or abscess, and the hair of all parts, and the bone of all parts leaving nothing remaining; and let the blood flow freely, and press well the place with your hand or any thing, and if the discharge of blood makes you opposite to the incision of the artery or vein, cauterize it until the wound is stopped from bleeding; then cure it with other means until it is healed.
dropsy (medical condition) We have said in the division that the similarities of edema are like idropisie; and in what manner the assembly of water is made, and the signs of each likeness, and the cure which is done with medicines, and that which is cured by iron: it is only eclites exposed; and no iron should be used in these two likenesses: namely tympanites and yposarche, for it is a deadly thing; therefore when you treat this likeness of edema called "eclites" with medicines, and the cure does not improve, look to see if the patient is weak or has other disease besides edema, such as an inflamed abdomen and similar things; do not use iron, for there is doubt; and if you see the patient of strong virtue, and he has no other disease except edema alone, and he is neither too young nor too old, then you should work in this way: Place the patient right on your lap, and the assistant presses the abdomen from below to bring the water to the lowest part of the bladder, then take the pointed spatula as shown in this form: And it should be sharp at two ends. But it should not be so deep that it reaches the intestine when inserted, and it should not pierce or bruise it:
then look to see if the edema is attached towards the intestines: if it is, you must make an incision below the bladder two fingers' breadth straight across from the handle; and if the edema is due to liver disease, the incision should be on the left side of the bladder two fingers; and if it is due to a blockage, it should be on the right, and the patient should not lie over the incision so that the superfluidities do not run to that weak place.
Then pierce the entire skin with the instrument, and push it, and place your hand all over the spatula between the skin and the gristle as much as the size of a nail or in which it fits; then pierce the gristle until the spatula comes to the joint which is the joint of the thumb, then pull it out, and put this instrument here that you see: It resembles a thin silver chain, and is made of bronze or light iron, and has a small hole on one side. On three sides, there are four holes; on two sides, two; and on one side, one; and the head is shaped like a feather, and this is the shape of the incision that scribes carve a feather:
At the top (of the thumb), there is the nerve. So when the instrument comes to the joint, then you hold it up now on the instrument; then empty either half or a third part of it, because if you see more than necessary in that hour, by chance the patient might die from resolution of their spirit due to the weapon, or they fall down unconscious, or approach death.
but empty according to its strength and according to the patient's condition and pulse; then pull the instrument and hold the joint, and it is now held for the cautery that stops the holes on the gristle, of which I have spoken earlier. You pierce in this manner; then you use the instrument again the next day if you see the patient suffering from it, and draw out a small amount of the joint liquid:
Do this every day and avoid overeating until it recovers but has a little water. And if you doubt the patient, and leave much water, cure it with burial or hot sand, and by sweating or bathing and in the sun, and anoint it with wine; and cure it with drying medicines until it is healthy, and cauterize the stomach, liver, and spleen after the extraction of water, as I said before.
Stopping the penis There are never born children who do not have foreskin on their penis, or the foreskin is small, or it is not in its place. If this happens immediately, puncture a very thin spatula according to this form: then put a thin piece of cloth under the foreskin and hold it in place for 2 to 4 days until the child wants to urinate, at which point the cloth should be removed, and urination allowed; and by chance, it is not necessary to do so because the urine that comes out does not close the opening. If the bladder of one who has a small stone is treated with a plug of lead as previously mentioned, it will expand. Those who do not have a stone in its place are weakened, because no one is born who has the stone at the head of the penis; therefore, they cannot urinate before lifting their penis up; and they cannot enjoy sex because the matter cannot reach the marris (the opening of the urethra), and it is a harmful disease.
The manner of work is that the patient lies on his back, with the head of the penis and the buttocks positioned as the end of a feather, so that the stone can fall into the bladder where it should be; and beware of bleeding that often occurs, and if it happens, stop the bleeding from the wound and cure the wound until it is healed.
boils on the penis "Many times this albathe appears in the penis, and it is an ugly appearance of the flesh; among them are malignant and non-malignant. You must take them one by one with a .i. oncine subtil (probably referring to tweezers), and crush and clean them all. Then put cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment on it, and treat it with diafinicon ointment until it heals." "If the albathe is malignant, of a putrid color and spreading, it requires cauterization. After you crush it, if the albathe is within the penis and has both internal and external parts, first remove the albathe that is inside. Once removed, treat the outside. Because when treating them together, there is no assurance that the parts of the penis will not be pierced, causing blackness and corruption in its length and breadth; it is necessary to remove all that is black and corrupted. Then lie it on a plaster made of honey and flour, which is made from the peel of pomegranate rind and other substances, then treat it with other medicines until it heals."
"If there is bleeding, apply the lunar cauterization as follows: The cautery should be in two forms together: for bleeding and corruption. If the parts of the penis are corrupted and retreat, it is necessary that you lead or make a canal from the penis and make the patient urinate. When the hairs reach the head of the penis (which happens to those who have not been circumcised), or it happens due to an injury or abscess, then you must shave it with one instrument having teeth, until the ligaments are released, and free the parts of the penis from all sides;
And if it is a difficult matter to discuss this, you should make an incision with a lancet about one span from the tip of the vein and skin; then press carefully between two fingers, and put a thin linen cloth soaked in cold water on it immediately, so that it does not swell up again.
of circumcision
Circumcision is not the same as other wounds; however, when we perform this work of our own free will and specifically for infants, it is necessary that we make the best and most straightforward work to save them.
I say that the ancients did not speak of the circumcision of their children, for they did not practice it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired by experience.
I wanted the largest part of masters and surgeons who performed circumcision around one day, and with forces, and in all cases, a newborn; however, the foreskin was too thick, and perhaps it healed over the top and delayed healing below.
If it is covered again, the pain is doubled, and at the healing of the member's tip, it is not assured; and in the trimming of the nail, perhaps the iron slips, ruins the work, and many times it heals so that there is no need for trimming, and I have seen this.
Of the amputation that is made to all the limb of thread I found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut equally well above as below.
For when you press your hand, it cuts equally all the time; but that the thread be well stretched around the skin; and in the first work, it is that you make the child think, if he understands, that you do not tie the thread around him except for attaching it to the rod only, and then let him play in all the ways that you can. Then place him straight between your hands and position the forces between your hands or under your feet so that the infant does not see them, nor any of the tools; then press your hand against the rod and blow or cough, and pull it up until the joints of the rod are in; then clean it well of the filth that has accumulated there, then tie the wound signet with a double thread, then tie a thread under one piece to another thread; and hold it at the second knot to the thumb and index finger, and cut between the two threads, then remove the core quickly and pull the head of the rod.
Then place him straight between your hands and position the forces between your hands or under your feet so that the infant does not see them, nor any of the tools; then press your hand against the rod and blow or cough, and pull it up until the joints of the rod are in; then clean it well of the filth that has accumulated there, then tie the wound signet with a double thread, then tie a thread under one piece to another thread; and hold it at the second knot to the thumb and index finger, and cut between the two threads, then remove the core quickly and pull the head of the rod. Then let the blood coagulate drop by drop, for it is clotted; and sprinkle powder on top and over the powder put a cloth dampened with a mixture of cooked egg white tempered with rose water, mixed with fresh rose oil; leave it on until the next day, and treat it with another remedy until it heals.
The form of the strength for healing is as follows: the two cheeks should be tender and thin, and the cheeks should be equal in size to a hand.
The error in healing is when the intestines are cut during incision; therefore, it must be extended to the fingernail, so that the wound is made deeper; and it should be cut evenly, and if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, use pliers, and then cut it.
And if they pass more than three days, and that which is below the vein becomes swollen, leave it until the abscess subsides, and gently lance it; cut if you can move it, but avoid the part of the vein; this will not harm it.
Then heal the limb with things under swollen wounds using the powders that we have said or mentioned treating, and if you cut too deeply it will go up, but do not worry; heal it as we have said until it is healed.
retention of urine
The retention of urine is due to a stone, or congealed blood, or a swelling, or frozen water, or similar things, as we have said in the division.
and if the urine is not released, and you see that it is retained by a stone in the bladder or urethra, then you must make the patient lean on his knees; put the feet on the back, extend the abdomen from above the lower back, and hold the patient as firmly as possible; and then apply pressure to the bladder area above the stone to expel it.
and if it does not come out as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you should administer extraction with all the equipment called "syringe", whose form is: it should be made of thin, light silver tube, like a bird's quill; and the cavity should be one and a half palm lengths, and thin at the tip.
And the method for the discharge of urine is that you take one double thread, tie one end to the head with a piece of linen or cotton, and push the head through the syringe with the thread inside; and fill the excess of the linen up to the head of the syringe, then oil or butter the syringe and put egg white on the bladder and penis moistened with oil and olive oil and cold water; and make the patient sit on one seat, and rub the bladder and penis with oiled and olive oil and cold water.
Then gently insert the syringe into the penis until it reaches the root of the penis, then double the penis over towards the scrotum; then push the syringe forward up to the bladder, and make the patient feel as if he is urinating until he fills the empty thing, and this is not done according to this order unless because the guide through which it goes is twisted; then the thread is tied to all the linen piece by piece, and the urine follows the linen, then remove the linen, and correct the urine.
And the doctor should repeat the syringe process until the bladder is empty and the patients are relieved.
Diseases of the bladder
When scorchings or blood comes into the bladder, or pus is collected there and you see it distill liquids and medicines, use all the instrument called "clepsydre" and this is its form:
It is closed with three openings: two on one side and one on the other, as you see; and the upper part should be shaped so that the medicine can flow freely from the opening, stopping the water if possible, and adding more when needed;
And when you see that your medicines are thrown into the bladder, put the head of the cucurbit in the moisture, and draw out slowly what is inside; if you draw out the moisture from the cucurbit, then push the drawing forcefully in again; the moisture will enter the cucurbit and will come to the bladder immediately, so that the patient will feel it.
This is the form of a subtle enema, which is used to cleanse the bladder. Here it is:
And it is made of silver or lead and has the head raised above one hand or a loop; under this a linen cloth is placed; then take a sheep bladder and put in the moisture that you intend to use for cleansing the bladder. Then tie the moistened bladder between two hands with a strong double thread, and heat one end of the bladder on fire. Then insert the head of the enema into the penis, then hold your hand above the bladder so that all the moisture goes towards the bladder until the patient feels the moisture has reached the bladder.
And if you do not have the bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make one circle, and pierce it roundly around; then insert a strong thread into these holes, then assemble the circle like one does a syringe, and put inside it oil, moisture, and water, and tie it in the instrument; do as you have done with the bladder, press it with your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
From the stone
We have said in the division the ways of stone, and extraction with medicines; and I have said the difference between the stone implanted in the rain, and all the signs, and in what stone one must work in size; and in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will tell you openly and briefly.
I say that the stone in the bladder often occurs more frequently in children, and this is a sign that the water jump from the bladder resembling water in its subtlety; it opens a passageway, increases the pain of the patient greatly, pierces it many times, and then binds it; and much of these jumps cause foundation; and the healing of children is light until they reach the age of 4, but it is very difficult in the elderly, and it is at the middle age for those who are between youth and old age; and the cure is easier for those who have large stones, than for those who have small ones.
And when we come to the treatment, it is first necessary to purify the patient with an enema, to draw out all the filth that is in the intestines. For it often blocks the search for the stone.
Then take the patient by the feet, bend and move them downwards, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and sinks upwards sometimes with the help of gravity; then make him sit between your prepared hands, and his hands should be below his hips, so that the bladder is completely inclined downwards; then search for it and touch it with your hand.
If you feel the stone in the body, hurry up to cut it above the stone. And if it does not fall down by itself, moisten your left index finger, if the patient is weak or old, or use oil, if the patient is a young man; and push it into its foundation, search for the stone, when you feel it with your finger, push it to the neck of the bladder; then press on your finger, and push it out where you see fit to cut.
Instruct the servant to press the bladder with his hand, and command him to extend his right hand upwards, and with his left hand remove the skin that is below the testicles in the part where the cutting is done; then push the spatula covering it, as it is its shape:
And make an incision between the scrotum and the foundation, not on the midline but along the left side of the scrotum; and let it be straight above the stone, and your fingers should be at its base or foundation, and let the cut be wide externally and narrow internally according to the size of the stone, not too large:
By chance, if the foundation presses it must jump without effort; and know that there is a stone or an angle, edge: it is curved to come out; and if it is soft like a plum and round, whose opening is easy.
Then make the cut larger if it has angles and margins; and if it does not jump, then you must strain upward with pliers that are like a limer at the head to force the stone to stay in place; or you can push an instrument subtle and curved at the head beneath it. And if you cannot maneuver it so, widen .1 inch with a chisel, and if it is not cut, strain it with vitriol.
And if there are more than one stone, then push the largest one at the bladder neck first, then hit it, then pull it, and the smaller ones after if there are more. And if it is very large, it must be, and make a larger wound. For two things happen to the patient: either he dies, or urine comes immediately through where the joints cannot be sealed; but nonetheless, try to extract, or break apart with pliers, as much as you can pull it in pieces.
And when you have completed your work, smear the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, hold it closed, and place a damp linen cloth in oil and wine on it, or in olive oil and rose water and cold water, to cool the abscess; then raise the patient's head on his neck, and do not remove the bandage until the third day.
When you remove it (the dressing), wash the wound well with oil and water, then apply a healing ointment of diaphinicon and basilicon until it heals.
If an abscess or erosion comes in the wound and congelation of blood forms in the bladder and urine is retained in this manner: without delay put your finger in the wound, and draw out the blood, for if it remains, the bladder will corrode and perforate.
Then clean the wound of pus and of any dirt and linen, and assist in every possible way that you can while it heals; and it is necessary that you bind the thighs together for her, and apply the medicine on the wound.
And if the stone is small and it is led by the rod and driven in, and urine cannot pass; heal it as I tell you now, cut it many times, or excuse yourself from the cutting by this cure. I have already proved it thus.
Take one iron fork of this form and sharpened at four angles with one tine:
Then take a thread and tie it around the shaft of the stone, so that it cannot come back into the bladder; then gently push the awl into the shaft, until it reaches the stone; and turn the awl slowly towards your hand in the stone bit by bit, until you can pierce the stone from the other side; if urine comes soon, press your hand on that which remains inside the shaft of the stone within the bladder. If it is soon broken, it will jump out with the urine, and the patient will be healed.
and if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, tie a thread around the stone and another one above, then push the shaft towards the stone between the two threads, pull it out, untie the thread, and clean up the congealed blood in the wound; and treat it until it is healed.
of the stone from women
It often happens that a stone is embedded in women, and if it ever occurs, it is a serious matter, and it is forbidden for four reasons: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is because it cannot be found a woman who knows well how to uncover herself, especially when she is chaste.
The third reason is that perhaps it cannot be found a woman skilled in this art of hands; and the fourth reason is that the stone in the woman's body is deeper than the stone in a man's, therefore it requires a more profound incision, and great fear arises from this.
And if you must proceed with this, then you should take a skilled midwife, and if one cannot be found easily, do not hesitate to use a chaste and subtle maiden; and present a wise woman of life of women, or a woman who knows a part of the art, and command her to perform what you command regarding the incision of the stone.
And pay close attention to whether the woman is a virgin; then you must insert your finger or foundation and search for the stone; and if you find it, you should press it beneath your finger, and advise her to bear down with her hand on the bladder formed.
If you find it, you should make her push it little by little from the bladder entrance to beneath, until it reaches the root of the thigh; then strike upon the stone at the root of the thigh against the mons pubis, where it is moved, and feel the stone in that place; do not move your finger above or below the stone, and cut it with a small cut.
Then push the right hand into the thigh, if you feel the stone, open the wound so that the stone can come out, and know that there are many types of stones: small or large, smooth or rough, long or round, and those with grooves. Know their appearances to recognize them.
And if the bone protrudes, set vitriol in powder on it and hold for an hour until the bone is cauterized; then return to your work, until the stone is fully expelled, and have instruments as I told you for the extraction of the stone for men to assist you in your work.
If the bone protrudes, and it is an artery that has been cut, put powder on the wound and bind with strips and bandages, do not resume work, leave the stone and do not draw it out for fear of killing the patient; then care for the wound.
And when the heat of the blood is appeased and the wound heals over, then return to your work until the stone is expelled.
of a flesh hernia
Aquous hernia is nothing but the accumulation of moisture or pus, which is beneath the cartilage of the belly button, containing the egg; and it is called "syfac," and sometimes it is properly within the egg's membrane, if one thinks that it is another egg; and it is the skin of the navel between the white syfab that we have mentioned; and this does not happen often.
And the growth of this hernia is due to a weakness that comes from the navel, and the material spreads out.
And sometimes it comes from a blow to the navel, and this moisture can have many colors: either a reddish-yellow color, or without red, black, or watery white, and this happens more often.
And these are the signs to recognize this assembly; for if it is white as we have said, it is an abscess, i.e., a long pouch like the figure of an egg, and its corners do not open because there is moisture all around.
If it has moisture in its very covering, it is an abscess with part of the egg, and for this reason they think that it is another egg.
And if the moisture is between the skin of the corners and the white as we have said, one can feel it well; therefore, when you want to know the color of the moisture, prove it thoroughly in all the wound, so that its form is as described before. According to what follows after the intrusion, judge what is inside.
According to what follows after the intrusion, judge what is inside. And when we cure it with iron, it is necessary that the patient be anesthetized to our ability and the filling of his body; then lay him on his back, on a thing slightly high, and put much linen under him.
then lie him on his left side, and command the minister to lie on his right, and stretch out the rod to one of the two ribs at the shoulders.
then take the spatula, hit the skin at the shoulders along its length until the hilt, and let your incision be straight in dividing the skin of the shoulders up to the white of the bone, and peel it off delicately according to your ability.
Then pierce the syphax completely full of water at least a large hole, and drain all the water, and then put your fingers in, and close the syphax from above; do not touch the core of the bones, but only the syphax; cut through it completely or in pieces delicately the edge of it, for if you don't cut it properly, the water will return.
If the egg (yolk) jumps out of your work, reset it in its place when you have completed the syphax operation; then assemble the two bones of the core into a stitch, then heal it like other wounds until it is healed.
And if you find the egg corrupted by another disease, it is necessary that you tie the vessels that are suspended, suspecting blood flow; then cut the bone to the entire suspension, and drain the egg, and heal it as we have said.
And if a wound has been assembled in two parts together, know that these are two branches; if you cut the other part as you did the first equally, then squeeze out the blood and put moistened linen soaked in rose oil into the wound.
and put other moistened linen in wine and oil, and place it on the two ends, and place woolen blankets over it, and bind it all with cord according to this shape:
Then take two woolen blankets made of coarse linen in this shape and sew them together at the belt of the braces. One of the heads should be placed on the foundation up to the back, and the other at the part of the handle; and the other head at the two corners, and tighten the rest all in the brake loop.
And sometimes medicine is this ramice of cautery in the place of iron cut, and you take one subtle cautery culteller, and press it against the skin, and let it be heated as we have said, so that the white pus containing the water is exposed.
Take the cautery in this form, and pierce the abscess once, and scrape it with this subtle hot cauter.
And press in all ways that you can until it is cooked through; and be careful that the fire does not touch the egg; and know that this work is more beneficial; and pay attention to the flow of blood, and take care with incisions.
And if no thing happens contrary to you, or abscess swelling or flow of blood or anything else, heal what happens contrary to you, according to what has been said before.
And if the patient is afraid and does not want to wait for this work because of its horribleness, introduce perforation, as I tell you, and it shall be that when you are certain by the signs that we have said that the anus contains water,
Make the patient sit on a raised seat. Then perforate the abscess in the lower part, as wide as a finger's span, and make the perforation long along the body; and let the openings be wide, so that all the pus can flow out.
Then put cotton on top of it, tie it, and let the remaining moisture drain away, then heal it until the wound is healed.
and if the white cloth does not allow the moisture to drain out of the wound's mouth, then you must insert a feather or instrument used for draining abscesses, whose form is as described earlier; widen one or two holes in the wound, check that the pus returns, and collect it for seven months or so, and when it has collected as described earlier, and thus the patient passes his days.
of an abscess on the cheek
Know that in the section of this procedure, there is fear in many positions, which makes it seem to me that one should move (it).
and I will tell you the work and likenesses of the abscess.
Therefore, many abscesses come from wounds or boils; it happens often in many cases.
It is to be understood that it comes from excessive sour and hot fluid spreading to the boils, or from blows;
And the color of the abscess corresponds to the color of the body; it does not cause pain, and the abscess is severe.
And sometimes an abscess is hard and painful, of the same color, and once in a while comes from the artery or inflammation of the vein.
When it is due to an artery, it can be recognized by the hot swelling of the abscess when you press it with your hands. and one should not touch it.
A person who is swollen from the vein is known by his disposition at the expression of the touch of fingers,
and can easily perform surgery on this appearance, and on other characters; and it is that you cut the cords of the kidneys, then the egg rises to the top, and the white thread extends down from the yolk, and releases the suspension from all parts of the egg.
If the egg is already softened with these characters born, then you must draw the egg and cut it,  \]   et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;
And if it is within the abdomen or in one of its cavities, you must release all the contents and close it again.
And if the skin is torn at its base, you must sew it all up and extract the egg as we have said.
And when your work is done, treat the wound with damp wool soaked in rose oil and wine, then apply other remedies until it heals.
of the abscess of the cheek
This is an abscess covered by a swelling resembling a boil, with the softening of the skin. and the patient groans loudly when he walks.
and the cure for this disease is as difficult and dangerous as what was previously mentioned.
nevertheless we will tell you the work of it, according to what the ancients did.
It is necessary that you make the patient sit on a raised seat, then push the suspension hoist for the legs towards your hands. Extend all the vessels that are near the penis and touch them with your fingers, then stretch them out properly.
Then take the sharp spatula wide across the vessels, exposing them until they are visible,
and then cut each side as we have said in the extraction of the arteries that are in the temples;
Then insert an awl where there is one thread doubled, and tie it to the first place where the vein appears, and tie it straight to the other end. Then hammer them evenly, according to the length of the body, and draw out the corrupt moisture.
Then treat the wound as one does with other bowed joints, so that no pus leaks out from either side.
For this reason there is no harm and if pus comes from all the joints, then the abscesses must be drained. If the eye does not lose its moisture due to the incision of veins, it dries out and cannot be helped.
Of the rupture of the fistula (a small abnormal passage or connection between two internal organs or vessels) The occurrence of this hernia (a protrusion of an organ or tissue through the wall that contains it) is due to a section (cut or incision), or fistula, or the extension on the abdomen in the area of the groins, causing the intestines to descend from that rupture towards one of the sides.
and this dislocation is either simple or extended, and these are the two types of dislocations that come from various causes: either by impact, jump, fall, lift of heavy burden, or similar things;
and the signs that it is of the extended simple dislocation are that they occur gradually over a long period and do not come suddenly. and the abscesses are equal up to the depth because the simple dislocation follows the intestines.
And the signs are when it is of a hernia, which brings about sudden pain at the beginning, and various abscesses appear close to the skin, and this is due to the rupture of the intestine and the body cavity opening due to the hernia.
Sometimes, intestines come out of the circles and are held in place, causing great pain to suffer for the patient, especially when pressed.
And in these iron treatments that cause fear, therefore one must escape from them.
And the method of work is that you instruct the patient to pull the intestine with their hand inside in the wound, if they can reach it. then hold it by its neck between your hands and lift the thighs.
then stretch the belly upwards, and cut all the skin of the buttocks with long strokes. then insert the index fingers of your hands into the lower back according to what you need to open the wound and make sure that the intestines can come out.
Then scrape the scrotum that is under the skin of the testicles, while the white scrotum is hard and exposed from all sides;
Then insert your index finger into the scrotum, into the area between the white scrotum that is under the skin of the testicle and the second white scrotum;
and remove what is behind the testicle, and between the second white scrotum; then move your right hand inside the scrotum, and lift the white scrotum up towards your left hand, and raise the testicle along with all the white scrotum towards the stomach. and order the assistant to stretch the testicle upwards, and untie what is in front behind the scrotum;
And if your fingers feel anything wrapped around the intestines or hardened white matter, and you find anything, push it into the abdomen.
Take an awl or a thick needle made of ten threads, and push it into the back part of the white matter (after the skin of the cocks), after the waist, then cut the hairs that appear from the threads, until there are four threads left. then bind them one on top of the other in a cross shape, and tie the white matter (as we have said that is below the skin of the cocks) with a strong thread of 2 parts. Then wrap the heads of the fingers, and tie them together in two parts, so that no servants who nurse them can enter, unless an abscess cloth comes. Then make the lacing following the first lacing long for two fingers' breadth of that one, and after these two laces leave a gap of one finger's width beneath the knee.
and after that all, according to the roundness that the egg carries; then cut in the part that is beneath the skin of the knee, as much as necessary, and bend it, as we have said before.
Then bring dampened wool in oil and place it on wounds, and apply the cord as we have said. And sometimes white areas are cauterized as we have said, after incision, due to the fear of bleeding.
For this happens often, and leave the cord until it falls off by itself; if it takes too long to fall off, you can remove it with warm water, and apply what has been said, until it falls off.
Then heal the wound with another remedy, until it is perfectly healed.
Of a fleshy hernia
In this remedy I have never seen anyone dare to cure by iron.
And the ancients say that it is made like a remedy that consists of vinegar, in such a manner that you bind the vessels, after cutting them lightly below;
Then put it in the middle and heal the abscess of those who are affected by it, until the vessels bleed; and heal it as we have said before, until it is healed.
At times rot comes in the groin, as we have said, and opens the joints; and no internal organs are sent to the anus, and if any are, it is little, and repair them every hour;
Moreover, if it remains too long in this place, the wound or syphac grows, as long as internal organs are expelled.
This happens due to the spreading of syphilis which is in the groin, as we have said, because it spreads, then the joints are softened and opened.
And if the treatment is by cautery, as previously stated; sometimes it is cured by iron in this manner:
The patient lies supine on his back between your hands, then strike the swollen place along the length according to the size of three fingers;
Then extract the pus that is underneath the skin, then take the iron and place it on the visible part of the abscess;
And press at the lower part of the abdomen, then count the two levels appearing near the navel, and count both;
then extract the navel, and do not cover or extend the siphon or any other thing, as I have told you in the treatment of the ramie of the intestines;
then treat it with the treatment for wounds. And when you cover the threads, if the wound heals and the wound is healed;
The siphon is constricted, and has no appearance in the wound, and the cauteries are made in this place, and closer to salvation.
of the softening of the skin on the buttocks
Many times the skin of the buttocks becomes soft in some men, because the charms within are softened and there is a visible liquid; and it is necessary when one sees it to cure, that you make the patient lie on his back, and strike the softened skin on the natural skin; then bring together the two lips to a stitch, and if you see, sew first the superfluous skin softened to 3 or 4 firm stitches; then strike between the stitches, and the wound as with other wounds, until it is healed, and let the thread seep through.
The punishment for a crime in this time period was severe and often involved physical pain or torture. In the case of a serious offense, a person might be subjected to various methods of corporal punishment such as flogging, branding, mutilation, or even execution by burning at the stake. Here is the first sentence to translate:
1. Know that castrations are mentioned in our law, and I would rather not speak of them in this book; and it is necessary only for two reasons: the first is that a person should respond when asked about castration and its cure; and the second, because we often need castration of certain animals to help us, such as goats, sheep, pigs, and other animals. I say therefore that castrations are done in two ways: either by attraction or by cutting. In the one that we do by attraction, we make the animal sit on hot water until its genitals become soft; then we seize them with our hand, holding them until they are restored and you no longer feel them.
Hermaphrodites
Hermaphrodites are of two kinds in men: the first kind has both openings as a woman, with hair and sometimes urinates through them. The second kind is in women, who have something above the penis like a spear and two openings. The treatment for men and women is to cut around the genitals, and cure them like other wounds; however, in the second kind of man whose urine leaks through the skin of the genitals, there is no cure.
The evacuation (of blood) occurs from the incision of the artery, (and) from the abscess, (and) in the treatment of wounds, (and) in the extraction of arrows, (and) in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, many die.
The tentigene is a wart situated on a natural part, which becomes too ugly to look at; some women have one as large as a hand, and it is a disease. You must dye the superfluous growth of the tentigene with your hand or onions, and strike it lightly; do not go too deep, so that bleeding does not occur, then treat it with another cure until it heals; and at another wart that grows from the mouth of a woman, and applies, and possibly jumps off, and is similar to a cow's udder, and for this reason they called it the "disease of the cow" by the ancients. You must strike it as we have said with the tentigene, and treat it until it heals.
In some cases, a patient may develop an unusual growth or lump that appears suddenly, moves around on its own, and is often painful. This condition was known as "erratique" in Old French. It could be caused by internal injuries or diseases and required careful observation and treatment to prevent worsening of the condition.
1. The nature of a woman is not discerned or small; it may be inherent or accidental due to illness that comes about; it may be due to adultery, subtle semen from the penis, or thick semen in the vagina, and it occurs either during sexual intercourse, in the thighs, or elsewhere; they should avoid conception, pregnancy, and flowers growing; and the knowledge of this is by looking at the woman's face. If the discharge appears near the hands or the genitals, then place your two index fingers together, and have the woman lie on her back with her legs spread open; then form the semen, when it becomes ripe, cover it with linen and oil-soaked cloth, and have the woman rest daily so that it does not stick. And if the semen is subtle and close to the two leves (testicles), hurry and do as follows: place your two index fingers together, and the woman should be on her back, her legs spread open; then form the semen, when it becomes ripe, cover it with linen and oil-soaked cloth, and have the woman rest daily so that it does not stick. And if the semen is hard and thick, you must cut it with a spatula resembling a mirto leaf. If the discharge is of blood, suspend it on an onion and cut; have medicines to stop bleeding, such as acacia, dragon's blood, incense, mixed with many eggs; then bring a wide cloth bandage, so that the wound does not stick; and in this way let it heal for a long time, and bring a dry linen tent; then cure other ailments until it is healed. And when in marriage there comes discharge of blood, it should be covered as described above, except if it is an inflammation that has been treated with cautery. For the inflammation that has been treated with cautery in the vagina, one should not touch to heal.
Hemorrhoids.
1. "Emorroydes are openings of veins which without care are usually not noticed, and when emorroidles become old, they swell; and as I have said in the division [of this work], their resemblance and signs, and I will say here those that receive treatment. I say that emorroides and the swelling, when they are fully formed inside the body, cannot be felt by touch, unless cured with iron. Those which are at the mouth of the body can be felt, and these can be treated. Therefore, you should put the woman in a cold house, then stretch the swelling with pliers at its roots, then sprinkle powdered medicines that stop bleeding, such as acacia, dragon's blood, and incense, etc.; then place her feet exposed for an hour, then immerse it in cold water; and if there is any blood flow, make her sit in a decoction of sumac, apple bark, wild madder root, and similar things, and then take barley flour, mix it with honey and oil, and make one poultice to apply on her back. If it bleeds, that's good. If not, make her wear hot water bottles on her back and under the breasts without piercing them; then take linen, wet it in juice of plantain or marshmallow with old wine, and apply hot linen at the site. And when the abscess subsides, treat the site with ointment until it heals; and that which is called 'albathir' is red, and resembles a small rough stone, and it should be covered as I have said for the swelling; and then treat it until it heals."
openings or abscesses of the anus
There are many types of abscess that may occur in the anus, such as canker sores and hot abscesses, herpes, fistulas, hemorrhoids, and other diseases I have mentioned previously. Therefore, I will explain here the treatment for a hot abscess in the anus, which is not one of those that are filled with pus. And if you want to know the procedure for iron-making, check if the abscess is acute at its onset, and full of heat and fever, and turns red when touched. Then do not hurry to puncture it, but let it mature until the pain subsides; then make the patient sit on one seat, or two small seats so that he can lean, support his back with his hands, and spread his legs apart; his knees should be bent and tied firmly with a strong rope; then apply the instrument used to open the anus, as follows: When you bring this instrument, ensure that it does not enter too deeply into the anus, and does not cause pain or bleeding to the patient. If the instrument is larger, cover the depth of the anus with fabric so that the instrument does not hurt; and place the mouthpiece on top, and mark the instrument. And when the abscess opens, and it becomes soft in your hand, cover it with a sponge soaked in rose oil or green dry oil; place the sponge inside the wound towards the depth of the anus, and place fabric over the anus and over the handle clean cloth moistened with vinegar or cooked long-rooted herbs such as aristolochia. After two days, apply ointment to it until it heals; sometimes the anus and the wound are cleaned with water and honey, then vinegar or long-rooted herbs are cooked, and then return to the ointment. And if the wound heals back into the anus, be careful not to burn with iron, but treat it as we have said previously.
Of childbirth
It is necessary for the midwife to first recognize the natural figure of childbirth and its signs when she sees the woman in labor and desires to urinate; then hasten the birth of the child; know that this childbirth is according to the natural figure, and it issues from below the head, and the second one comes with it; and when you see these signs, gently press the woman's abdomen so that the child comes quickly; for when it descends onto its head, the second one follows with it, and the husband cleans himself of his waste through good cleansing; and this which comes otherwise does not come naturally. For sometimes it comes on its feet, or the body or the head, or the hands, or on the belly or the backside, and it is turned by chance onto its neck, and in other bad figures; it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and clever in these things, and to beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the figures as to how one should assist.
If the child comes onto its head naturally, and the woman gives birth with great effort, and the strength of her virtue is weak, make her sit on a saddle, or women hold her; anoint her nature with oil or fenugreek that has been cooked, then the midwife puts the small spatula between her hands in the shape: And cut the second bone, and strike its nail so that the moistures which are within come forth; and press the woman's belly until the child descends, and if it does not descend, then you must clisterize the woman with muscillaige of fenugreek with oil of sisament; then make her take and vomit from condysi, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: thus the child will come forth.
The issue of the child from its feet When the child comes out from its feet, you must push it upwards; and then turn it gently here and there, until it is equal.
Then take one piece and stretch it gently here and there.
If it can jump up to the knees, when commanded to seize, and makes it vomit from disgust; If it jumps up, may God will it.
And if it is not as we have said, turn it little by little until it is according to the natural shape. Then it is gently turned little by little.
And if it does not come as we have said, take musk-root juice of height, oil of sage, and melted resin, and grind everything in one mortar; And apply the ointment made of woman's nature upon it. Then make her sit in a cold bath until below the ribs;
and when she has been softened, make one collar of myrrh, place it beneath her, and leave it for an hour; then make her sit on a chair, then make her cough and hold her mouth and nose, and press gently on the belly, for the infant will soon come out now. Of the birth of the child on its thighs When the infant comes in this way, place the birthing forceps hand by hand.
from the delivery of the child that comes out with one hand wide open it is necessary to find a way to bring back the hand; If it cannot be returned [to its place], then lift up the woman and walk away.
If she cannot walk, then make her lie down on a bed and spread out her legs.
Then administer the mustard plaster as I have told you;
And if it does not give birth [to the dislocation], make her sit on a chair or seat, then study how to reset the hand. And cause it to give birth according to its natural shape, and make her vomit, and command her to hold on until the child comes out.
Hold the baby's head by its neck, and spread your hands, and turn your face towards the mother's back. You must hold the baby's foot gently, then twist it slowly, and pull it out lightly.
And when it is equal [the joint], put above it a strong mustard plaster made with high altitude and oil, as we have said, then command that it moves little by little.
And when you have done this, make her sit on a chair and command her to take hold of it; then make her vomit. in the same way, treat the second [injury].
in the same way, treat the second [injury]. When this kind of inflammation comes on in this manner to any other [part of the body], press it with your nail until the moisture is voided.
And if the infant lies on its face and neck, press down on the belly, so that it is not held back, and the infant dies.
Then push the child inwards, as much as you need to, and command the woman to take care of herself once.
of twin births Know that twins are born often, and sometimes three or four; and this is not strange, and it happens frequently. Twin births are rare and do not survive very often.
I know that they are multiplied, and the sperm that conceives them is linked to filth.
And sometimes it returns to its natural state as a sow gives birth, as we have said.
And if it emerges violently, as we have said, and the bailiff is skilled, and do quickly and gently what she does. and do as is appropriate to save life. of many children.
of many children. At times they are formed in the womb: one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, or more up to fifteen; and all of them are fully formed like a child by the measurement of the wise glorious one.
It is necessary that the bailiff knows this, for sometimes similar things happen. follow as it is required.
Of a dead child
When you cure the woman of the dead or unborn child, as I said in the division, and it does not come forth, and you are forced to work with your hands; you must know if the woman is of pure virtue, and has no accident or fear of death;
The woman must lie on her back, with her head inclined downwards, and her legs raised.
And the minister should shave the woman's head in two parts, or tie her down to the bed so that she is not treated in childbirth.
Then rub the wife's mouth with moist oils mixed with myrrh and musk, and anoint her husband's hands with these oils and these myrrhs. Then push it gently into the socket, then search for one that fits, which is suitable.
and take care if the bones are broken on top of their head. if you pierce the joint with a needle or its neck or mouth or throat or under the chin or in the armpit or near the sides.
And if the dislocation is on the feet, push or pierce it and bring the bones together in the middle;
Then it is necessary to stretch the skin around it with the right hand, and place the curved instrument between the two of the left hand, and push gently with the whole hand, and pierce the skin in any one of the places we have mentioned, until it reaches an empty state;
Then insert [a needle or awl] opposite another one, or the third if needed, so that the extractions are equal;
and then move it equally from one side to the other, so that they [the extractions] move out, and sharpen the awls so they hold, as shown in the following form:
If there remains a part, press some oil onto the blades of your fingers and apply them to that part, and pull the other part.
And if it remains not at all, place this splint or higher up the limb, and do so until it goes completely away.
When one hand is in front of the other, and cannot be returned due to strain. you should wrap it with one cloth, until it goes completely.
Then press on the joint of the sole or at the heel, and you must do this with the other hand, and with two feet.
And if the child's thigh is large and swollen at the outlet or has a hard head assembled. If you must insert the pointed spatula between your fingers, and press and extract the sharp one (arrow/stone). or you grind it with the instrument called "almidach", from which the form comes with the instruments or chapter that follows this.
And do the same with infants naturally born with large heads; Then draw out the bones with forceps;
And if the head leaps out and is pulled by force, it must be cut open to let out the moisture that is causing the problem.
If it cannot come out, break it into smaller pieces where you can.
And if it [the patient] is swollen in the belly or beneath the ribs, then you must pierce it until the moisture flows.
If the swelling is on [the patient's] feet, the reduction will be easy and the alignment towards the mouth of the bladder will be easy.
And if it [the swelling] is narrow in the belly or thigh, then you must draw it out with one cloth wrap around the hand. and cut open the belly or thigh, until the moisture that is there flows.
And if other members are dislocated, and the head remains. If the nail of the thumb is struck deep into the wound of the wife, and it is pulled out until it reaches her mouth. Then insert one or two fingers, and pull forth.
And if the wife's mouth is narrowed due to a hot abscess that has come, it is not necessary to force it. It is necessary to administer moist and fatty things; And apply plasters, and soften it in warm water and moistening agents.
And if the bone is on its surface, and you can make it even, apply what we have said in the previous step.
And if there is no ability to do so, break it into pieces and leave nothing of the remaining tissue.
And when you have done this, bring him what we said in the dressing of abscesses that come to the marriage;
and if bleeding occurs, let it be stopped with binding, and bring other treatments.
I saw a woman in whom the fetus had died, then another was consulted on that case, and the death of the other fetus was prevented. After a long time, an abscess came in the armpit and swelled so much that it burst open, and began to rot.
I was called to treat it, and I thought for a long time, but could not heal the wound.
I applied a plaster of strong attraction, and an bone came out, and after some days another one. I marveled greatly, for the belly has no bones.
I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
I make the wound, and into it I insert bones, until the woman is better. and the woman stays long in such a state, and then a little pus comes out from the place.
and I have never heard this chapter except because, when the master finds something strange, he knows what to do about it.
to bring the husband back to his place
Here follows the shape of the lever, to which books are applied; and at two turns, the heads of the two links. The horns should be thinner than the restrictor, and made of ebony or boxwood.
and the barrel of the pipe should be one finger's width wide, and the edges of the arms one finger-width, and of long a half palm. And between the two limbs should be two joints of the same bone, which are tightly joined in one and the other, half a palm length or a little more;
And this pair of joints are pushed into the mouth of the jaw to open when turning the two horns.
Another form, more subtle and lighter in appearance, should be made of ebony or boxwood, according to the appearance of pliers. And say to the two shoulders, as you see, of one span in length, and two fingers in width;
And when you see to open the wife with all the tools, make her sit on one bed, her feet hanging and legs apart; then push the two shoulders together in the woman, and hold the head of the tool beneath her thighs; Then work your hand with all the tools, just as you have done with pliers equally, according to the quantity that you see to open the mouth of the anvil, until the bail makes what it desires.
These tools are all covered and have similar shapes; and when the smiths have equipped them, they work more quickly, and at a greater height for men because of their quantity.
Do not disdain the tool that you have not equipped, as its necessity is not easily excused.
When the second child is held back during birth, you must instruct the woman to retain her breath, and then make her vomit with discomfort, and hold your hands at her mouth and nose. If she jumps because of this, it is good (or correct).
If it is not so, take a small pot and make a poutice or cover and put herbs that can open the mouth of the woman, such as rue, anise, chamomile, cascara sagrada, and centaury.
All these herbs, or some of them, should be cooked or boiled in water on the fire; then put a tube or pierced pot lid on the pot, and the other end into the mouth of the patient.
And hold the plaster until the vapor enters the patient's mouth; then make him vomit, as we have said. If the second one suddenly moves quickly. If it remains after this treatment and does not heal as expected, command the woman to moisten her left hand with oil of cumin or mustard plaster, and then put it on naturally.
And she seeks the second joint; and when she has found it, if she takes it and stretches it little by little straightly, so that the husband does not resist during extraction. but you must move it gently to the right and to the left, and then pull; if it comes and dislocates itself.
And if the husband's mouth is opened wide, we have said the cure of emptying and fumigating with herbs.
and if there is no such thing as we have said, make sure you do not pull too much.
But it is necessary that the one at the mouth of the woman's womb, you tie him to the woman's thigh, then apply a clisterium ointment four-fold.
If it is possible to retrieve and replace [the object], it will pass; but nonetheless, when she can do so, if a bad smell comes from the stomach and the head, it will poison the patient.
Therefore, necessary are suitable fumigations for this [case]: no ancient has proven the fumigation of dill and dried figs.
The shape of the instrument with which one fumigates the woman to retain flowers and secondary ones, is as follows:
And it resembles glass in shape, with the head being thin in the nature and the large sides over the fire;
and let the fumigation be over the coals, and let the tinder burn until it is consumed, then start another.
to bore through the foundation
Many children are born who do not have the foundation pierced, but it is stopped by some subtle means. Then you must have the obstruction pierced with the correct tool, and not with a sharp splint, and ensure that it does not touch the flesh.
Then put moist linen soaked in wine and oil on top of it, then treat with ointment until it is healed.
And if you doubt that it will not come out again, place a plug of wood and leave it for several hours, and remove it when the child wants to go to bed in the room.
And sometimes this sudden swelling of wound or abscess occurs; it must be covered. If it is inflamed, as we have said, the bandage of cloth should be used.
of the fistula from its base Fistulas that come from below the base are swellings, and those that come out of the sides of it, or in between the two parts,
If it has a fistula or more than one; and when the swelling is old, if it opens up, then add moisture to make it white or thin pus.
And sometimes these fistulas are persistent; and they are known by those who have them or an evacuation or windy passage when the patient has an evacuation, and accidentally urinate in it.
And if the fistulas pierce up to the bladder and halfway down the penis; they reach up to the knee joint and the nut of the thigh.
And thus one recognizes the fistula piercing through to its foundation, and not piercing entirely through: it is that you insert your index finger or foundation, and insert a fine needle of iron or steel into the fistula where there is no twisting.
and if it has twisting, then insert a thin linen or horsehair tent, or hair, until you feel the tent or hair at your finger:
And if you do not feel it, neither pus nor putrid matter nor worm comes out, as we have said: (Note: This line is a continuation of the previous one and I am translating both lines together in one English translation)
If the fistula is open all the way to the bladder or the conduit of urine, if it gushes out urine and cannot be sealed by medicine.
If it is pierced all the way to the knee joint, then the tendon comes to the surface:   (Note: I have combined two lines into one translation as they are related) If it is not twisted and the source of pain is around, then it is indeed broken, and no medicine or ointment has any effect on it.
In these Persian fistulas there is no cure but pain and futility of foolish physicians who interfere with it.
In one that is not Persian and not old, in hope of healing by iron, as I have experienced,
and it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back; and he lifts his legs up to his thighs, and has his thighs inclined towards his stomach. Then insert a tent of arrows, or of planks if there is curvature, as long as you know where the tent comes from.
If the patient feels it around the foundation, then it is necessary that you insert your finger to indicate.
then you will know that the tent has penetrated; and it should be discovered where your finger feels the sore or the flesh, then you will know that it is pierced. if it is not worked, it cannot be healed.
One should say, however, that one can heal some, but it happens rarely;
and help is given, if it is heating the fine cautery according to the width of the fistula, as has been said before; and put everything hot in the fistula until it reaches the base; and do this 2 or 3 times, as long as you know that these charred fibers should be burned, which are similar to a feather of a bird;
And then, cure the swollen tents with butter, until the heat subsides, then apply a soothing and healing ointment.
If it heals like this, that is good. But if it cannot be healed in any other way;
and if the tent enters but does not penetrate to the base, and between your finger and the tent, place a thick covering of fat or sycamore, and you see the fistula beneath the cover with care; If the edge of the fistula begins, push it forward towards the opening, and then apply the cautery afterwards, until it reaches the head of the opening.
When the opening is released and closed again, find those charred pieces that resemble a bird's feather, and nothing remains.
And if the flesh grows over it, cut between you and the wound, then cauterize it with fire or medicinal herbs.
For fire cauteries have two good effects: firstly, the removal of charred tissue around the wound, and secondly, stopping the flow of blood and drying up moisture.
Then heal the tents of wet cloths in butter or in boiled cheese, until the wounds are closed, and let the charred parts burn in the butter/cheese.
Then heal the wound with hard charred medicine, and these are dry medications.
For when it is restored, it heals and does not return.
If a fistula comes to the full extent of its foundation and is removed from the body, push your thumb or finger into it and examine it.
If you feel the tension and between two is the cloth or the linen or leather, or it is close to being pierced, there should not be any other way than a faith and hope-giving method through the administration of one of the three ways:
or you cauterize it as we have said, or you strike it to the bottom, or if you boil it, then treat it as we have described before.
and do not go too deep that you cover the holding element for the foundation, let the effusions come out through it voluntarily. Then heal (it), as we have said;
Then heal (it), as we have said; In case it becomes healthy (the wound), then remove that covering and clean it when it is cut away from the base, either by tenting or using another instrument. Then disinfect the charred flesh that is in the wound, as much as you can;
Then study to heal the wound and to retain the fistula on the side farther from the base; it will be easier for the patient.
And sometimes they are fistulas in this manner: and it is when you bite the tip into the fistula, and it is where it touches the foundation beneath the skin above. and take a piece of parchment pierced at its head in this shape: and put one twisted thread through two, and push the parchment along with the whole thread into the fistula until it reaches the head.
If it [the joint] is dislocated at the margin of the foundation within, then extract the thread of that one, so you pierce your finger or foundation.
and draw out the head of the thread, and bring together the two shoulder blades, and hold one against the other, and leave it for 1 or 2 days.
and keep it immobile until the threads meet the bones that are between them, and become joined.
then heal the wound until it is healed and healthy.
If the fistula does not pierce itself, make it pierce in all possible ways, if it is not too deep.
For you should not treat the fistula too deeply by cauterizing it, and then heal it as we have said, until it is healed.
The shape of the spur-like spathulum used to make a fistula is very sharp at one end and slices. And on the other hand, not because one should not strike what one should not copy, as you see here:
Hemorrhoids are of two kinds: either they are within the foundation, like a piece of resin, and there are both small and large ones; and in the skin, blood flows out immediately. and there is one or more of them, they are outside the foundation and at the head of the foundation; but those that are outside have little moisture,
And always or a little of sour lemon juice or a little blood, and it has the color of the body.
and the treatment for those with it within their foundations, since you instruct the patient to strain for urination in rooms, until the foundations pass, and this appears in the sons. hasten it, and pierce it with pincers or hold it with your nail, then strike at its roots;
and if the hinges cannot be held by their moisture, take a small cloth or cotton, or a piece of camel's hair; And draw them to your hands, then strike them, and pour some hot powders upon them that serve as a substitute for cautery. or you cauterize them as described in the "cautery" chapter, then treat them with other remedies until they are healed.
and if the foundation cannot be removed, clisterize the patient with biting and harsh cleansers to cleanse the area where the foundation is located, so that it can come out easily.
If the patient applies oil to himself, and his hairs are deeply rooted in the foundation, then the treatment is easy; And it is that you grasp them with your nail or tweezers, strike them, then heal them as we have said, until they are healed and fear the incision by iron.
You should make the stitch in this way: take a twisted thread and put it on a needle, then pull the thread above and pierce the needle from the other side, and twist the two threads below the needle. and if it is wide, make the stitch tight, then knot the thread, pull out the needle, and do the same with all the others, leaving one for the blood flow.
Then place a soft cloth soaked in rose oil or wax on the foundation, and place it, and instruct the patient to rest.
And then let it drain until it stops, and when it is dried, heal it with ointment and other treatment, until it heals.
With the fire or foundation. Often there is drying of feces in the intestines due to natural constriction, and when the illness is old and medicine is not helpful.
It is necessary for you to peel the skin at the tip of a splinter or your fingernail, so that it does not get wet. then heal it until it heals as required;
and if it cannot heal, then repeat the shaving more forcefully until it heals, and be peeled; then heal it until it is healed.
The trembling (or shuddering) Louse is a small pustule appearing before the body, and it travels throughout;
And sometimes the troutworm freezes (or paralyzes), and it is felt like death trembling throughout the body, and more in the hands than other parts.
And the remedy is that you take a cane from an ostrich feather or a strong goose feather and place it on the trembling (patient), until the circles contract the trembling completely; Then turn your hand along the entire cane until you cover the trembling entirely and push it into completely, and strengthen the trembling from its roots.
And if you see, do this with a cane of iron or steel following this form and be subtle underneath and train above:
Do not pierce [the area], for it should be held by the thumb, and it should be pressed. And if you wish, cauterize the trembling, as described in the chapter on cautery.
The form of the clyster (enema) is   ... Never is an enema made with silver or iron, or melted tallow or resin; and at times, small and large instruments are made according to those for whom they are prepared.
Therefore, those whom one treats in the care of children and who are weak and painful, are small.
The form of the cupping glass is both small and large, or the belly is tied in this manner:   (This seems to describe a tool used for cupping therapy.)
and it has an opening or the belly is tied, as you see, and the cheeks are pierced within; and at one side there are two holes, and in the other one.  (This seems to describe a design for the cupping glass.)
And let the stomach or man put the medicine from a beast's bladder or parchment, and it should be pierced all around with small holes.
And at each hole there should be space of one inch, then push in each hole a strong thread of twisted cord in ten or fewer, and bind the stomach like a goat's pouch. And when the medicine is inside, tie it with a strong thread to the instrument in front, then smear (clisterize). This is the shape of a circle.
And let the medicine not be too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the clistere with oil or egg yolk, or something similar, then insert it gently.
Then the ministers stretch out the patient's two hands together while he is completely visible, then remove the cloth, and wash the patient's legs at the surface.
If the medication seems to come out, squeeze it as much as possible; and if it does not go away all at once, letting it stay for an entire night increases its benefit.
If you treat the patient with a cloth for the disease of abdominal distention, and the medication seems to come out quickly, continue it until he is cured.
And if the hemorrhoids are fleshy or abscessed, it should be cleansed as gently as for an infant;
and this is the form of the gentle cleanse where the skin is stretched:
of wounds
We have said in the division the treatment for wounds; now we will tell you about hand treatments and medicines, according to their completion.  --> We have already mentioned the cure for wounds in the previous division; now we will tell you about hand treatments and medicines according to the process or method.
I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and of what kind they are made.
The things that cause wounds are by piercing with a spear, cutting with a sword and knife, or lance, mace or arrow, or similar things.
or according to the parts of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, head, chest, abdomen, liver, and similar limbs.
And I will tell you the treatment for every wound, and I shall begin with the simple wounds of the head, because it will come in its chapter.
And if it is a simple wound of the head and the bone is not broken, be careful that it is from an arrow or similar things, and the skin is torn all the way through and the wound is large. and you doubt raising an abscess hot: if you do so immediately, clean the head wound itself whether it comes a little blood from the wound or opposite of the injured part.
And the patient should evacuate himself of wine and large meats.
If he does not want to purge (sainier), his food should be reduced, and he should not drink wine, nor eat meat.
And apply on the wound, if an abscess comes out, cotton wool soaked in rose oil or in vinegar steeped.
If there is no abscess, then apply on the wound if it is fresh with all its blood, and it has not been moved by air, here is a little powder that I will say later.
If the arrow has moved it, then apply some ointments until it heals.
If the wound is large like that of a sword and similar, and the lips cannot be brought together by pressure, then stitch it up, as I will say for belly wounds, with sewing.
If the wound exposes the bone and pus, but only holds together by a little, press it; then heal the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh instead of skin. And instruct the patient to eat coarse foods such as boiled heads (testes) and wheat, also including peas and similar things.
And if you find or suspect rotten flesh not on the bone, press it all and throw away the pus, then heal it.
And if there is an artery in the wound or vein without a cord, and it cannot be stopped by medicine, then tie it, and if you find it dislocated, bind it with a thread; And if that does not help, cauterize it.
And if these wounds are small and simple, the cure is easy: you put in this powder which hardens as soon as the astringent has set it;
And the method of the powder is: take one part of incense; two parts of dragon's blood; three parts of quicklime, and grind them finely together, apply the wound, and press it firmly until it drains well and joins all its blood.
and then bind it tightly and leave it to heal, if it does not swell; for the medicine is not removed until it has healed.
And sometimes this is done with quicklime only when there is no incense or dragon's blood, but the sore has not moved.
And if the wound has moved, most certainly do not put this powder on it;
but place some digested herbs or wheat flour made with water and honey on it until it swells. then cure it with other remedies until it is healed.
and if the bone fracture comes with the wound and it is small, extract it using fine pliers.
And I will tell you after this about the breaks of the head.
about the wound of the neck   (neck injury)
If a wound occurs in the neck and it is simple, without any difference between it and that of the head, but if the nerve or the artery is cut.  (neck injury with damage to nerves/artery)
If it is the nerve, there is no other remedy than to let it heal and not put anything binding, for it harms nerves and makes them shrink; And do not put anything cold on the wound, for the substance of nerves is cold, and their continuation is with the brain, which is the highest member.
but let the medicine be warm, such as warm water washed with mild soap, and mixed with rose oil, and also cooked in warm water. and other stones of similar manner, and always moist.
And if the wound is large, bind it with a bandage, then treat until it heals.
And if the wounds are deep and swollen with pus, pierce or dig lower.
And if the arteries are cut and bleeding occurs, stop it, ligate it, and cauterize as needed;
and if the spine of the throat is cut or the veins are severed, keep them closed so that the meat remains. tie up the vein above the throat of the neck, and do not touch the throat but place it back in its natural position; And then apply the traction method, and leave it for some days, then cure it with hot compresses until it heals.
If the wound presses on the bone, break it. If there are pieces of bone, pull them out if you can, and those that you cannot remove, leave until the wound festers. And let the joint be dislocated and aligned.
And if the wound is fresh, sprinkle on it the powder that I have said. If there is bone in the wound and it has a fistula, then cure it as I have said in its chapter.
of the wound from a spear or knife.
If it is a wound from a lance or knife, and the wound is deep, look to see if bubbles rise from the wound; therefore, know that the wound is deadly.
and if it is not deep, and the wound is fresh with all its blood, do not put powder on it at first hour or bind it for the blood that causes it to swell. return to the patient's heart and kill him; But apply an attracting ointment, and let it lie for two times per day;
And if you don't have ointment, put in the wound old cotton to draw out moisture.
and let the patient sleep on the wound for three days, or four, or more. if no spasm, nor evil tremor of heart, nor drawing of bowels with entrail does not occur; And when you see the good positioning, know that the wound is healed. Then treat it with poultices and other cures, as long as it is healthy;
If it cannot heal, then open it, know that there is a fistula; cure it accordingly.
If the wound is from a sword or knife cut and it is simple (not complex), then cure the part that is in front;
If it is large, stitch it up; and if it is small, powder it, and if it has been pressed into the bone, take away pieces of it, be it a wound, and pull out the threads if they are drawn. And if they are not drawn, let the wound fester, align the extraction.
and for other wounds on other limbs, it is the judgement as we have said.
The breakage of the stomach
The rupture of the stomach is great, medium, and small;
A large wound makes the intestines or the nerves of the intestines protrude once in a while through it.
And stitching is more difficult, and sometimes a small wound is worth more than a large one,
because when one puts more points in (the body), if one does not put them in from end to end; because the intestines swell soon enough that they feel the cold, if they are pushed more inwards,
And because it is more important to heal the midline wounds, because one rearranges the intestines back into their place for them rather than for others.
And know that the wound of the belly is in four ways:
The two common wounds occur in the abdominal wound,
And the suturing of other wounds on the body, as well as two other specific suturings, are common to other wounds;
Moreover, they are more appropriate with the suturing of the belly, and I will explain one and then the other.
I say that when the wound is small, and nothing from the intestines is protruding, And a third thing is about resetting, which can be done in one of two ways: For the smallness of the wound, as we have said, For because the intestines are swollen due to cold.
And when it is cold, heat it up in this manner: soak a sponge or a piece of fine linen in warm water only, Or you cook in hot water with squill (squinant) and cypress (cipre) and thorn (spike). And soften the intestine until the inflammation is removed.
And sometimes make this wine restraining, and it's good to soothe what swells for reduction of inflammation.
And when you see the inflammation spreading, if there is a raw intestine or a bad intestine that has been cooked, Because this narrows the entrance to little things;
and if it cannot enter, make a small incision with the instrument used for hemorrhoids;
and the first cure is to grind the root; we should not cut it unnecessarily.
And this is the instrument to split:
slice within along the curvature and do not bend it, and observe its shape:
And when the wound is widened, and the intestines escape: If you reset it according to its natural form in its proper place, If you have the power, for it is necessary. (Note: The "car" here implies that the action of resetting is necessary, but not that the patient or someone else has the ability to do so.)
When the wound is wide and it is in the part below the belly, you must make the patient lie on his back, And raise his legs higher than his head; If it is in the part beneath the belly,
and if the rupture of the belly is in one of the two parts: If the broken part is higher than the other.
And thus it is necessary to treat as I say in large and small wounds.
In small wounds, use what is appropriate.
Then place a skilled and compassionate minister between your hands who will treat the entire wound with his hand, And gather the lips; and this is the common method of suturing.
and this is the common method of suturing. and you take one needle or more, according to the width of the wound, Then leave one inch of space from the edge of the wound and stitch with a needle having one strong thread. And pierce the two shoulders with the two sharp bones (of a splint or instrument).
then draw a double thread around the needle of two parts (i.e., twice), Then assemble the two shoulders of the wound properly.
And leave one finger space, and insert another needle; then tie the thread as you did for the first needle, and do not stop doing this according to what you have need of the needles, until the entire wound is constricted;
and the needles be medium-sized, between thin and thick. because fine needles pierce all the flesh, while very thick ones cannot enter well. Because they should be cut open;
and it is not advisable to push the needles too deep into the flesh and skin,
so that they do not open and cut the wound before the joint;
then pierce the head of the needles, so that it does not hurt the patient while sleeping, And place bands or cloths on the head of the arrows to keep them still, and let them remain until the wound is healed;
and this method of stitching arrows is more suitable for small wounds, because it takes one or two arrows to do it.
The second stitch is common. and you assemble the two shoulders of the hide and the two shoulders of the sack together with a needle having one strong, medium thread. and when you have sewn these four pieces together,
and when you have sewn these four pieces together, if you unravel the needle at the part where you began, in the way that cloaks are sewn.
And place a distance between each stitch the thickness of a small egg.
this stitching should be for the man.
and I sew a wound on the belly of a man.
who was wounded by a knife, and the wound is more than one palm long, and protrudes from the abdomen about two palms in length,
and was located within the belly, I brought back the intestines when it had been twenty-four hours.
and the wound healed up to fifteen days, and it was cured, and became healthy.
And they had judged him that he would die, but this was a miracle;
and I did not cure it with medicine, because at that time there was none available nor any medicines; And apply old cotton above the wound twice a day, and wash it with honey water until it heals.
I will tell you the two proper methods of stitching:
Take the needle and thread from the outside to the inside part.
when it has passed through the core straight, if you find that the knot or stitch where you put the needle,
And make it pierce from the other side through the inner part up to where it protrudes.
and the understanding of this stitch is that you sew as the pilgrims sew fur, and that you leave the seam once on one side, and take it up from the other, until the stitch is completely finished.
The second method of stitching, which Galen calls specifically,
is as anyone does who joins two parts naturally together, and apply one of the ends of the thread to the other end, in this manner:
insert an awl or the nearest thread end and pierce only that spot, And let the two cheeks (or sides) remain open; Then turn the needle and make it pierce from the outer part to the inside. with both cheeks (or sides) open;
Then pierce one and the other from the outer part to the inside, in two other cheeks (or sides) that are opposite each other.
And this is the common method of stitching (or sewing).
Galen said this word, and no one denies it.
One should sew the stomach with two needles, each having thread in it.
and one should thrust one needle from one side, and the other from the other side, in the manner of those who sew corsets.
And know that when the hernia is within the abdomen, is the stitching more severe than in other parts of the belly.
The judgments for the wound are as follows for other wounds:
And it is when you find the fresh wound full of blood, as soon as the arrows have moved it, then insert the arrow and tie it; then put powder rejuvenating flesh on top.
then insert the arrow and tie it; then put powder rejuvenating flesh on top. if the arrow has moved it, then put some ointment on it that is present, until the wound heals; and sew the flesh with thread, and bind the strips of linen cloth; Then treat the wound as others, while it is healthy;
and if you have no medicine, put on it (the wound) as soon as it starts to discharge pus, old cotton. and move it two times a day while it is healthy.
For you have no need for other medicines in many cases where the wounds are simple;
And if you doubt whether the wound will infect the main limbs, then wet a thin cloth lightly in warm oil or rose oil. then wrap it around the joints, and beneath the bones;
And if pain or swelling occurs in the belly, and it often happens, and if the clysters of black wine make it hot, and particularly when the swelling reaches the intestines;
and pierce inside, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small.
The intestine called "jeun" cannot heal when it is perforated, And it is due to the planting of veins that they are, and because of the subtlety of all the body, and the proximity of its nature to nerves.
And if the worm jumps out from the wound, return it back like the intestines, while it is still fresh.
and if it is old and has turned into or black, you must cauterize the blackened part where blood does not flow from it. because there are veins and arteries;
Then grip what is between the ligament, and place the two shoulders hanging from the part below the wound towards the side to align the extraction when the arrow falls out, and the wound bows.
of the boil's rupture
When the intestines are torn, and the wound is small, if it can be restored in some men,
because I have seen a man pierced or gutted by a spear;
and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, And it became ulcerated and turned into a fistula, and from this came the discharge and windiness;
I applied remedy according to what I know, and did not stop refining it until it was healed, and the wounds sealed.
And when I saw the wound sealing, I feared that the patient had something wrong in his stomach; but he was not ill, but remained in better condition, and diet and drink;
And they said to any experimenters that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it should be tied in this manner: take large thongs, then bring together the lips of the wound, and when the thongs have opened the mouth, place it on the two lips,
Then put another force after in the same manner as before, until the wound is completely grasped;
and stitch the wound. If the head (abscess) abscesses in the intestines, it causes no harm to the patient.
And it can be tied with a fine thread that is cut from the intestine of an animal.
in this manner: take the head of this thread made of intestine which should be quite thin. then tie the head of this thread (the intestine thread) with a fine linen cord twisted around it. Then insert the thread into the needle, sew the intestine, and reset it in the wound.
And this way of suturing wounds is not beyond faith and hope.
And if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the small intestines, there is no remedy or healing, except through subtlety.
from a fistula or... Know that every wound or abscess, when it heals, is universally called "fistula." and likewise when it is closed and healed.
And a fistula is according to the truth, a swelling lasting long and white, where there is no pain. and is as swollen as the feathers of a bird;
And sometimes in a clear jump, and other times thick; Sometimes shallow, and other times deep;
And I have spoken about it in the section on wounds, that every wound that is not healed, and there is no flesh, It is not only due to one of the eight causes:
It means, "This is to know, by the smallness of blood or heart;" And by its badness; Or because there is hard flesh within, under the lips, which does not allow flesh to grow; or it has too much pus; If the loosened joint is of bad quality matter, then [the following action is advised]: and the medicine is not good in treating it; because corruption is a type of pestilence. Because the property in that region causes slow digestion, and slows health, and naturally decays by nature; There are veins or bones:
And I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the treatments of medicines in the divisions:
And I will tell you how to treat a fistula made by manual work:
Recall that fistula occurs in all members of the body; for there are fistulas that come from large veins, and arteries, and nerves, or in the intestines, or the bladder, or one of the ribs, or in the spine of the back, or any joint of the hands or feet;
And all the fistulas that are made in this way are difficult healing, and there is nothing but labor and ignorance.
And if there is any fistula that does not reach the level I have said, and you are confident of its cure, And you shall recognize it (the dislocation), if you take a tent of beeswax or iron, if the fistula is straight, then insert it.
and if the fistula is twisted, then search for a slender tent reed. because reeds bend easily due to twisting.
and if the fistula is crushed in many places and you cannot search for it well with reeds, If the clisterization is performed by one of the wounds,
for the moisture cuts from one wound to another, and it purifies.
then you shall cauterize it as best you can, knowing if there is bone or nerve, and it is filled up to the full.
and ask the patient carefully about the pain he feels when pressed by your hand, and where he feels it.
And when you truly know the place where it is located, and if it is far from a joint, or a nerve, or an artery, or a vein, or in any of the places that I have told you, if it is turned as I have said,
or in any of the places that I have told you, if it is turned as I have said, and cut open the cavity and the rotten and corrupt matter within; and then heal it until it is healed,
And if the fistula is properly deepened correctly, then you must stop it up, as much as you can. Then put moistened tents in healing balm and push them into the head of the fistula,
Then put moistened tents in healing balm and push them into the head of the fistula, until the medicine corrodes the excess that remains at the bottom;
And then put salves with healing balm on it until it heals.
If not healed by this means, then cauterize as we have said.
and if the bone is corrupted from the fistula, crush it. If vein or nerve does not trouble you or main limbs as we have said.
And if the bone is exposed, and there is corruption and blackness, leave it to fester until all the corruption is removed, then heal with healing herbs until it is healed.
and if not healed, then let it swell as before, know that you are not to wait until the fountain (source of water).
If you dig deep and wish to be at the bottom, and remove all corruption, then return it to its place;
And if it is in such a state, that is good. If this is not the case, know that the corruption is too deep, you cannot reach it; If there is no other remedy but to rest with natural means;
and if a small bone is corrupt, and you can draw it out with pliers; If it needs to be extracted using one instrument;
if there are many bones, extract them all, not leaving any one behind;
and if the moisture opposes it and there is no error or fear, if it softens and moisten the bone and releases the bones.
And if you cannot remove them within an hour, put on the wound something stimulating purgative. and let it remain until the flesh is rotten around the bones,
And then if they have more easily movable bones;
and if it is a large bone like the thigh or shin: only remove the corruption until all the blackness is removed, then restore the wound;
And if there is a large part of corruption reaching to the bone. It must be covered completely up to the corruption and then be healed until it is closed.
And I will tell you of a fistula that happened to one man in his leg. so that you may take example and aid in your work.
A young man of about 30 years had a pain in his leg due to a cause that came from within the body.
until substances came to the leg, and there developed a large abscess without any cause for opening.
but they opened it further due to their foolishness, opening more abscesses. And it becomes full of matter, and a fistula forms, and much pus comes out that all are going bowel and moisture from the body.
And they put many remedies around it for two years, but there was no experienced person in the art of hands.
as long as I was there, and I saw her leg and the medicines with which she was treated, and that was coming out through the sores with great effort. And the youth's body becomes red, and has a yellowish color.
I pitched a tent in one of the wounds, then I searched all the wounds.
and found that one wound was coming towards the other from all parts of the leg.
Then I hurried up and cut into one of the wounds until I discovered a part of the bone, And I found it corrupt and pierced, and the corruption came up to the bone within;
I seemed to see the bone as corrupt, and I thought there was no other corruption except that which I left;
and I began to dress the wound with medicinal salves for a long time, but it could not heal;
and then I dressed it again and discovered the bone as before,
I found continuous corruption in the bone, I cured it, and then I extracted it, and I considered how to set it;
but I could not manage to hold a palm's breadth of the bone, and I pulled it apart with all its marrow; then I restored it with medicine; and it became healed and set quickly,
And it is not necessary to start the work again except due to the weakness of the patient who could not endure. and due to the fear of death that I had for him. For there was often bleeding, but he recovered completely.
For there was often bleeding, but he recovered completely. And a hard cyst grew on the bone and he had a good disposition without any harm or side effects, neither in the air nor in coming.
And you draw out the corrupt flesh beneath the skin of the head, and uncover the flesh on the spot where you wish to be, that it does not burn the flesh; and place a splint or a flat piece of wood under the bone to protect the rotten flesh; and it must be as much as one can see and feel the corruption, and also again.
And if the bone is corrupt but does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or a part of it, un iron rod beneath it; then press.
and press the cloth from one part of the corruption to another, and let the iron rod be as long as the length of the corruption, as we have said;
if the corruption is in the joint, then strike the dislocated joint and hold the bone that contains it from the other side;
And if corruption is in the continuation of the two joints, there is no other remedy than covering [it].
and if corruption is at the tip of the hand or the foot, it is a very grave matter. but nevertheless, you must inquire about this corruption, how it has opened up. And purify it in all ways as you can, but let the vein or nerve not hinder you.
And know that the incision and stitches for covering these bones are many, according to the position of the bone and the appearance of them. and their thickness, their fineness, their largeness and smallness, and their hardness; and for this reason, the tool must be adapted to each type of work;
And know that the work will show you the instrument needed, according to the knowledge of this art. and the testimony of the ways of diseases; if you think about the instrument needed according to what is necessary.
with fire The shoulder may dislocate either from within or from outside.
and when you have administered this corrosive treatment by means of medicine, it does not benefit at all. it is necessary to cover that limb up to the level where the corrosion occurs, if the patient becomes weakened by death or by the greater wickedness of the limb's defect;
if the patient becomes weakened by death or by the greater wickedness of the limb's defect; And the signs are that the limb turns black, as if it were burned by fire. And then comes the spreading of darkness, then follows the corruption of member to member. It takes all over the body; if you hurry to cover it.
If it is from the sting of some poisonous animals, such as sea scorpions, vipers and similar.
If the corruption is at the head of the tooth, strike it, but give it no space to come up to the hand.
And if it comes up to the wrist, strike it at the joint so that the corruption does not reach the arm;
and if it reaches the arm, strike at the neck; and if it passes the neck, that is death. And no remedy is of any use but the amount of its potency;
And thus one does when the corruption comes or the foot: if it comes in the first joint, then strike after the next joint;
If it comes at the foot, then strike the entire foot; If it reaches the leg, then strike at the knee joint;
If it rises above the knee, there is no other remedy for the patient but death;
And the method for covering or dressing the limb is such that you bind it above and below, Extend one minister to the lower ligament and another minister to the upper ligament, And you separate the cartilage that is between the two ligaments by about one span wide, so that the bone is exposed;
Then cover or dress it (the limb), and put on each side a linen cloth, so that the dressing does not touch healthy tissue, And the patient comes with another injury and abscesses growing.
And bleeding comes when you work on it, so cauterize the wound quickly, or you put some restricting powders on it; then return to your medicine until it is completed,
Then bind the limb with a suitable ligature, and let it heal until it is healed.
and I will tell you what happened to a man in the foot:
a man had a blackness that resembled burnt by fire,
the corruption began first in his toe of the foot, spreading through it all;
And when the wounds see corruption, he pierces them with copper [instruments] and they become healthy;
For a long time after the corruption returns or comes back with the hand, it came to me,
And I put him on things that stimulated recovery after the body's cleansing, but the corruption could not stop;
And you command me to cut off his hand, and I don't wish, unless I have hope of repelling the matter. and doubted also if by cutting his hand, it would not cause death. for the man's strength was weak; and he despaired completely, and returned to his land. if he were struck with a sword to cut off his hand, and he would be healthy.
And I have not considered this except for when other options are needed, if it is necessary.
An abscess occurs in the shin bone, and remains for such a long time that it causes a great swelling of the leg. Then they run and pierce through, causing the leg to jump, and the bones remain visible, as if a knight's. And the skin that is above is also as thin as a linen cloth torn. and it will not run up to the bone nor to the nerve, and such a disease is called "putrid".
but if it is so long that it comes all the way to the bone in depth, it is called "fistula".
And the cook should be such that you wrap it completely, and equally when it is subtle, as a cloth. and not to become corrupt.
And if you suspect that the meat will rot and the corruption is not complete, And the skin is thick with fat, if you cure it with a plaster like this:
look to see if the breasts are large and swollen, and if they smell foul, then use this Egyptian plaster made in this way: take asafetida, oil, and litharge, equally, and cook them together in one pot on the fire, As long as the medicine is red and thickens like honey;
and then take from this according to your need, and make it into water and honey. and anoint the breast, and bind the wound; and leave the medicine inside for two hours, then take it out straining;
Make this procedure as many times as necessary, until the breast is drained; and remove the pus.
and occasionally cleanse with water of ashes. when this medicine is not present, and you take vine ash and pour water over it,
Then bleed and apply poultice until you know that the breast is well healed;
and if the patient cannot endure it, do not use the Egyptian medicine or water with ashes, if the poultice is with water and honey or it has a little bit of crushed litharge; or you may apply poultice with honey and sweet wine, which has the property of purifying and washing. And the wine makes the blood congeal
and when you have done this, and you are sure that the breast is well cleansed, if the enemas given causes the flesh to be produced in him,
And you take a plaster of definite size, and make it with rose oil and wine. and you anoint it with some medications and unguents, whose properties or treating the unguents I have mentioned.
if the wound on the breast is small, and the cloth plaster cannot enter, If a wound from a small iron is opened, place an Egyptian bandage on it. or Basilicon ointment, as long as it is opened wide;
and if the wound is too large, leave it at least one league or the size that can be reached by a clyster.
and if the hernia that throws out the belly is above, lower it or even more below. For when the bone is fully set, do not let any cartilage grow on it. and if you cannot cover the wound beneath as you see fit, arrange it in such a way that the bone is set at its lowest point.
And if you cannot cover the chest beneath as you see, Then proceed in this manner: let the intestines move gently downward and do not leave anything of the intestines. and take consolidating medicines to place on the chest,
and stretch a linen cloth over the entire chest; Then press with force on the breast, i.e., slightly larger than the first [pressure point]. then anoint gently on top of it, i.e., another cloth according to the size of the pressure point. and place it on the breast pressure point to align the bone, and do not remove the large cloth except after many days once.
and the one who is on the breast pressure point, remove often to remove the bone, And know what runs from the wound, whether it is poison or pus, or digested or undigested.
and pay attention if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not,
and when your medicine has been applied in such a manner and you see that the pus rises above the wound's edge, If you know that breasts harden [or become firm], approach them with health.
And then unbind it in the morning or afternoon, and when you are unbinding the wound, If you change one [piece of] clothing and renew the dressing.
And if the breasts fall out improperly after many days, know that breasts do not harden [or become firm]. And if subtle poisons creep up after a long time, do not despair of health,
for the health approaches. For there are people whose wounds swell up slowly in their wounds, and those who do the opposite.
and if the stomach bloats too quickly after many days, know that the breast does not become sour.
and if the breasts take a long time to dry out and are swollen, apply drying medicines that are moist in substance but dry in effect. As an egg is defined, for it contains much vitriol, and it is the last of medicines;
take an egg white, define it with rose oil and stir equal parts of old wine in substance.
then cook it and use it; this method makes it more cooked and thickened. When the diaphysis (long cylindrical part of a long bone) is not present,
and take myrrh and aloes and incense, grind them together, and sprinkle the powder over the honey when it is on the fire. and then dip one cloth, and lay it on the breast, and sometimes administer an Aristotle-long liniment, and roots of celestial lily (an ancient medicinal herb), which is like flour made from peas and quince.
and roots of celestial lily (an ancient medicinal herb), which is like flour made from peas and quince. And in using simple or compound substances: grind them up, make it into powder, and put it on the honey as I said, and apply it. and if the patient is ill for a long time and is not cured by this treatment,
and if the patient is ill for a long time and is not cured by this treatment, then understand that the corruption has entered completely, and causes pressure on the bone or hard tissue, or ligaments; if the patient is cured by the treatment for fistula, as we have said before.
Of the abscess of the nail
Panaric is an abscess that arises under the nail at the base of the hand. or at the foot, or by chance arises in other places;
And when it (the wound) becomes inflamed and no care is taken, an abscess may form. And cut and pull out the nail until it reaches the root, and by chance you may cut through it completely.
The corruption reaches the bone, causing a stinking pain, and the shoulder is large and discolored.
When you follow the treatment as we have described in the previous section, but it does not help, It is necessary that you cut off all the superfluidity which has accumulated on the nail. then cauterize the wound after. The cauteries are very great aid if the bone is healthy and the nail is healthy;
and when the nail after the flesh adheres, and it starts to thicken and swell, It is necessary that you place the rod under the nail so as not to touch it. and push it upwards, and strike the soft tissue gently and lightly. and place on top of the remaining soft tissue medical substances that are burning and corrosive to remove everything.
And if the corruption is in the bone, strike it and draw it out, for as much as the bone is corrupted, it cannot heal.
and if you see the tooth decayed, strike it with one of these tools as said before, then heal it until it is healed.
and if it is wounded and boiled, and feels great pain, it is necessary that you drain it first; Then pierce the angle of the spur with a pointed spatula while cutting across it.
And ensure that the cut does not reach the flesh underneath the angle, because the patient would feel too much pain.
and if it happens, place something over it to ease the pain.
The patient who is born with tumors on their hands by chance, are entirely fleshy. and by chance it has bone or nail, and sometimes it has a nail.
and none of them are born at the root of the joint, but rather in some of our fingers. The one who is born in any knuckle of the finger does not move, And the one born at the joint of the thumb, by chance becomes mute;
the size of the one who is fat is light, in this manner: The size of it at its root is as wide as a large spatula.
The one born in the root of the joint is difficult to treat: keep him covered.
In one who is born or about to die, it is necessary that you cut round the cartilage up to the bone, then cut the bone with an appropriate saw, then heal it until it is healed.
Simultaneously, swelling comes at the joints due to birth, or from an injury, or burn, or similar things.
It is necessary that you cut this swelling so that it can heal according to its natural forms; Then put between two tents or cloths soaked in rose oil, so that they do not stick. And you place between two thin planks, until the limbs are fixed as required.
If it comes to any of its joints with the palm, then strike that bond as required.
Poor people
The veins are large, swollen, filled with melancholic excesses that come into various members of the body;
and it happens in legs more often in those who walk and work and carry, than in others.
Therefore, you must occasionally administer purge of the gall and then cleanse the basilica.
The iron cure is in two ways: one is to strike it, and draw out black blood; And another way is to open a vein, and draw all its blood out.
The incision method is as follows: first cut deeply into the leg with hot sharp steel until the flesh becomes soft, Then hold the leg of the patient above the knee to the part below the thigh; Then open the vein in one, two or three places, of a large size,
Then slit and draw out the black blood from the arm to the hand, from one end to the other, as much blood as the strength of the patient can withstand;
and then tie it up, and command him to bind himself with meat that makes black bile disappear.
And recommence the evacuation and the purge when the veins are full, and it harms the patient.
The elevation of it is as follows: raise the leg of the patient, if there is much hair, then put it in water and heat the leg with warm, hot water until it turns red and swells the veins;
And if you have no other remedy, heat it with fire, and then strike it towards the vein near the top of the thigh, or in the part below the knee.
Then scrape the skin with the knife and peel back the vein from both sides, as far as it appears when felt.
and when it is seen red and black, and when it enters the skin, it seems like a white cord.
Then push the thigh bone downwards until it is raised to the skin, and then bend it slightly at the angle.
Then break the arm into another place four fingers' breadth below; then scrape the skin over the vein until it appears. Then tie up the thigh bone, as you did before, and bend it to another angle, as you did first.
Then break a different size (or multiple sizes if necessary), tie it up, and bend it to the thigh bone.
Then draw and extract up to the second joint; then remove joint by joint until it comes out entirely, then strike (the dislocation).
and if you cannot draw and lift it, push an awl with very thick double thread through it. and draw and lift it (the dislocated joint), and you push a splint under one rib, and turn your hand from side to side until it comes out. And keep it from bursting, for if it bursts, it cannot be drawn or lifted, and it harms the patient.
And when you have treated it all, place linen soaked in wine and rose oil on the wound site; and care for it until it heals.
And if the vision is constricted, twisted, and wrapped together, and it is not straight as we have said, Therefore, you must cut it forcefully but do not cover it; drag it as we have said before.
Therefore, you must cut it forcefully but do not cover it; drag it as we have said before. The form of iron used to pierce the bladder does not bend and does not cut, but it should pierce the vein.
and is large-curved, for if it is thin, it would pierce the vein, but be thick as we have said, and here is the shape:
From the civil vein
This vein is located in the legs, in warm parts where there are no herbs or trees, and on land with no moisture.
And by chance, a boil arises somewhere other than in legs, and this happens from the corruption that comes beneath the skin.
When it comes within the body like a snake and spreads, incise between the skin and flesh.
And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are such that there is a very large inflammation in the leg. Then the joint changes (dislocates), and the vein begins to forcefully come out, just like a root of a plant.
When the joint opens, it is necessary that you wrap around a piece of wood from 6 to 8 inches long and tie it.
and leave the wood (plank) at the leg, and every time it (the shoulder) slips out, you wrap it around the plank and tie it. And if it is too long, take a part of it, roll up the rest, and do not cover it at its root until it is all out. for if you cut it, it goes back into the flesh, causes an abscess and pus or a bad disease.
therefore, it must be treated little by little until the end, and nothing is left on the body.
And sometimes this vein is about five or ten fingers in length. And a man came to me whose length was ten fingers, and when you sew it, push one bean or pea through it and pierce it all the way through.
So that everything comes out; empty the matter within it, and bring medicine to the place, allowing it to decay for any length of time, then heal it as one heals an abscess.
And sometimes in this vein there are more rain-like substances, and similarly when it opens at the joint of the finger or toe. And it comes much from wounds, and from which it jumps out; treat it then as we have said before.
From the worms that are born between skin and flesh
This disease is called in our land "cow disease", because it often happens to cows.
and it is a small worm that is born between skin and flesh, and travels through the whole body expanding and contracting, And it feels very painful to move from one limb to another, until it rips the skin or jumps out.
And it is infested by purulent humors, like worms and snakes and roundworms or belly lice.
And there is doubt about its nature, for when it travels through the body, it rises to the head and reaches the eye. By chance it enters and destroys the eye; and this happens many times.
When you see it to cure and draw, one can force it only when it goes:
then you must lie the limb above and below with a strong rope tightly.
then strike on top and pull forcefully, and if the limb is fully inserted into the flesh, do not pull it back, if you cauterize it with fire, until it dies;
And the greatest harm it does is that it runs the oil, as we have said.
and if you see it coming or close to the oil, hold the sorcerer beneath it in form, then strike above, and pull it out.
And it is necessary for the patient to use body purification with medicines that dissolve bad humors.
And let them eat boiled meat that has been purified.
Of the pain coming from windiness This disease is called on our land "wind-disease," and it is a pain that comes in some limbs. And it moves from limb to limb; and I saw what I am telling you.
I was summoned to a sick woman, and I uncovered her arm, and saw a small swelling in the armpit of the arm.
And after that, it started swelling as if a worm were climbing towards the shoulder. more rapidly than any other thing, just like living silver when it cuts from one place to another.
the pain moved away from that place and pierced into the shoulder.
And a little while later, it runs through the entire body until it reaches the other arm;
Then I found that it keeps turning around the body, as I saw it.
I marveled much how it moves from member to member, for I had never seen this disease in such a manner before. However, I had often heard that the pain moves from one place to another, but I did not want it at all, as I saw it in the woman;
and I thought that it was because the woman had a dry body, and her veins exposed. and this is where that constricted wind appears.
and it does not appear according to this reasoning to those who are luxurious and have moist bodies and covered veins.
And when you wish to treat this illness, and the patient feels that pain, if it opens as we have said, then press above and below forcefully, and then press firmly until those windings are forced back to their place. and cauterize the place; if you do not see it with your eyes,
if you treat those that push out the windings, like corrupted pills and pills of snakeroot, and similar things.
Of arrows
Arrows come in various forms, depending on their appearances and the places in the body they strike.
The differences between them are that some have large points, small ones, pointed and flat-tipped; and those that have two points, those with barbs, and those that have splinters. and a dislocation occurring in any member occurs in two ways: either in the main member (head),
or in secondary members such as the brain, heart, liver, spleen, lungs, intestines, bladder, and similar organs. When it (the dislocation) occurs in any place of these members, and the signs of death, which I will tell you afterwards, appear: Therefore, you must be careful in the extraction of this arrow, for death may come after in many situations; And when this bad sign does not become apparent, and the arrow is not completely in, pull it out, and treat the wound.
And when the arrowhead pierces the skull bone and the piece of bone splinters off above the skull, It is when the eyesight darkens and swells, and reddening and pain in the tongue, and convulsions and confusion of mind, and vomiting of bile. And by chance, without force from the nostrils, or ears; and by chance, loses speech and voice; Jumps out of the wound white matter like cheese, and also jumps as if burned by hot iron;
If this sign appears, refrain from treatment and pull out the arrow if it is not in.
The sign of the arrow when it falls or pierces, is that it is near the left breast and feels like it has been driven into something hard, not empty; And by chance, the patient may fall silent like the hairs, and black cold blood appears, and chilliness and cold sweat, and fainting occur. Therefore, the patient senses doubt that death is near.
The sign of an arrow that never pierced the flesh is that without pus gushing from the wound, the throat swells, and the patient's complexion changes, he breathes heavily and seeks fresh air.
If the arrow falls on the blanket of the bed, it is lodged in the ribs; and it expels a large pus, great pain, and heavy breathing; and all the limbs of the shoulder move.
And if an arrow or stomach falls out from the wound, by chance, anything of undigested meat may jump out from the wound.
And if an arrow or stomach falls in (the wound), and anything of excrement jumps out through the intestine route, there is no hope for the cure, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
If an arrow falls in the bladder and urine jumps out and comes out, and the patient feels great pain; know that the wound is fatal.
The other limbs, such as the arms and legs, neck, shoulders, hips, buttocks, spine of the back, ribs, and feet; and similar members are safe according to several conditions. When the arrow is in the nerve or artery and it is not poisoned, as I will tell you what happened to me, do this instead.
It happened to a man that an arrow pierced or wounded the root of his nose: I pulled it, and drew it out beneath the fat of the ear, and it was saved without damage.
And pulled out an arrow that had pierced the oil gland beneath the paper-like membrane. And the arrow was inserted, and it could not reach further than the tip towards the flesh, And the arrow was large like a Turkish bow, with a light iron point shaped like ears; it pierced through, and no bad accidents happened to him.
And the arrow passed through the throat of a Christian, and the arrow was an Arabic one with ears,
I was a bearded man, and became subtle enough to pass through, and the Christian was unharmed.
And draw an arrow out of a man who was shot or wounded, and I thought he would die;
and then after thirty days, his condition did not change; I cut above the arrow, trapped it, drew it out, and there was no bad incident.
And if you want to treat a man who has an arrow lodged or stuck into his back, and the wound is sewn up;
and the arrow remains inside him, and does not change its position naturally, nor can it be found in any of his natural movements.
And you want to treat another man who has an arrow lodged in his face, and the wound is sewn up;
And it remains in such a way, enduring great pain; many other similar things.
Take an arrow out of one of the princes' king, who was pierced in the neck, and was slightly leaning towards the right side; the arrow was completely straightened.
I was summoned to the treatment after she had fallen ill for three days. I found the wound very narrow.
I tried to probe it with a subtle instrument but felt nothing. and it felt pointed and pain beneath her right ear. I thought it was from the tip of the arrowhead.
I apply the plaster soothing and digestive to the joint, as it does not swell. And the arrowhead appeared at the joint.
And the arrowhead appeared at the joint. I applied the plaster for many days, and straightened the wound directly, and the patient remained healthy for a long time.
until he felt the arrowhead in his intestines for one day; and he told me. I apply corrosive medicine to the wound by hand for several days until it is drained.
and pull, and feel the head of the arrowhead which protrudes from its place; then I pierced the wound with that corrosive medicine until the head of the arrow appeared clearly.
And he passed beyond the limits in four months.
Then I will lance the wound that I have pierced with the forceps and split it open from both sides, but it could not heal.
Then I continued to refine and invent various methods of instruments, until I made the forceps well for one day. According to its shape that will come at the end of this chapter, I will keep it until its end and restore the wound.
And the physicians judge that the nose cartilage cannot be restored: Then I will restore it, and the wound will heal, and the patient will be completely healed.
I have told you about the extraction of some arrows, If you apply your remedy to this (condition), I do not say to which specifically, for books cannot fully grasp everything.
but wise masters understand well about a little thing and about that which is failing and in need. true nine works, and nine tools, at the end of things strange that happen in this art.
I say that arrows do not enter members where they are inserted except according to two ways: or through the side where they enter, or by some other way;
and that which flies out from there where it enters is an arrow entering the flesh, and occasionally flies away at some point.
If it does not fly away immediately, leave it until the flesh heals around it, and let the opening heal;
And if it is embedded in bone and cannot be removed, leave it for several days and try to extract it every day.
And then it jumps, and if it does not jump, pierce it all around with a sharp tool, as long as the area around is widened, and then pull it.
And if the arrow is put back into place within the body so that it cannot be seen, pull on it firmly; and if you feel it, pull it with any suitable instrument;
and if the narrowness of the wound or the depth of the arrow prevent you from pulling it out, And there is no bone, nerve, or vein, if the wound is large enough. and pull out the arrow if possible, and if it has ears in the arrow as they are,
and pull out the arrow if possible, and if it has ears in the arrow as they are, if you can remove the bone that has been impaled by two parts in the muscles. and then break or fold the arrow's ears (barbs) as much as possible so you can pull it out.
and then break or fold the arrow's ears (barbs) as much as possible so you can pull it out. And be careful not to break the arrowhead, but rather pull it out more gently.
If you cannot do it at once, push the lance to the bone and then pull, for extraction will be easier in this case. If the flow of blood obstructs you, bring to hand what we have said about the cure in its chapter;
And beware of cutting the nerve and vein, and use tools as you can safely pull out the arrow without risk.
Either quickly or slowly, either firmly or gently; place the patient according to the form he was in when the arrow struck him. for this is the greatest aid that can be, and if you cannot do it, place him according to what the signs show you.
The arrow that comes from another place, if it opens anything of it, or the skin is swollen in that spot as one can see or feel:
then cut along that spot, as long as the scissors can grasp it, and then pull it out; if it does not come out now.
And if it is retained in the bone, round your hand and turn it until it enters the bone, expand the bone, then pull it out.
And if it cannot come out, let it stay for a while, and then continue the extraction until it comes out completely.
and if it were of an arrow shaft, push it all the way through.
and if it had fallen and you see that it requires a pointed instrument, use a pointed instrument to remove it. If the tip of the arrow enters the hair of the instrument; then push forcefully,
and if the arrow is stuck in the instrument's hair, use the instrument with its pointed end entering it to facilitate extraction.
And if the arrow is touched, you must cut around the affected area where the poison is, if possible, then treat the wound as appropriate.
And if an arrow falls or pierces the belly, bladder, side, or kidney, and it is near, and you can cover over it, then do so.
And be careful not to cover the vein and nerve, then extract it, then stitch the wound if necessary. heal it until it is healed.
The shape of the tweezers used for removing arrows is similar to an owl's beak, and here is its shape:
And there are many ways to do it: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrowhead.
Openings of common veins Openings of veins from which one drains are 31, of which there are 16 heads
This means: two veins that are behind the ears, which are called "doubs 'herbech'" And the two arteries which are in the two temples appear; And the two veins that are in the two eyes of the eyelids, which are called "aspirates"; and the vein that is on the forehead; and the vein that is at the top of the neck; And the two glands which are at the neck; and the two veins that are above the mouth, and these veins are called "augeherich"; and the two veins that are under the tongue.
The veins that are commonly known to be five in each arm:
The first one is cephalic, located on the left side of the chest, and lay people call it "vein of the head". The second one is called "fistula," and is composed of the cephalic and basilic. And lay people call it "vein of the heart"; the basilic is located on the right side of the chest. And lay people call it "vein of the belly," and it is above the abdomen. And this [refers to] the one who is healed, whose wound clearly opens above the pocket.
The vein that is between the little finger and the ring finger, and if it has two joints.
And in the leg and foot there are four veins: one is beneath the calf of the left, And the second tendon which is at the right ankle; and the vein called "nasse," which is in the left ankle.
In the other leg there are three veins beneath these (veins).
The venous sinus after the ears assists in ancient catarrhs and migraines. The quality of the vein as I tell you is that you raise the head of the patient,
The quality of the vein as I tell you is that you raise the head of the patient, And rub the joint or veins with a rough cloth; then tighten the patient's neck with a screw. until the two veins appear behind the ears in the two places depending on the head. then take hold of it (the pulse), and where you feel the throbbing under your hand, press down on it firmly.
then take the lance and thrust it through the vein up to the bone, then move your hand up along the whole vein. And make two incisions through the skin and vein well with a knife, and draw out the blood until it stops.
then strain and tie it until it heals;
And I have already said the incision and the cautery in the first book.
The healing of the two arteries that are in the temples, it is worth using emigraine for older people. and sodium, and ophthalmia treated, and at the eyes sore with tears.
and the qualities of the healer are as I say: and it is that the patient extends his neck, until the two veins appear openly. and feel the pulse beneath your thumb, then press gently.
Then, lift the key on the vein at its top, indicated by your finger, and push the lance beneath. and lift the vein at its top, and prick (it), just as you have done in two other veins, and make an incision for the blood according to your need.
then undo the patient, and place your finger on the vein for an hour, then put cotton over it.
and then close (the vein) forming it, and let it heal until it is healed; and we have already spoken of their dressing and extraction, where the book begins.
The vein at the forehead is as valuable as the cephalic vein in ancient facial diseases, and it has migrated and turned red;
And its characteristic is that the patient extends his neck while twisting, until the vein appears; then take the instrument called "fosseur", whose shape is:
And place the point on the vein, and press down from your hand, or something else, and let the blood come out according to the quantity that you see; Then loosen the patient's neck and tie the vein when it is healthy, without ever using a wide flame.
Moreover, the flames should not be too sharp; and take care to pierce through the side because the bone is near, and by accident break the flames when they are fine.
The piercing of the two veins that are in the two armpits helps the eyes, the thigh, the groin, and the wound in the oil, and the diseases of the face;
And the quality of their blood is such that the patient twists their neck in turning it with some cord, as before.
Then the blood, and let the vein be crossed, a little long by the flame a little wide, for there is no flesh there.
If the iron is fine and breaks, then make a suture of blood, as much as you need, and then tie it up with cotton, and bind it well.
The sanity of the vein from the neck is beneficial against ague, and against smallpox, and diseases of the face. like emigraine (migraines) and redness that comes in the face, and especially when it is old;
and the qualities of the sanity are that the patients compress their neck, then squeeze their nose with your left hand, And take the subtle flame long, and thrust it into the gap between the two nostrils, because the vein does not open well in that manner, and the wound will begin to heal now.
do not go too deep, and let the blood flow as needed, then bind it for a night, because it is quickly restored.
The first joint of the two fingers helps in the stiffness of the elbow, at the beginning of swelling, and in many diseases, abscesses, corrosions, herpes, and inflammations.
And the qualities of the joint are such that the patient straightens his neck from under one and the other, as we have said; let the master be standing over the head of the patient, and the patient lie on one seat,
Then, open the vein lengthwise a little widely, then drain the blood gently, as necessary.
Then repair the other side of the vein, then untie the ligature, and tighten all the veins moderately. Do not strangle the patients; let them be until morning so that the wounds heal.
Of the treatment of livestock (or animals) The treatment of wounds of the upper lip helps with swelling in the mouth, decay of gums, and cuts or splits in the lips, as well as teeth problems and around them.
And the qualities of the treatment are to make the patient sit before you and hold his neck as I have said; then turn the upper lip, and look at the two places: one is on the right upper lip, and the other is on the left. And they are recognized by the fact that they are black, and by the fact that around them there are small black veins. Take hold of both of them then, and if you do not recognize them, and you are in doubt about it.
Take hold of both of them then, and if you do not recognize them, and you are in doubt about it. grasp the largest one of each pair, and also do the same for the two veins above and below, because it is done in the same way.
From beneath the tongue. The evacuation of veins that are below the tongue helps after the head injury, and it is at the incision of the neck, and the diseases of the eye, and the diseases of the mouth;
and the quality of bleeding is that the patient should squeeze between your hands before the sun, lift the tongue, and look at every side a black vein:
then one and the other, but do not go too deep, for below are the arteries.
The veins of the cost are commonly healed according to two methods:
or when pricking at any one spot with large mirrhin or olive oil of subtle kind as you cut through it, and it is called "anesil"; and are broad and thin according to the width and narrowness of the veins. The shape of the mirrhin flame is very renowned and is broad as you can see:
And it is necessary to open the swollen veins that contain thick blood and are troubled. and this is the form of olive oil flame:
and it is pointed more finely, and it is for thinning subtle veins that contain thin yellow blood.
The sanitation of the basilica vein, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases that are under the throat, neck, chest, and abdomen.
And it is necessary for the lord [physician] to drain the blood well, and to pierce the artery that is below. And if he touches the artery, and bleeding comes out, it needs to be stopped, as I have said; And the flame should not be pressed, but rather sliced like an incense stick.
And if the basilica does not open manifestly, then you must force it open and change another. or you wish to have no pain in it, or you open the vein in its place with the arm: it opens manifestly. and apply the copper to the fire as we have said.
And if you wish to know the place of the wound, then it is necessary that you pull on the arm, and you touch until you find the pulse. Then sign the place with a cross, then tie the arm, and burn the vein with fire.
And beware not to hit the artery when you see the place swollen, for it is an artery; avoid it then.
If you see it swelling up high like the urine of a child and it is red and thin, know that it is not from an artery: Then hasten yourself, put your finger on it for a long time, then cut off your finger if the blood does not stop flowing, which often happens;
The patient should keep his arm still, and let it be like that, the sick person does not move it; he should be in fear, and not move it until it is healthy again.
If the wound is not staunched, and it bleeds, and the medicine is not present, then cut the artery if it is open, because the head of it recedes; stop the bleeding from the wound.
Take a piece of the outer bark of the willow, cut it, and take one half and apply it well until the next day.
If it does not stop bleeding, that is good; if it does not, heal it as we have said, with powders that stop blood.
And the stopping of bleeding is not necessary in many situations because of the small size of the wound and the strength of the ligament of the arm.
The vein in the middle helps to drain blood from the head above, and from the body below, Because it is composed of the basilica and the cephalica, as we have said;
and the lord should pierce through to the nerve that is beneath, and if it pricks too deep, and he finds the nerve, and it swells and the patient becomes sickly and grey, and by chance cannot be cured;
and this nerve opens up frequently, and if it does not open in any man due to its subtlety, then you must cauterize it with the instrument anesthetic; and cut off the nerve to your ability.
And if there is a vein between the two nerves, make it long.
The vein of the head, if it draws blood from the head, helps the eyes;
It is necessary to vein with olive oil or myrtle fire, for it is the safest of all veins, because there is no nerve or artery beneath it.
Therefore, one must seek the lighter joint, and not to worry if it is necessary for the first time, and start again. If the joints swell in some men, when it is necessary for the first time, but he does not worry about it. The quality of the blood is according to your judgment.
The first thing you should know about bleeding is that bleeding is not performed for any other purpose than to preserve health.
And to avoid future illnesses; And the incision shall be made in one of the four veins that are named: namely, cephalic, saphenous, and basilic. And it should be incised at the beginning of spring, and in autumn and winter after eating, when the signs of filling appear;
And it should be bled for the first or third day, after 2 hours or 3 days.
The bleeding given to diseases has no fixed hour, but when there is a need for day or night, in all hours and at all times.
And it should not be bled children under 14 years old, nor women in the fourth month of pregnancy up to the seventh. Nor elderly people who have passed 60 years.
And when someone wishes to heal themselves, in whatever way that may be, it is necessary that they empty their intestines with a gentle enema. if there is much feces retained, so that the veins do not carry away the superfluidities harmful to the main limbs.
he who is excessively salted with meats, or drunk, until he recovers from that state, or watery.
And if there is wounding after the passion of colic, vomiting, loosening of the belly, multiplication of abscesses in a woman, and work, watchfulness, and labor, and whatever the virtue of the body or the weapon,
then thin the fluids, if he does not have a thick constitution, with foods and drinks and medicines, if you have that power.
then immerse or bathe him, if nothing hinders, to thin the blood,
And heal the vein with the plaster as we have said;
Keep yourself on that day from work, and from pain, and from lust, and similar things;
and be lying down and joyful, and let the healer raise himself higher than the one being healed, and rub the arm 2 or 3 times;
then draw the thread moderately, because when it is too tight or loose, it cannot cure him;
And then rub the joint with your hands until the veins swell, and feel for them.
Then wet the linen cloth with a little bit of old oil, then place your fingertip of your left hand on that vein beneath the joint where you want to cauterize. so that the vein does not burst when pierced. For there are veins that run like cords in a sieve, and some of them are filled with windiness. if you put fire upon it, the flame retreats and cannot open the vein, and thus it is one of these.
and if it opens the vein, the wound is too narrow, therefore the sieve-makers must be cautious in these matters.
And if the vein is opened for the first time, it is good; if not, then begin again slightly under that place or quickly above, if the places are not swollen.
And if the places are swollen, and the patient is afraid, let it rest for one or two days, and do not bind the arm: In case there comes an abscess, let it not enter bathing; then begin the healing if it pleases the patient:
If the hole is small or you doubt whether it does not emit as much blood as you see, then apply heat directly to that hole:
And the wound is opened slightly, so that the area swells; for this often happens when the wound is small.
If you see the area swollen, do not start draining immediately, but put some oil on it, for it will heal the body of blood and make the oil spread in this place.
and administer the oil in each wound that you drain, to stop the flow of blood;
And this same thing happens with triceps and biceps when set in place; if they are too subtle (small) and split apart when they are too large.
If there comes a large abscess, which often happens, especially when the opening of the vein is small, If you hurry, put wet sponge (sponge soaked in warm water and oil) on it for an hour;
And it is necessary that you do this after the evacuation of blood from the vein, and if it remains in place after some days without any blackness or greenness, that does not harm it. And if you see, place something of aloes or myrrh in its lower part, under the wound, as a mark, or similar.
And many times there appears an abscess and signs at the wound of the basilica; therefore place your hand over it, and if you find it soft when compressed by the hand, then that is the bad sign. Therefore do not place anything of what has been said, for by chance without the artery; but make one dry compress to harden the place, then cure it with another remedy until it is healed.
And draw blood from each according to the amount of its virtue and the color of the blood.
For if the wound is black, let it bleed until it becomes red; and if you see it thick, let it become thinner; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
And it is necessary for the one who is wounded and has need of bloodletting, to make a larger incision, and let the veins be wide.
And for the weak one, do the opposite, and it is necessary to let him bleed little by little, and it should be done by cutting across, not by pricking.
And this method of bloodletting is safe from discharge and paralysis of nerves, and it is better than the long bloodletting or the wide one.
And for the body which needs bloodletting, it is necessary to give bread soaked in apple pulp; if he is heated, let him bleed 4 or 6 times.
And if it is of cold complexion, let it eat soft bread soaked in sweet syrup, or sweet scented syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and sesame, and fragrant syrup.
And if it swells at the wound after bleeding, you must give him broth of cooked meat and fragrant subtle syrup.
and use other things as we have said in the section or chapter on fainting, for the evacuation of blood.
If you want to dislocate someone's arm and heal it again, if necessary, when it has been weakened by prolonged healing, it should heal little by little, according to the quantity of its strength continually.
If you want to dislocate someone's arm after the first healing, and it has healed in seven hours after the first healing or after the ninth hour.
If you want to heal from another part, it should heal on the second day or the third day.
Because there is much blood within the body which is already heated, and it brings fever; therefore a large amount should be drained, and the opening widened until it gushes out in a pan. then you treat all the conditions of health, and place your hand on top of the toes when they heal, so that death does not come in the place of a pan. and this happens many times, when the healers are negligent;
And it is not good that when you dislocate the arm and draw blood a second time, and the wound is closed, that you press forcefully. If it is bent, extend the arm as much as possible, for this would be bad;
but leave it until blood flows out again; or you will prick it with the tip of the flame, causing the coagulated blood in the vein to flow out. and put .1 piece of fresh linen on top and press lightly.
And if the vein has burst, do not tie it or squeeze it until the abscess is appeased.
And if you need to draw blood a second time, do it in the same place or another vein or the other arm.
The veins in the arm are not found in the neck because they are composed of something else.
And the method of bloodletting is that the patient puts his hand in hot water until the veins are red.
Then it shall be tied moderately, so that the vein appears clearly, then press gently across, neither too wide nor too long.
and the wounds shall be cut open wide, and press firmly near the joint of the hand, and if it cannot heal, place the hand in hot water and let the blood flow out into the water until you have enough.
and if it is on the inside (of the chest), do not push the hand into hot water, for it puts it more in winter than summer.
And the vein of this vessel is safer than all other vessels, as there are neither artery nor nerve in it.
The vein of the right arm's savings vein is valuable for all liver diseases, and this is the method:
Press the arm and apply hot cupping, until the vein is full, if you see it. and if the vein runs transversely (crosswise), and you apply cupping all over it, there will be no harm.
And do not go too deep, for the nerves are all exposed bare beneath.
Then place the hand in hot water, if it freezes in the wound and cannot come out.
And when you have drained the blood as necessary, place oil and linen over the vein to heal it quickly, and do the same for each wound.
The purgation of pus from the hand on the left side has the same effect as the disease of the mice, and do it exactly as I told you regarding the right side.
The purge of the spine has the same effect for all the diseases that are beneath the chest, as the disease of marriage (syphilis), retention of urine, sciatica, and diseases of the thighs and old legs, and similar diseases.
And the quality of its purge is that the patient should put their foot in hot water and rub on the vein until it perishes, And lay [something] above the joint of the foot; and if the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot it goes much [further].
Cut it then along a healthy artery or one that is larger at the ankle, as it has more value.
And if you cut above the foot, beware of nerves that are below, and cut through it as when sharpening; let the flames be annihilated.
And if the bone cannot come out, put the foot in water and let the vein drain well.
And if the blisters need to be lanced for the first time, start the second one a little above, because the skin is salted. Do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and do the same with the saphena of the other side equally.
The skin of the sciatic vein is at the ankle joint, and its lancing is worth pain relief from the hamstring, when it's for hot blood.
And the qualities of his health are such that the patient bathes or immerses and stretches the leg above the ankle four times in twisting.
for otherwise the vein does not open; and if it opens, heal it in all ways that you can, and by crossing. it is better that you crush it, for the wound is hollow and it responds well to human hands.
it is better that you crush it, for the wound is hollow and it responds well to human hands. And if you do not pierce it, there is no healing for the pain in the hip or back, and towards the small of the back, keep away from nerves;
Then make such a cut to let the blood out as you see fit, then unbind the ligament and place cotton on it and bind it; it is now healed.
Wounds caused by cupping
Cupping glasses are made of horn, or bone, or glass; and cupping is done in two ways: either by cutting and drawing blood, or without cutting.
And this cauterization, which is to wound, has two ways: either it is with all fire, or without fire;
and two others on each side of the neck; and the cauterization under the chin; And the boils on both shoulders; and the boils on the knees; And the boils on both arms; and the boils on both legs; and the boils on both ankles; and the ventosation does not treat blood, but only small veins that are scattered in the flesh,
and for this reason, it should not be avoided at all, as is done with blood-letting from the vein; And it should not be administered at all; neither with fire nor hot fire, in any disease arising from congestion, until the entire body is emptied.
If it is necessary for diseases to ventose (use cupping glass), or by habit, then we shall administer it every hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in the middle and each time.
because there are some who, when they need to ventose, have a heavy head;
And for those who find swelling and redness in their body, in their head, and at the neck, and darkness of the eyes:
And for those who find a pool of blood in their mouth, with their tongue swollen and bleeding: And if there are such people who think, see black bile and have fevers and similar symptoms:
And when we observe these signs, especially during the month, we command them to be bled after four hours of the day:
The purgation of the mouth helps with the swelling of the head ... that comes to the eyes, and it should not be after the evacuation of all the body;
and this ventilation is in place of the purgation of the headache,
and it should not be used by those with cold complexion or who have constipation, for it causes them great harm;
and it should also not be used by the watchmen, nor those with cold head diseases.
And he who recovers often becomes oblivious, and therefore it is necessary to place the cupping glass a little lower due to the fear of forgetting.
The cupping at the neck is in place for healing the head and basilica, and therefore it is beneficial for the fracture. and to split the channel of the arm, and immediately, and to fill it up.
And it must be pushed gently, for if it holds too tightly, it induces forgetfulness or stomach and heart trouble.
The ventosations at the 2 costal bones of the neck are worth the pains in the head, and migraines, and strangulations, and the pain in the roots of the teeth,
and is in the position of the artery in the basilica; and you must instruct the lord to press his hand when inserting it, not to touch the artery, and not let there be any bleeding.
Ventosations below the chin are worth oral disease and tooth decay, and similar illnesses in the mouth; and they are found near the arteries of the 2 lips.
The dislocations of the shoulders are harmful to the patient who comes from heat and fullness.
The dislocations of the ribs are as bad as four veins in the arm. because it draws blood from these large veins;
and command the Lord not to be too deep, for the flesh is bare and knows beneath black and arteries.
The swelling that is on the rump is useful for drawing out the hemorrhoids from their foundation and diseases beneath, and it should be large and made of a linen cloth that needs to be well pulled; and by chance, if it is too thin, it will break; and this causes large wounds.
The swellings of the legs open widely, as they draw blood from all over the body, and are useful for ancient pain in the loins, the back, and the bladder, and remove flowers; and they are located at the elbows and knees, but weaken the body after long use, and bring pus in various dispositions.
The method of placing the swelling is that you place it first empty, and squeeze gently and quickly, and move it evenly, and do not stop until you see the location becoming red and swollen, and the blood appearing red; then press firmly, and remove the swellings, and take care in the disposition of the body, as there are some who have tender skin and clear pores: it is necessary to make a single incision, and to make large and deep wounds, and a little shallowly.
And if the wound is large, it should be cut twice: the first time to make a way for thick blood.
And if the wound is very deep, it should be cut three times; and when we want to draw out little by little blood drops, we only have to prick once.
If we want a lot of blood, we encourage it to flow more frequently; and if the wound is deep, we should make an incision all the way through, and when we pierce the heart, it should be done quickly.
And for those with thick and hard skin, and narrow pores, you should anoint the joints of the affected areas with penetrating and soluble oil. If it is oil of violets, sweet almond oil, or oil of the seeds of pumpkin,
and if it is vinegar, oil of watercress, lily oil, chamomile oil, or similar.
And if the excess is large and cold, take oil of amatina, or balm oil, or anise oil, and similar ones.
If the person to be treated has tender flesh and large pores, it is not necessary to use oil,
But it is necessary to wash after the dislocation with rose water, or cold water, or water of marshmallow, or water of gourd, or water of porcelain, or another similar substance.
And if the patient has much moisture, he should rise from ashes of nettles, or marsh water, and sumac, and similar things.
And those with large excesses should rise from old wine, or water of vinegar, or a decoction of dais or chamomile, or similar things.
And it is not advisable to apply a cupping glass before bathing or in the bath, but after the bath for an hour or two; and do not sleep after cupping.
And it is necessary that he wash, when he should be cupped and when he has been cupped. And guard the one who is cupping (the patient) is bilious, and him without is too sharp and inflamed; it is necessary that he take cool things, such as pomegranates and endives and lettuce leaves, etc.;
And cooked peas, meat broth, and moist meats.
And he who has a cold constitution, let him take honey syrup and fragrant diluted wine, which is between old and new, and eat peas, cabbage, and small birds and pigeons;
and on the day he will purge himself, he should drink more than eat;
It is necessary to give certain men sometimes triacle or muscatel before purge, or afterwards, to strengthen the main limbs; And let the wine be made subtle, but it is not suitable for those who drink hot liquids.
The blisters placed on wounds are those placed on the liver, spleen, gout, belly, buttock, and thighs, for these members cannot bear to be wounded under the blisters.
and it should not be done to draw blood from one member to another, As we place the bandages on the limbs when they swell; to remove the viscosity from the member, as we apply leeches on the belly and on the buttocks to reduce it.
and remove the pain when there is an abscess or arrow, remove it by attracting its position through its virtue accidentally or dislodge the arrow from its place.
and in this way, it is done when it is placed on the liver and spleen when there is retained windiness,
And these blisters are applied empty to be sucked only; and sometimes they are applied along with fire, and sometimes filled with cold water.
as in diseases of the lungs, and in such manner one fills the bladder with hot water or water in which cooked herbs suitable for this purpose have been steeped.
The form of the bladder applied to fire is as follows:
And it should have two holes of about half a palm's width and depth, and it should have one small hole around the middle, just like pushing an awl.
and made of iron, soft before so that it does not burn the patient when placed on the member;
and have a rod of iron or steel through its middle to insert a handle.
and be large and small according to the diseases and age of those who take them.
For the boils of children are different from those of adults, and thin ones from fat ones.
And this boil should be placed upon the member thusly:
Take the beeswax candle or linen thread and insert it through the boil to the member beneath it, so that the light is inside the boil so as not to burn the patient;
And then place it on the limb, and your fingers should be above the opening that we have mentioned, so when one wants to see, if steam is coming out, remove the blister.
Wrap it in linen thread as previously described, and repeat the process often if necessary.
In the blister that is administered in case of pleurisy, it should not have a hole or opening, and it should only be applied when it is full of liquid.
And this is its shape: [In this context, 'it' refers to the dislocation mentioned earlier]
Sinews are not tied up unless in members where no bandages can be applied due to their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar places. and in naked flesh areas, such as the elbow or ankle, and other similar locations;
and the quality of the user is that when you find sinews in clear, clean waters, without any pollution, you should take them.
And put them in a warm mild broth until they are tender and have nothing in their stomachs; Then let it be drained of blood and pus, then rub the limb until it is red, and apply sulphur;
And when they swell up and become hot, if it is a place where a poultice can be applied, apply one, for it is very beneficial;
If it is not so, lift the joint gently, then with water, very well, and then press on it.
And if the joint becomes too much swollen after the body, moisten a linen cloth with cold water and put it on until the swelling subsides.
And if the swelling is increased, apply powdered vitriol or other similar things until it subsides.
or place half-peeled beans on the joint and leave them until they harden onto the joint, which will cause it to subside now.
And if you need more lances (or instruments), take others as well.
And if the instruments are not to be taken, rub fresh blood on the place, and insert a needle until it comes out. Then, lay them down and as soon as they feel the blood, they heal themselves.
And when you see that they are dripping, sprinkle a little of powdered aloe and crushed seeds, or ash on them, they will now stop.
Here comes the book of breaks (or fractures)
This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine and it is about restoration of a break and dislocation.
Instruct the dear son that the foolish man should abandon this chapter, as he will never see any old books or read letters from them.
And because of this, knowledge in our land is strange, as I have never found anyone good at it.
And I know nothing about it, except for the knowledge from old books, which I have studied extensively and applied through experience, and by the habit of my life.
and I have described it in this chapter what is contained, and I have summarized it at the end, and shown clearly the forms of the instruments that are brought in, as I have done in these two chapters before.
Therefore, it is necessary that we say the prologue of this book, the sum of the word and the chapters where the wise put their understanding, and remain on truth, so that those who are experienced know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
When fracture or dislocation or twisting or distortion comes to anyone, it is necessary that you treat the patient from both sides, unless something prevents you, such as frailty of body, infancy, or old age.
or if the time is not very hot or too cold; and avoid cold foods, that is to say cold meats, and chicken and beef, and do not drink wine, nor consume any fatty meats, and do not overfill yourself with foods that fill the veins with blood, until you have doubt of abscess heat or spreading of matter in the member; then the patient will recover again under his first regular government as he has used it.
And when the broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary to feed the patient with thick foods that make large stools, or he must have viscosity, as cooked wheat in water and peas, and meats like beef, pork, mutton, veal, fish, eggs, fresh fish, strong wine, and similar things. For this thick feeding speeds up the healing of the bones.
Know that the broken bones of the old and weak cannot be well healed or mended according to their nature due to the weakness of the members, nor those that are too tender, such as the bones of small children.
But has no cure, reset above the broken bone, i.e., large tendons that straighten and join the limb together, until it heals as it was before; and not to touch it at all, and for this reason, it is necessary to feed it with large meats, as we have said.
And know that the fractures are diverse in many ways.
For the fracture of the head is other than the fracture of the foot or leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all ways of fractures. For it is a fracture that grows toward the ear, and another one lengthens like the quill of a pen for writing.
For it is a fracture that grows toward the ear, and another one lengthens like the quill of a pen for writing. And there is also a fracture with an open wound, and a fracture with a small crack.
And each kind has its tool, and appropriate device for restoration, as memory recalls in its place;
And it is known as the break of the bone when the joint is twisted, and wide open by displacement, and sounds under pressure from the hand;
And when there is no twisting or touching, and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no break.
But it can have a twist, a fracture, or a small break. Do not move the hand, but place the remedies that come after here, and then gently hold it now.
And know that the fractures going to the branch, and are the two parts disjoined, it is necessary now to set them equally aligned, so that abscesses grow not there.
and if abscesses come there, let it be left for any day, until the abscess is calmed. then set it equal to the muscle that you can easily and wisely move, and know that the restoration of it is easier than the restoration where there are fragments; then tighten, as necessary hereafter.
And if in the bone there are broken pieces, if it is less than two parts, whether it is hand or foot, or with your hand if it is one of the small members, or if it is two ropes, or one rope and your hand;
align the limb according to its natural shape, so that when the parts of the member are dislocated they are realigned with all means available, and ensure that through your work there is no injury or pain for the patient.
and adjust well the two bones according to the best forms.
And it feels well to the touch if it seems not good: straighten it nicely, and do not strain it too much, nor press as those who bring it by their work abscesses hot and contractions to the member, as we have seen many times.
And when the limb is healed, correct the patient so that they do not move it, neither by watching nor sleeping, nor turning, nor in any other way; and watch carefully that the limb is so secure that it feels no pain. For when it feels no pain, it is not broken, and it must be set in such a way that it feels no pain.
For when it feels no pain, it is not broken, and it must be set in such a way that it feels no pain. and keep it straight so that crookedness does not come when it is restored;
and the quality of the broken limb is as I tell you.
Know that broken limbs are various in smallness, great size, and form.
For there are small members, such as arms and fingers, etc.: it is necessary to wrap linen cloths soft and fine.
and those that are thick, such as thighs and legs: it is necessary to wrap with a large and hard rope, because the large ropes embrace the whole large member evenly, and they press from all sides equally, so there is no bruise.
then tie light tourniquets around it, three or four turns according to the member, and hold your hand a little on the rope, then go above the break and tighten less than the break, then move away from the break.
And soften the ligament little by little, until you take a large part of the healthy joint, then take another ligament and turn it around reversely over the broken joint.
Then return to the part below the break and hold it moderately, not too hard nor too loosely, as we have said in the first place above.
Then place padding of linen or fabric between the ligaments until they are all even, then tie it all up with a bandage, and then place your well-made splints on top if there is no abscess or swelling.
And if there is swelling or abscess, put on top something soothing for the abscess and one who extracts the swelling, and leave it like that for some days.
then hold your elbows, and they should be the thickness of half a thick cane, well-healed, or of a staff that is used to split logs, or of palm reeds, and should be shaped like this:
but it is necessary that the elbow one puts on the fracture should be a little larger and wider than the others;
And let it be as long as required for the limb, whether large or small.
then hold it steady on the stirrups as you did at the first joint, then tie it above with a thread coming along, just like in the first joint when breaking it.
The following is narrower, shorter now; and the thread should be medium-sized, not too thick nor too thin, and made of soft linen.
because if the thread is thick, as I have seen in the work of fools who make their ropes with twisted linen threads, and this is a great error, for the rope cannot be even if it is too thin; and it should not have less than two fingers' space between each stirrup.
And if the patient is wounded by the heads of arrows after setting in healthy bones, place linen or cloth bandages under them so that they do not become inflamed.
When the wound is with a break and the veins are severed, I will tell you the cure below.
And know that it is not appropriate to set arrows in broken limbs on the first day. For when the limbs are large, there should be no need to apply hot irons before 5 or 7 days, or more, according to your certainty of the abscess healing process.
And here is the method of ancient plasters for restoring fractures, dislocations, and twists: you should take flour that is kept in the mill walls, mix it with an abundance of egg, and apply this mixture, neither too thick nor too thin, and use it, and this is the common method of a plaster for restoring a fracture in various positions, and equally for women and small children, as it is not too hot or too cold.
Another method of plaster for restoring fractures, dislocations, and twists: take barberries, dandelion leaves, nettles, tansy, and Arabic gum, in equal amounts; myrrh and aloeswood, 5 parts; alchemil, 8 parts; and make powder of these ingredients, mix them with an abundance of egg; if the complexion of the person is hot, use this plaster as it has a good composition and quickly restores broken bones for many men.
Another method of plaster that is beneficial for twisting: take mugat and vismalve, mix together 10 times its volume; add mirrhe and aloes, 8 times its volume; acaice 6 times its volume; bolic armenic 10 times its volume, grind well, and concoct with vinegar or abundant egg, and administer it.
Another method of plaster for joints and dislocated bones, to relieve the pain arising from them, and for treating wounds: take new linen, wet it in vinegar and cooked oil, and apply it on the area. This plaster does not restore [the bones], but it is good for soothing a hot abscess and proper wound pain.
Another method of plaster that mends broken bones: take dried fig leaves and earth-purslane leaves, grind together, and make a plaster.
Another method of plaster for the restoration of bone fracture and to hasten the healing of an abscess. Take root of comfrey, chamomile, flowers of violets, flour of peas, of each one part; grind and mix with wine, and if the limb is scalded, mix with moist coriander juice or water, and use it.
Another method of plaster more forceful than the first, when a hard abscess comes to the restoration of the limb. Take roots of comfrey, flax seed, balm, lentil, and sage, flowers of violets and chamomile, of all one part; grind and make with salty water, sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb, and its rest.
Hippocrates said in his book that no other plaster should be placed on a broken limb for restoration except beeswax and oil, and nothing else, and he said it should be between soft and hard.
And it seems Galenic that one should place hot and slightly warm dry things on the broken limb, to restore it, such as myrrh, aloeswood, incense, and similar things, as we have said.
Another way of poultice that is good for wounds and pain: take ground mugwort and human hair shavings, or bird feathers, and yarrow, equal amounts, grind them up, and make a poultice from it and apply to the affected area.
Then wait a little after that, and take care to ensure the patient feels no pain, or the bone has not moved from its place; do not dislocate it by hand for many days.
And if pain or itching comes at the joint, without rest or swelling, hurry up, dislocate it, and remove the emplastrum (medication) immediately; then take a light cloth, a sea sponge moistened, dip it in water, and lift up the joint, until the itching stops, and the pain is soothed. Then let the limb rest for an hour, then put on dry linen moistened with water or rose oil, and tie it up with a bandage, until you are sure of the abscess heating.
and let the inflammation of the limb rest, and remove the pain, then continue the binding gently, and a little emplastrum, and do not strain it too much as before; and bind it until it is healed.
And if you see that an abscess swells and reddens and hurts and inflames are entirely opened up, and you need to plug and bind it, proceed as you did equally before.
And if no blood comes from the limb as we have said, do not unbind it before 3 or 4 or 5 or 7 days; and sometimes leave it for 20 days, according to what one sees, until the break heals, and bring the wound close to the skin above.
Then you bind it more tightly than before, and let the meat swell, as I have said before; and if you see the wound dry out more than necessary, know that pus cannot come in. Arises then from hot, warm water, always when you dislocate it, and this should be done every third day, and apply a little cold on the joint.
By this work, then cut the nerves in the limb, and correct immediately what the foolish surgeon does, who keeps the member twisted: this is harmful, and it is dangerous work, and I see nothing else but to tire oneself and to work correctly.
Of various ways of breaking Many ways of fractures are, and various shapes, and the causes are intended.
fractures are made by sword percussion, and the bones are broken all the way to the shaft that is beneath the bone, as it happens with hacks or thrusts; this type of fracture is called "hackure".
When the sword strikes the bone from above, causing it to pierce, this type of fracture is called "absolute"; and these are either large or small breaks in the bone.
And if there is a blow embedded, or wound, or cuts from arrows, or falling on stones, or similar things.
And if there is a persistent breakthrough to the membrane beneath the bone, which protrudes above or below the bone, and this wound is large or small.
And if there is a wound that penetrates into the bone as fine as a hair, and it is a small tear, and for this reason it is called "hairline fracture".
And if the wound is made by striking with stones or falling, or similar things, and makes the bone piece to enter within, and the limb becomes swollen like a baker when he puts it in the oven; if the stone enters within.
And this happens more often to those who have moist bones, such as a child's head;
and in all these ways of fracture, small pieces are dislodged as well; and I will speak about it specifically.
We should be familiar with all ways of fractures by the dissection above them, and the investigation at attempts, and by the corrupt flesh that is upon it.
The hairy appearance is known to those who, when the bone has been exposed and scraped on top, if the fracture is black it appears open.
In the treatment of fracture, take care of the patient's condition, and if you see any harmful symptom such as vomiting of blood, loss of consciousness, swelling, fever ague, hairs falling out and reddening, or other similar signs in various conditions, it cannot heal without doubt.
And if you do not see any doubtful symptom, and you hope for recovery, then begin the treatment.
And when the wound first comes to you during winter, it is necessary to remove the bone before the 14th day at the muscle that you can reach.
And if this is the case, hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the tissue beneath the bone is not corrupted, and the event that we have mentioned occurs.
And if the bone fracture reaches the tissue that covers the brain, you must cut the broken part in such a way: and it is that you take hold of the patient's head, and expose above the bone in all ways as you can, and over the figure of the wound more gently than you can,
and if the flow of blood or an abscess occurs when exposing the bone, use what is appropriate, and it is that you fill the cavity with damp cloths soaked in rose oil; And let the wound rest until the abscess subsides and ensure the flow of blood has stopped; then start to remove the bone around it. This is done in two ways of treatment: one method is that you cut at a narrow incision before, and this is the shape:
And then make another incision larger than the first.
The second method is that you have several incisions of various sizes, some narrow and others wide, sharp, and made with iron tools; and work lightly to avoid piercing the bone.
And if the bone is displaced and hard, then you must pierce it around, so as to administer splints with splints, not allowing them to penetrate beyond the bone's surface, and there should be a margin or circle above its point, which prevents the splint from passing beyond the bone; and you must have more than one, such that each comes in its place at the bone's edge, so that you have splints for all sides; and this is the form of the four kinds of splints:
The quality for piercing around the broken bone is that you place one splint on the bone, and turn your hand until you feel that the bone is perforated; then replace the splint elsewhere a little later, and do this all around, then cut the space of the bone between the fracture pieces as finely and gently as possible, and do so as we have said, pulling the bone to your hand or any other tool such as pliers, forceps; and ensure that you do not touch the brain nor the nerves.
And when you have perforated and treated the bone, it is necessary that you reset the sharpness which remains in the bone with any other tool resembling an incision blade, but it must be thinner and finer than the other blades.
And if there remains something of small bones, no scales, lightly remove them with instruments; then treat the wound with bandages and ointments as we have said.
And another method of work, which is more secure, is that which the Greeks called, and it is highly praised, and this is his word. First, you must uncover a part of the bone where the fracture is open so that when you have uncovered this part, you will place the lenticular anvil under it as shown in its form:
And do not cut from only one side, and the part is hollow on two sides, so that the cutting is towards the bone; then strike with a small hammer on it, so that you gently break the bone all around, and take great care of the cloth that is underneath;
If it is adhered to the bone, gently split it, because one can easily harm it and cause fear.
If the bone does not break through to the cloth and it is cut only from above, making small pieces, then you should scrape it roughness, remove scales with a sharp rasp and different quantities, depending on the work and shape of the fracture.
If the king shaves with great razors, and afterwards with more subtle ones, and does not stop until it is well done.
In other hair cuts and breaks of subtle shape, it is necessary that you bring the cause according to his discretion; and this is not something that can be replied to by one who has put his study into this art.
And if the sore is exposed, it is necessary that you take one linen cloth, according to the quantity of the wound, and wet it in rose oil, and place it on the wound; then take another cloth doubled in 2 or 4 layers, and wet it in wine and rose oil, and place it on the first cloth; and do this more lightly than you can, so as not to burden the sore, then administer another linen, but do not strain it any further than covering the wound only;
And leave it for a day or two until the abscesses calm down, then cut it open and administer the following medications like root of lily, flour of wheat, incense powder, aristolochia, and similar things; make powder from these items and sprinkle on the wound, and immediately provide reliable medicines without bitterness.
Ensure that the wound is always kept clean, you must not leave ointment or pus on it, nor let scabs form on the brain tissue, because when scabs form on the cloth, they rot and can cause great harm to the patient; because when something bitter is applied to it, it causes pain.
Therefore, be cautious in case any bad accident happens to the patient as we have said, it is doubtful and full of uncertainty.
And if blackness does not come violently except by the medicine that has been applied, then you should take a part of honey and 3 parts of rose oil and 1 piece of linen cloth and mix them together and apply it on the affected area. Then heal in the manner of treatments that are required, until it heals.
Know that sometimes the two parts of the nose above are broken, or one of them alone because there are two bones; and the one below is cartilaginous and does not break, but only bows or twists, and then heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, it must be that you insert your little finger or thumb into the neck, and place the break inside the index finger, and in the hollow by the side, until the neck returns according to its natural figure. And do this gently, and be careful that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
And if the break is in the part above the neck and the finger cannot reach the place, then you must put a small splint on the head of the finger.
And if the fracture is in two parts, you must set it again, and hasten to restore it as soon as possible.
If not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscess has calmed down, then you bind to the head of the nose pieces of linen cloth, if the fracture is in one part.
Or you bind another on the other side, if there is a fracture there; and let the pieces be as thick as they fill the nostrils of the nose.
And they said that one should moisten the pieces in butter and soften them each day. I do not think it is good, but they must be moistened with a mixture of egg white and flour; then leave the piece until the bone is hard, and the cartilage is hardened.
And at times, feathers of geese are inserted instead of thorns, and if a single piece of soft linen is wrapped around it, and the breakage is held, then blow into the patient's nostrils; do as you see fit.
If an abscess opens during the incision while you are working on it, put cotton wool soaked in rose oil or a little piece of onion there.
If an abscess does not open, apply a plaster from the inside, made of wheat flour and incense powder mixed with egg white, then put light compresses on top, but do not tie it shut.
And if the break of the neck is small and it breaks into small pieces, then take appropriate instruments to extract it, then make an incision, and apply things that promote healing such as char, suture, plasters, and ointments suitable for this purpose.
And if there is no wound inside the neck, then heal it with bandages and place wooden splints on it until it is healed.
of the fracture of the jawbone
When the jawbone is dislocated beneath and there is no wound outside, and the fracture is only displaced, but not broken in two, if one recognizes it easily, then it is corbeled within.
If the fracture is on the right side, you must insert your index finger in the patient's mouth; if it is on the left jawbone, insert the index finger of your right hand and press gently into the fracture, then align it by pushing from the outside with your other hand.
And if the fracture of the jawbone is displaced in two parts, then you must administer extension of two parts, until they are equal.
And if there is movement of the teeth or fracture, hold them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, then place on it a broken mandible splint, and place on it one double cloth; and place upon the cloth a large and well-made plaster, or an equal piece of skin, long and wide according to the mandible, and attach it to the jaw as you can, and command the patient to rest, and provide light foods.
And if you see that the figure changes, dislocate it on the third day, and then reset what has changed; place plaster upon it, with milled powder mixed with egg or flour of wheat after removing the splint; and place upon the plaster a light linen, and if the plaster sticks to him, and the condition of the patient does not change, leave it until it is healed; many times it heals within four weeks.
And if abscesses come up, bring what we have said previously.
And if there is a fracture and wound together, carefully remove no piece of the bone; if it can be removed with delicate tools appropriate for this purpose.
And if the wound is narrow, stretch it with fire as needed.
And when you have removed all these pieces and it does not dislocate anymore, if the wound is wide, stitch it up with one layer of appropriate dressing to promote healing until it is healed.
from the forceps (a medical instrument) The forceps breaks frequently in front of the shoulder, and the breakage occurs in three ways: either it is broken and dislocated in two places and divided into several pieces, being the easiest to restore; or there is a break with an open wound.
And the procedure is when the breakage has an open wound, that you have two assistants, one to hold the shoulder where the forceps are broken; and the other to extend the neck towards the affected part; then adjust the dislocation with your hands so that the form is as it should be, having no appearance or displacement.
And if you need to extend it more, place a round cushion of cloth or linen on the patient's shoulder, and make it large according to your needs; stretch and lift the forceps, and hold the cushion with your hand so that you adjust the dislocation as needed.
And if you cannot draw the head of the shoulder outwards because it comes in fully, then the patient must lie on his affected side, and place one small pillow under the shoulder, and push the assistant's hand downward on the shoulder until the bone of the joint is raised.
Then direct the fracture to your fingers, and if you find debris, then it is necessary that you cut above it; and draw out the pieces gently, and if the bone cannot join due to any obstruction, strike it at one of the incisions that you have made; but place this instrument under the joint to prevent it from dislocating:
and is shaped like a spoon, but not concave, and should be as wide as necessary, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the work; and it should have two prongs, as you see, and one should be wide, and the other narrow, just as the opening of the wound that you made when treating the bones:
And when you are sure of the abscess being hot, if it opens and the wound is small, or you doubt that the abscess is hot, then apply bandages and lint to the wound, according to its size.
And if it is a hot abscess that comes, wet a linen cloth with rose oil, asafetida, and wine and place on top.
The bone compression when there are wounds or cuts is to place a plaster of flour and egg powder on the bone, put light packs on top, and put a spear beneath if necessary. Then take a very large bandage, one palm wide, then put a double cloth damp on it and wrap it up; then take a subtle awl three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around the bandage so that the head of the bandage hangs down. and place the awl on the break, turn the bandage around the neck, and under the skin of the healthy person and the sick person, and pull from each side, and when you see that the sutures hold the bandage in place, and you see clearly that the awl does not move above the broken bone, keep it in place every day, and when the threads loosen, tighten them.
and make the patient lie on his back, and put a small pillow under his armpit to lift the shoulder up; align the break with the forceps by adjusting the shoulder, or tie the arm to the neck, and do not untie it unless a bad accident occurs, for up to 20 days.
Then repeat the application of pressure, if necessary, and hold it and leave it in that state until it is restored; and it is restored in most cases within 28 days, and less in some men.
for the break of the shoulder
It happens that the broken or dislocated shoulder does not heal on its own and needs to be forced back into place; it should be aligned according to the figure of the dislocation, and reset according to its natural shape in all possible ways; then put powder from a mill with abundant egg white and fine starch, and cover it with two layers of cloth; then put a wide and thin splint, a little larger than the shoulder, on top, and if there is any hollow in the shoulder under the splint, use lin starch to fill it so that the splint fits evenly; and then firmly bind it all in one strong bandage so that the splint does not move from its place, and observe the bandage every day; whenever it softens, bind it again, and if the splint moves out of place, adjust it and lie the patient on his side; and the shoulder will be restored in 20 or 25 days. And when this number is completed, unbind it, and be careful, for it is not a bone that becomes loose easily.
And if a bone fragment protrudes in front, and not beneath the skin, lift it up, and the bone, and do as we have said in the treatment of an abscess to calm it with hot cautery.
of the fracture on the thigh
The thigh bone is sometimes fractured in the middle, but it happens seldom; but it often breaks at the end. And when it is fractured obliquely, it falls below, and the patient feels great pain, and lack of strength, and immediately vomits blood, and the openings in the broken bones become apparent, and the joint feels cold.
And the restoration is such that the patient lies on his back with one cushion between the shoulders, then presses the shoulders and assembles the ribs of the two sides to your hands, very carefully making it equal in all ways as you can, until the figure of the bone is as it should be; then place plasters and bandages made of thin fabric over the broken bone, or something light, and wrap it in one cloth, and tie it to the broken bone so that it does not move; turn the arm round several times, and tighten the bandage gradually, and check each hour whether it is healing, if it softens, tighten it again; and if it needs to be released due to corruption or itching at the site, or pain or abscess, hurry, release it, remove the plaster, and direct those who came to treat it in a healing manner; then bandage the plaster again, and tighten it until it is healed.
of the broken ribs
It is known that the fracture of the ribs occurs only in large ones after the back, and in the chest within, and they do not pierce except because they are slippery; and one can feel this easily at the investigation of the joints.
And the restoration is that you set it equally, as required. Then put the splint, and hold it with a stick, if necessary.
If the fracture of the ribs is concave within, it causes the patient great pain and shortness of breath, as if from pleurisy, for the bone pierces the membrane; it points to the ends, and immediately vomits a large quantity of blood, which is a serious illness, and the ancients used great devices.
And if there are those who say that it is necessary to administer foods that swell the belly, to push the fracture outwards.
We should not cause abscesses to become hot unless they have come. If it has come, let it heal.
And they said that anyone who puts leeches on the wound to drain it is reasonable; however, there is doubt whether the leeches attract waste to the wound due to their weak positioning.
And they said that one should cover the wound with damp linen soaked in hot oil and put towels between the ribs to make the wound even, then it should be cured by sweating, meat, and medicine.
And if the patient feels intense pain that it cannot be endured due to the broken bone, and there is fear in the patient, then it is necessary to make an incision above the broken rib, and it is necessary to put one instrument underneath for support; and then it must be cut, drawn lightly, and then sew the two edges of the wound, if they are large, and heal with plasters until it heals. And when abscesses come, place damp cloths soaked in rose oil on top, and on the broken rib; and heal the broken rib as needed, and lie still on the affected side until it is healed.
of the break of the collarbone
Occasionally comes a break in the collarbone or spine. And similarly... And when this happens to anyone, and you wish to know if he will be well or not, take notice if his hands are softened, swollen, and dead, and cannot move nor stretch, and when you prick them with a needle, he does not feel it. Know that he is mortal in many positions, and if they become mute and feel well when squeezed and pricked, know that the jointure of the bone is saved, and that the patient will be cured, if there is treatment applied.
And when similar happens to the spine in the back, and you wish to know if it will be well or not, take notice if the feet are softened, and the symptoms are in the hands, and the vertebrae jump spontaneously and movement is against his will; and when it is soothed on his belly, it jumps again against his will. And when it is soothed on his back and he wishes to rest, he cannot. Know that it is mortal: do not labor at its cure.
And if this accident does not come upon him, it is a lighter thing.
And the cure is that you reward him if there is an abscess heated, put oil of roses or egg yolk oil on it until it is soothed; then put on one of the drying and comforting ointments, and tie it with a thread, and command the patient to rest; and let him not sleep on that part where he feels pain, as long as he is well. If any bone dislocates, it is necessary to cover it; then remove the bone, and close the wound with two stitches if it is large, using a bandage; then treat the wound with an aromatic healing balm until it heals; and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called "the head of the cow," push your left thumb into the space between the bones, and make it even with your right hand as much as possible; then apply the ointment and oil, if you have any; then bind it, and if there are bones dislocated, lift them up, remove the bone, and treat the wound until it heals.
of the break of the shinbone
It often happens that the bone of the hip is broken, and if it occurs, there will be a slight reduction in mobility at the site; and it extends for a long distance, bends towards the front, and causes pain at the location, swelling, and breaks the affected area.
And the restoration is that you extend your hand above [the broken bone], so that you are on top of the breakage; and know what the break and its shape is; and if the break is only at the head, then make the break equal, as it is in its natural shape.
And if the break is long or it bends inside, make the patient lie on their stomach until the restoration of the break is made clear to you. And when you have set it even, place the splint on top, then place a rod or peg on top of the fracture and hold the break so that it does not move; and apply the position beneath the ribs until the fracture is even.
Instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy side or back.
If an abscess has erupted, do not touch it until it is quieted, and place on it what we have said before; then return to the treatment, and hold it as necessary, if there is no bad accident; this is the method.
of the breakage of the shoulder
The shoulder is that which is between the chest and the head of the upper arm, and if it is broken, it should be restored according to one of two ways: the first being that you take a rod filled with thick paste, in this form:
And tie the two shoulders with two ropes, and lift them up, and raise the patient on one seat; then let him lower his broken arm over the rod, until it comes to rest, and have a rope attached at its midpoint, then lift it on some heavy thing or the assistants extend it downward; then place the mire (assistant) holding the breakage with both hands together, until the breakage returns as required.
And another way it is that one restrains the patient on his bed, and ties his hand to his neck, then commands two ministers that one presses where there is a break with his hands, and the others press below all around, extending each one to their part.
And if the extraction is more forceful, one tie a cord below the break, and above the break, and each minister extends to their part. If the break is near the shoulder head, it is necessary that you put a medium cord below the shoulder, and another towards the neck, below the break; and in the same way if the break is towards the neck, one should lightly tie a cord, without effort, until the break is even on the level, and on the neck; then make the break even as needed, and tie it, if no abscess comes.
If abscesses come, do not tighten it for more than 7 days, and put a soft cloth soaked in linen and rose oil on it to calm the abscess; then tighten it, and the method of tightening is that you put a cushion on the break, gather the arm towards the shoulder, and place your hand on the shoulder or chest; and tie the bandage, and tighten on the shoulder and on the arm, so that the arm is in a straight line, if nothing prevents it, or if the bone is not moving.
And if you doubt that the bone does not move, use splints, and place a larger and stronger splint on the fracture than the others, and have one inch of space between each splint, and let each splint be large enough to pass over the fracture by two inches on each side; then hold the splints in place, as I said at the beginning of the chapter regarding the fracture, more firmly and lessen it in alignment.
If you see the position of the splints and their binding, as we have said, when restoring the broken limb, and you doubt the abscess is heated, leave it to heal for seven days, as we have said; then observe every three days the binding, to ensure that pus does not swell or come to the place, or the new flesh does not come to the limb because it is too tight. Follow our advice.
If no such accidents occur, do not unbind it before four days or more, and let the patient lie on his back, with his hands on his stomach; and put under the shoulder one compress of equal wool, and observe every hour of the day or night that the shape of the broken limb does not move, or the bindings are not softened; follow our advice by the power of medicine, and give the meat as we have previously specified, in such a way that the meat is first soft; and when it starts to recover, it should be thick. It is customary that the shoulder and leg should be rebound in forty days altogether; then unbind it and administer baths and liniments for the place to heal properly. If the incision is ugly and inflamed, wait to unbind it for one day or two months.
Of the fracture of the arm
The arm consists of two bones, which are called the "ulna" and the "radius"; one is small, that which forms the elbow, and the other is large, that which is beneath, near the little finger; by chance, only one fractures, either the small or the large, or both together.
When the small ulna is fractured, restoration and healing are easy; but when the large one is fractured, healing is difficult and more painful than when both are fractured together. If it is only the small ulnar bone that is fractured, then you should extend it slightly and align it.
If it is the large bone that is fractured, then it should be pulled harder; stretch it over one fist, lift the elbow of the hand higher than the others, and the small finger lower than the others, and cross the arms above the patient's chest, with one fist in front of the other, so that the patient does not feel any pain; then extend the assistant's arm to the lower part under the fractured arm, or to the elbow, and another assistant above. Then align the bones as best you can.
And if it is broken into pieces, put each one back in its place, and if there is any displaced piece that protrudes, you cannot restore it to its place, then cut off the bone as we have said before.
And if with the breaking into pieces, I have spoken in the individual chapter; take care.
And if, at the beginning of the resetting, abscesses arise, apply a cloth made of rosin and white beeswax that is neither too hard nor too soft; and glue one piece of cloth gently over it, until the abscesses are calmed down. Then remove the rosin, and place the plaster made with the powder of the mill with plenty of egg, then put on the splints, and make sure that the splint for the broken part is stronger and a little larger than the others; and be aware that it should have 7 splints or more in various positions: whether the broken part is in one bone, or two; and tighten more above the break than elsewhere, and always less when moving away, as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and let the cloth over the break be soft and moist, and neither too hard nor rough; and let the thread that holds it be made of linen, not too thick or too thin, as we have said. And check the member and the ligament afterwards after some days. If any bad accidents happen to the limb, such as itching that happens to the limb, then you must irrigate the limb with hot water until the itch is soothed; and let the limb not rest. Then begin the treatment again, and if the ligaments are damaged and the bones dislocated, address this similarly.
If the nails cannot come to the limb because it is too narrow, then you must soften it slightly and wait for some days until the nails grow, and then set it.
If none of the things we have said come to the patient, then do not release him until 20 days or more. After that, you can put his hands at his neck and make them even, and watch for movement and dislocation, and let him sleep on his back; know that this break will heal in 30 or 40 days, or perhaps sooner, depending on the compositions and complexions of the properties.
Of the fracture of the hand
For at the back of the hand and near the fingers there are few fractures, but it occurs multiple times.
And when the sole of the hand is fractured or dislocated, the patient should lie crosswise, straight and level; then put his hand on a cloth extended, and the attendant should extend the fractured bones and align them with mirrors, until they are well joined; and apply the plaster and padding, if no abscess comes, then put an iron splint according to the size of the place; and it should be wrapped in one linen cloth.
And if the fracture is on the sides around the sole of the hand, make a splint of cloth, and instruct the patient to wrap it around his fractured sole; then bind it with a long piece of cloth, and let the iron splint be as large as the sole of the hand, and bind it as necessary.
And if the break is on the outside (of a limb), it must be that you place a splint above, and another below in the heel, so that the hand is open and straight, then tie it all around the hand, and bind the joint between the fingers.
If the break occurs in any of the fingers (knuckles), it must be made equal as required; and hold with the heel, and if you see that you place a straight splint to lift the break, and do not move it; and if the break is in other fingers like the index or one of the others, make it equal, and tie with the sound finger which is after; or tie them all in one bandage, as needed, or put a splint above, as for a knuckle; and beware in the restoration and placement of abscess heat, and heal what comes there, as I said.
of the broken shin (or thigh)
The bones of the thigh are often broken, and one can see it when they twist it forward or backward; and the restoration is such that one ligament is tied above the break, and another below. And the patient lies on their face, then each attendant extends their ligament equally to its corresponding place; and this is when the fracture is within the bone.
If the fracture is near the root of the thigh, then one ligament should be towards the hip and others towards the fracture. And if it is near the knee, then ligaments should be below the knee, and extend beyond; then place the patient's leg equal to its two hands, as per its natural figure, and then apply the splint and the bandage, without an abscess coming up.
And if there is an abscess that boils, let it cool down first, then return to your work and treatment; the incision is made in this manner. You should bind it up above the fracture with a thick doubled bandage for two or three days, and allow the superfluous material to drain out, then turn the leg so that the heels are at the root of the thigh, and insert one long pin between the thigh and the leg, just below the knee, and bring the head of the pin above; then turn the leg and the upper part of the bandage, then place the stirrups on the fracture and place a stirrup on the bone of the leg; then use soft cloth for seven inches between the leg and thigh to even out the tightness, then begin to bind tightly in four turns or more above the fracture; and as you go higher up the fracture, loosen it; then take the two pins that you inserted between the leg and thigh, and tie three stirrups over them, then return to beneath the head of the pin, so that you are below the hip, tighten it so that it does not move from its place, then leave it like this, until there is no sign of abscess or inflammation.
If pieces of the bone are protruding, you must remove them if possible; and if not, you must cut the area and draw out pus; treat it as we have said until it is healed.
And sometimes the leg is broken in such a way that splints are placed on it, as in the shoulder or arm; however, in the restoration made in this manner, the patient does not experience any pain.
Know that the leg is restored within a day, or a little more or less, according to the different complexions.
of the alleyway of the knee
Know that in the alleyway of the knee occurs little breakage, but it bends frequently. And if it breaks, it is not just a fracture, but rather a split or a deep wound, and it causes pain everywhere, and this is felt by everyone.
And the restoration is that one equalizes the round end to its socket, as long as it can be assembled; then place the arm, and place a round peg there if needed, and tighten it as required; then check all the arrangements we have said in other breakages, like an abscess, burn, and so on; place at each accident what is needed for it, until it heals.
of the leg fracture
Know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is called directly "mustelz", and the others are called "foscile"; and it has the same kind of fracture as the arm, and for this reason, the restoration is the same as that of the arm equally, and the work is the same.
And if both the bones of the limb are broken together, the leg turns in all directions.
And if the slender bone is broken, it turns forward.
And if the large bone is broken, it causes great pain and can be seen; it turns under. Then bring an extension, make it even, and tie the splinters equally; however, if the break is misaligned or has more pieces, the extension should be smaller and lighter; and align it according to your ability.
And when you have completed your work, take two fists of thick yarn that wrap around the leg on both sides and are as long as the leg from the knee to below; then wind them twice in two layers, one above and one below, and tie them at this point; the leg will not be able to decline to the right or left, and it is good; nor should anyone add a splint of the same length as the leg, and place the leg for protection from movement; it is done properly at the break where there is pain; move the leg every day to see if there is any abscess or other accident; cure it until it is healed.
Of the break of the bones from the foot
At the ankle, there is no breakage, but the bones of the foot sometimes suffer breakage and also the toes, and there is no force except for the shortening in various positions.
And if there is breakage in the bones of the foot and you see these bones rise up against each other, place the patient's foot on a flat surface like he wants to walk, then place your foot on his, where the bones are raised, then press them back into their places; then put a splint and bandages on it, and put a small board under the foot with two hollow spaces, then bind the foot evenly, as you have covered it with cloths and other things that you need.
And when four or six days have passed, unbind the bandages, for you will find the bones even, whether they are broken or dislocated.
And if any of the two [shoulders] are broken, restore them as we have said for the hands of the hand; then place a splint on the broken one according to the length of the arm, and let it be slightly larger; then place a piece of wood under the affected shoulder as I have said, and hold it in position; and if there are 2 or 3, or more [broken shoulders], break each one, placing a splint on it according to its size, wrapped in one linen cloth, and hold the wood under the affected shoulder; and let the top of the wood be turned away from the stomach of the shoulder so that it covers well.
And do not forget the other things I have said about broken bones, after we have spoken of them; and treat each accident according to its need.
on the break of the wrist bone
When the bone of the woman's pelvis is broken, make her sit with her legs apart, then incline her to the lower back part and hold her from behind; then fill the cavity in the pelvis with cotton and put in as much as a pound; then turn the woman, tilt her hips and scoop out the lower back gently, and when the cotton comes to the entrance of the pelvis, the bone returns with the pound; and whenever she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and whenever she has emptied it, put it back, and do this for 7 days: the break will heal, and if you see, take a bladder of barley, tie one end of a cord to it, and push the whole bladder into the pelvis; then inflate the bladder forcefully through the cord until it is filled inside: the break will return; then fill it with cotton, and leave it for some days until it heals.
And when the bone of the man's thumb is broken or that of a woman, restore it as we have said in the treatment for the pelvis; and these breaks shall not be hidden from him who applies his study and experience to them, and my book is intended for this purpose. For the break indicates various dispositions towards restoration: take note of this then.
In a spear (shaft), when it is broken, take an owl's gullet and put the shaft inside; then wrap fabrics around it, and leave it for 3 or 4 days, and it will heal quickly.
of a break with a wound
It is necessary for the one who has a break with a wound, especially if it is large, such as the bone of the leg or shoulder or similar, that it should be treated immediately, as the writings we have said bear witness to.
And if the wound is healed, anoint it with vitriol, unless you have something else, then immediately proceed to restore the break in that same hour, or the next day, if abscesses do not come.
And if abscesses come, let the restoration wait until the ninth day, until the abscess is appeased, and do not touch it on the third or fourth day, for you would cause bad accidents.
And if the bone is broken and appears on the surface near the opening, it should be set gently with light pressure, at a small extension.
And if the limbs are not aligned to be set evenly by your hands, it should be realigned with this tool made of iron, which is about 7 or 8 inches long, and the width according to the size of the wound; and therefore, the mirror must grasp 3 or 4, according to what is needed in each case of bone setting; and it should be round and slightly larger than required, so that it does not bend when compressed on the limb during your work, and sharp at the front, and large in the middle towards the wound, like this:
And it is called "palainche," so the curved limb should be placed on top of the visible bone; push it once until it returns to its original position and align it evenly with the other one. If the fracture is subtle, and the tool cannot grasp the bone properly, you must cut the visible part of the bone until the tool can take hold of it.
And if you cannot reset the bone, as we have said, strike it with an appropriate instrument, either chisel or saw, within your power; then remove what remains in the bone with sharpness and small shavings.
And when the bone is reset and the patient feels great pain afterward, know that it is not in its natural place. Make sure it is in its proper place, then moisten a clean cloth in black, sticky wine (if it is summer) or alcohol; do not apply any oil to the wound, as it will cause pus and corruption; then administer splints when you have restored the bone, leave the wound open, cover the area completely according to the size of the wound, and take care that the wound is not strained with a fracture. Many fools have done this, causing either death or further injury to the patient; therefore, let the bandages be softer and more flexible than other fractures.
If the wound is large or bad and you fear that an accident may occur, as we have said, and if you feel pain at the site, do not apply splints; instead, wrap it without splints, using hard cloths and tie them. After one or two days, if you see pus coming out of the wound, remove what you had put on it and apply a healing ointment such as tetrafarmaçon and similar ones.
And it is necessary that you dislocate the member twice a day, in the morning and at evening, until it heals and becomes healthy.
And the limbs should be set in such a way that the bone moves downward slightly.
If it passes many days and the bone cannot heal but keeps bowing out again, as there are small fragments of bones; therefore, you must press the wound firmly and remove all the dislocated pieces causing pain.
And if there is an abscess or other corruption at the site, you must treat it according to what was said in its chapter earlier. And when a bone is broken and open on the limb, such as the bones of the thigh or shoulder, and similar large members, do not drain it, as many times death follows; but leave it until it can be drained; perhaps it will heal by itself after 20 or 30 days. Then treat the wound if possible; otherwise, leave it.
The swellings that come upon the sore
We often come after the healing of the break, especially when it is near the joint, and the appearance of the limb is dreadful to see; and unfortunately, the limb cannot perform its natural functions.
Therefore, take care with him if he is weak: administer medicines such as aloes, incense, myrrh, and saracolle, acacia, and similar others, so that you choose one of these things or all together, grind them into powder with wine steeped in alcohol or egg whites or oil; place it on the sore in poultices, press it well and do not remove it for many days; then loosen it, and start another, until the swelling is removed; or you strain over a piece of plank well made; because the properties of wood are such that it removes all inflammations from the limbs; and if the nodation has turned into hardness like stone, and it is necessary to remove it, you chop off the top, and reveal the superfluous parts; or you shave it at any rasp, until it is removed, and cure it until it is healed.
When the fracture of the bone is restored and remains after the limbs are weak and delicate, it happens for many reasons: one reason being that it was tied too tightly, and was not bound as it should have been; or because there were too many ligaments, and the nutrients could not reach the member; or because of excessive bleeding; or because of excessive movement, not in its proper time; or because the patient has little blood in his body, making him weak.
And the remedy is to make the sick person eat, and make his body lean, until the wounds multiply in him; provide baths, and give joy and cheerfulness; then apply balm to the limb, so that the balm attracts great nutrients to it, and irrigate it with cold water often, until the nutrients reach the limb; return it to its natural form.
The twisted limb after health
When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the bones are broken open, and the shape of the limb is misshapen, nevertheless do not lose hope; do not believe the foolish who say one should break the limb new, and many foolish people have done this in our land; and this practice is blamed, and great harm comes from it, and perhaps death; however, if the swelling and twisting are fresh, you must anoint with warm water, or softening herbs such as marshmallow leaves, roots, clover, and similar things, and make a poultice. You should prepare one soothing poultice, such as daisy, and take the musk oil of comfrey, and mix it with ginger oil or sesame oil, and apply the poultice; or you can grind ripe figs with wheat bran, and similar medicines that reduce swelling.
And sometimes the swelling is removed by rubbing continuously and for a long time with moist hands. It should be moved in the limb every hour.
And if the tortuousness is swollen and hardened, just as with a stone, it requires being cauterized; therefore, it should be covered up to the bone, incised subtly and lightly; and cloth and dressing should be applied in its treatment.
Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation occurs in anyone, it is now necessary to return it without delay.
If one waits, the joint swells, and perhaps it can be reset at the place; for this reason, it should not be moved until the swelling has subsided: many times it causes pus and other pain.
Nevertheless, when this happens, first let the patient cleanse himself, then allow the abscess to heal; then heat the member with hot water and oil, then gently reset it, and treat each member as the treatment comes in its place.
And I have ordered the chapters of shoulder dislocations down to the feet.
The jaws [or mandibles]
It sometimes happens that the jaws [or mandibles] are dislocated in two ways: either they are slightly displaced from their place and softened a little; or they are completely dislocated, hanging towards the lower part, and drool saliva from the mouth which it cannot hold, cannot close its mouth, and wraps its tongue with speech.
When a dislocation is small, it often returns with multiple displacements.
And if it is complete and finished, you must reset it promptly, without delay;
Hold the patient's head firmly and place the thumb of one hand in the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth, if the dislocation is two parts; and the other hand should be open to provide equal pressure; command the patient to soften their jaws, and move them from all sides.
And the thumb holds it evenly, until it returns to its place.
And if it is reset, indeed it is the jaws that are together, anoint them with hot water and oil while gently manipulating them; do not force it to be reset, as we have said.
And when they are reset evenly and the mouth of the patient closes well, soak it in a cloth made of softened rose oil and beeswax, then tie it lightly with thin threads.
and let the patient sleep on his back, with his head between two pillows so that it does not move to either side nor exert itself, but take light food until the pain is alleviated, and bind the jaws.
And then gently soften what he wants, and do not work at all to open the mouth for eating and drinking, until the jawbone is well knit and healed.
If the two jawbones cannot be set right within an hour and are not converted to their places, fevers and accustomed sores come about, and possibly a rupture of the stomach, and perhaps pus vomit.
And when you see this, then know it is ruin; and many times the one who has this dies within eight days.
Of the collarbone
The collarbone cannot dislocate from the chest within its continuity and from below, but sometimes it does dislocate to one side, and this is felt.
And the restoration is that the patient lies down on his back and stretches out his arms; then presses the shoulder firmly with your palm, and it will return; then place a bandage and sling over it and hold it in place.
And the part of the shoulder that is towards the chest cannot dislocate; but if it does, you must reset it to its place as we have said; then put on a bandage and sling over it, hold it in place, and instruct the patient to rest until he is well.
And likewise, the head of the spine is reset when it is dislocated from its place.
The dislocation of the shoulder.
Know that the shoulder can only dislocate in four ways: one of which is when it dislocates at the lower socket (assle) below; and the second way is at the part of the upper arm; and by chance, it dislocates above the part, but this rarely happens.
and it does not dislocate behind the shoulder blade nor inside the nerves; and it often dislocates below towards the socket (assle), especially in those who have little flesh, for it can pop out easily; in those with enough flesh, it jumps only a little, and returns quickly.
And sometimes it happens to some men that they get hit or broken, and the shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and they think that it is dislocated by this.
Therefore you must examine it, as long as you are certain; and then begin the treatment.
Dislocation is known when it moves towards the inside (internal dislocation) and you can tell the difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find a noticeable difference between them. And you will find a hollow in the shoulder blade and press down on the shoulder blade as if it were an egg; and the patient cannot return their hand to its place nor make any movements.
And if it is dislocated upward, do not hide it, for you will find it clearly when pressing down.
This manner of dislocation is not difficult to reset when it is new, or if the infant is ill.
And the manner is that the minister lifts the patient's hand up, then places your thumbs beneath the joint, and forcibly moves the joint upward to its place; and the minister lifts the hand, extends it upwards, puts it back in place; it will come quickly.
If it does not come as we have said in the hands for several days afterwards, then it is necessary that the patient be bathed in hot water; and bring him a soothing and calming poultice, such as a decotion of elder and fenugreek and melilot in hot water, and apply it.
Then the patient should be made to lie on his back, and place a piece of equal-sized linen beneath the joint, neither too soft nor too hard, then the minister places his foot on the cloth, lifts the head of the shoulder properly, and pulls the hand of the patient.
And another servant holds the head of the patient still so it does not move downwards; that shoulder will return immediately, and if you see, reset it in this way:
and there is to be present one man who is larger than the patient; he should be facing towards the side, and push the shoulder of the patient beneath the armpit, and lift the armpit upwards so that the patient hangs by the arm; and another servant pulls the hand of the patient downwards towards the abdomen. And if the patient is too light, give him something heavy to hold, and the dislocation will return immediately.
And it is also reset in another way: and this is done by inserting one long needle into the ground so that the head [of the shoulder] is as rounded as a pea, and it should not be too thick nor too thin; then it should be placed beneath the patient but with soft wool on top, and the patient should be lying long along the staff; then the hand [should be] extended beyond on the other side and the joint will return to its place quickly;
and if it does not want to return due to all the things we have said, then perform this treatment: take one needle of two hands in length and four fingers wide, which has a round head for easy insertion deep inside the joint, according to this shape:
Then tie the patient's arm above the head with a bandage to prevent it from pricking the patient, then place it beneath the patient's armpit; stretch out the patient's other arm on top of the pole, and attach the shoulder to the pole, and the forearm at the wrist of the upper arm, then raise the forearm onto a block of wood about one foot wide, and extend the hands below, and leave the body hanging from the other side; the joint will now be in place.
And when it is in place, whichever way that may be, you must put a cotton ball equal in size beneath the armpit, then apply an ointment made from flour milled with egg white, incense, and oil, all over the shoulder and around it, then bind it under the armpit tightly, and turn the bandage over the ointment, and embrace the hand at its neck, and keep the hands still.
And it must be kept closed, until the limb is comfortable, because it will heal sooner; and then keep it closed for five or seven days more, and move it; and if it becomes hard and is not softened, then it is healed.
And if the joint is out of its place due to moisture that has come, or for another reason, then you should administer fire cauterization at three places, as it is stated in the chapter on cauterizations.
And if you do all of this and it dislocates again after seven days, and the joint does not stay in place, and cannot lift its arm upwards, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is either cut or stretched out or weakened; and know that the joint was never correctly set.
The dislocation that is towards the back, either to the side or behind, is made by impact and stretching of hands, and other force is applied; and it should be treated until it is healed.
And after the healing of the limb, groin comes to it late and slowly, then the patient uses many baths until that groin subsides, and returns to its original state.
The cost of dislocation is...
Know that the jointure is dislocated at points, and at points it returns; and if it is dislocated everywhere, both in front and back, and dislocations are not cured, for one can see and feel it clearly; and dislocation happens according to each shape. And when you join the sick person's shoulder with the bone, if you can see it clearly. For the joint is dislocated, and it cannot bend the arm, nor touch the shoulder at all.
And it is necessary that you reset the dislocation as soon as an abscess heals, for if an abscess heals, it would be difficult to reset; and perhaps it cannot be entirely reset, especially when it is at the back; it is worse than other dislocations, and is of greater pain, and perhaps there comes death.
And the restoration is such that you extend your hand to your two hands; and his arms should be spread out, and his hands should be turned according to the shoulder around it, above and below, and push the joint back to its place, or to the root of its palm, until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is at the front, it returns when the elbow doubles to its elbow, and strikes the root of the palm that has been dislocated.
And if it does not return to its place, administer strong extension; and there are two persons who extend the arm, and they hold it in extension so that it does not move during extension; then turn the arm on both sides, and when you have wrapped a double-length and wide cloth around it;
and when the mirrors join the joint to the hand, oil it with some oil to soften the joint, then press the joint firmly until it returns.
And when it is in its place, put dry plaster with egg yolk on it and hold it in place, and make the patient hold his arm at the neck, and leave it for some days, then release it.
If the joint is closed in its place, remove the bandage and leave it; if you see that the joint does not hold well, repeat the plaster and the bandage, and leave it in this state for some days until it is firmly set; then release it.
If there is pain after the reset of the joint, and it swells, wash and rub it well, and press until it is soothed; or put a piece of fat mutton on the joint, then leave it for one day and night, then remove it, and make the patient enter warm water. And when it swells, wipe the joint carefully, then place it back in its socket, and then immerse it [in water]; and do this 2 or 3 times until it is healed; and if you see, put warm moist hay soaked with butter on top of it; it will return to its position.
the dislocation of the hand
The dislocation of the hand is light and easy to reduce compared to other joints, it must be returned to its place quickly, in the very instant that it becomes dislocated, unless the limb swells or hot abscess forms.
And the repositioning is that you place the sick hand on a table, and extend the fingers of the helper, and the mirror reflects it, so that it is even, as he places his palm at the appearance of the joint, and pushes until it returns.
And therefore you should look to see if it is in the correct position, then make the sick person place the back of his hand on a table for extension and repositioning. And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, make the sick person place the back of his hand on the table, and place your hand at the appearance of the joint. If it returns, that's good.
If not, if he tightens with plasters to alleviate abscesses, let him leave it in this state to begin healing.
And if he cannot endure it, and you are unable to put it back in place after any number of days, then the dislocation remains.
And do not harm the patient until his hand is crippled and cannot tighten anything at all: then know that the nerves or arteries are severed, for there is no other tool available except to tighten with a cautery in such a case, and possibly nothing else is of value.
And when the hand is at its place, put it on the plaster as we have said, then hold it and leave it for 5 days, then release it.
If it cannot move well and there is no swelling, wet it with hot water and rub until it is healthy.
of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
The fingers of the hand may be dislocated on either side, sometimes at the back of the palm or at the front.
Then stretch out the arm, and push the dislocation towards your pockets until it returns, then hold the elbow of the arm, and turn it towards the part where it is disjointed.
Leave it for two days, and then make it equal in the third day; bind it as we have said, and loosen it by a day, and make it move, and bind it again; do this frequently until it becomes narrow.
and do the same if it is dislocated in the palm of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it heals; and do the same when it is dislocated from another place.
The dislocation of the vertebra of the back
When the vertebra of the back or the neck is dislocated, or there are many such dislocations, there is no cure, as death quickly comes to the patient.
And the signs are that the excretion jumps unintentionally, it cannot be held, and many times some member is softened, either both legs or the two arms or one of them.
And many times the vertebra of the back becomes fourfold; that which becomes fourfold at the rear is called "gilbositeness":
The cure is such that you should inquire if the tumors have arisen from childhood; if there is no remedy or healing for it altogether.
And those that come from falling or blows or similar things, the ancient methods of healing used to speak in large words, but they are not of much benefit in all cases.
But I have abridged it according to my intention, and I have made instruments in various ways.
I say that in the tumor which comes before, there is neither tool nor healing;
And similarly, one that comes straight between two costal areas, cannot be cured by anyone other than the one who comes from behind, as I said;
The patient should lie down face up on one even level and apply pressure beneath him to prevent bleeding;
then insert a thorn into the head and another at the feet, and tie ropes around the soles of the patient's feet, hips, knees, and ankles;
And two ministers should know the ropes, one at the head and the others at the feet, between the two thorns;
And let them be tightly closed, the tongs as we have said, and the mirrors place their palms on the spine until it returns.
And if it does not return by this cure, take a plank that is three arms long and shaped like a wedge, place it under the patient on their side, and thrust the head of the plank beneath them, then place the edge of the plank on the spine. and the mirrors place their feet on the other end of the plank, and press firmly until it returns to its place; and if you see that it does not work, turn the plank with your hand.
And you stick two needles in the head of the patient's arm, near each joint, and have space of about an inch between each needle.
and have one needle twisted in each needle, or the turn is corrected, and the needles are firmly in the earth so they do not move; and between two needles have a turning needle, like cables, and in the two turning needles have two small needles of about an inch long, to turn the turn.
and then tie the cable that is between the ankles to the turn near the head, and the other cable towards the other turn at the joints, and each minister turns his turn with all the cable, and the master aligns the spike as we have said.
And when it is evened (the affected part), place a plaster of desiccative substance with abundance of egg, then pour warm water over it, and then apply a thin board of 3 fingers in length, pressing the place of the swelling and the healthy part of the spine, then tie it with a cord as we have said, and let the patient use warm fumigation until he is healed;
and if anything comes at the end of healing, then administer softening and soothing medicines, with the board as we have said before; and sometimes one applies a piece of wood to it.
sometimes the appearance comes at the back of the spine and it seems to be a dislocation; but it is the bone that opens, for which reason there should not be any presumption: perhaps death will come as a result.
Of the shoulder dislocations
Know that the joints of the shoulder and the shoulder blade come undone only due to dislocations, and it does not happen in the same way as other joints; and the joint of the shoulder is dislocated in four ways: inside and outside, front and back, more inside than others, and less dislocated in front and behind.
And the knowledge of its dislocation inside is that when the diseased leg is joined with the healthy one, it is longer and wider than the healthy knee, and the diseased knee cannot bend at the fire. And it is the loin that is dislocated swollen with abscesses, because the knee joint is located there.
And the sign of one who is about to die, is that this happening is contrary to those before.
And the signs of one who is about to die, are that his leg is swollen and bent as described earlier; however, do not double the knee in pain, and if you want him to walk, he cannot move it forward, and he retains his urine, and his ankle swells, and when he walks, he limps on his toes.
And the signs of one who is about to die, are that he cannot extend or bend his knee, and his leg is more twisted than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the hip of the thigh is at its place below the ribs.
The translations for the given lines are:
And in the one where dislocation is fresh, and there are four types of dislocations, hasten that you turn the joint, and push it inside and out, and move it left and right; by chance if it returns, no other treatment is needed.
And if it does not return in this manner, then one strong servant should be prepared and firmly hold the leg with two hands or one chain tied around the knee: and another attendant extends his hand over it in this manner, pushing his hands beneath the buttocks, then tightens a rope-like device on the thigh; and another holds the head with the rope.
and everyone rises together at once, until the patient is lifted from the ground once, and remains hanging.
This manner of extension is common to the four types [of procedures], and if the dislocation returns, as we have said, it is good.
If the joint is not dislocated, treatment should be applied to its appearance. When a dislocation is at the front, you must remind the patient to lie on their healthy side, then place the rope around the root of the thigh and the part that is below the angle, and tighten the rope towards the angle and the forceps.
Then take another assistant by the arms, and embrace the large part of the affected thigh and stretch it out in the opposite direction; it will return to its place now; and this method of dislocation is easier than others.
And if you cannot hold it in this manner as we have said, then you must bind the patient's two feet together with a strong rope above their heels and knees, and the affected leg should be extended two feet more than the others;
Then hang the patient by the neck from a post, and have them suspended two arms' length above ground; then command one servant to embrace the thigh, and another servant should be hanging with the patient, who should embrace the thigh, as the joint is returning quickly now.
And when the dislocation is at its furthest point, lie the patient down as we have said in the section on sciatica, and apply one ligature above the affected leg properly, and also above the pelvis.
And then put two splinters, one at the neck and one at the feet, then insert one splinter between the thighs of the patient in the affected area. And let it be planted with dampened cloths around [the affected area], so as not to prick the patient; then extend each assistant toward him, and place an equal mirror opposite his hand for the dislocation.
If it returns [the dislocation], that is good. If not, place him on a table and press as we have said in the gibbosity, and let the patient lie on the healthy side.
And when the dislocation is in front [of the body], it must be extended quickly and as I have said; place the mirror above the injured angle, then press with the other hand and hold it below towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is towards the outside, it should not be extended downwards, nor raised up on the ground, but rather it should remain as if the haunch were dislocated outwards, just as we have said regarding the lying down on the two haunches. And it should be raised up, and the limb extended as we have said before, and it must be pressed on the joint towards the table.
and will be at the right point when the patient extends his legs, and they will be even; then adjust the thighs, place the pillow, and bind with a bandage so that the haunch does not move.
And it rests for 3 or 4 days, then you dislocate it, and put a splint on it; and if you see that they are even, hold them steady as before, and leave it. Three days; then you dislocate it again, and make it walk well, until the limb is comfortable.
Of the dislocation of the knee
The knees dislocate in three ways: inside and outwards, backwards; they do not dislocate forwards.
And the signs are that you command the patient to bend his leg at the knee, and if it does not bend at the knee, know that it is dislocated.
and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit upright, extend his leg if he can, and place your back on his face, and place his foot on your feet.
then take his knee in your palms, and pull it apart between your hands, then bend the two sides of the knee outwards; and another servant extends his foot until the knees return to their place, and the signs are that they bend slightly at the knee.
And apply the plaster on top, and make the leg adherent to the thigh, and let them lie together tightly for 3 or 4 days, then dislocate it; and do not disturb the patient to walk, until the limbs are comforted.
And if the limbs have not healed, administer strong extension as we have said in the treatment of the hernia, until it is healed.
of the ankle dislocation
The heels are sometimes swollen, and sometimes completely dislocated, both inside and outside.
And the signs are that the ankle is swollen, and there is a bulge in the area where it is dislocated:
The reduction is easy, and it should be done lightly when it is only swollen.
And when it is completely dislocated, you must make the patient sit upright, and hold the leg (or "limb") of the affected area by the ankle with one assistant:
Then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and then towards your left hand two times, then stretch it upwards and push the foot upwards forcefully.
and do this two times as we have said, pushing and pulling the foot; if it returns to its place, that is good; if not, repeat the work because it will return.
and if it cannot return in this way, place the patient on his back on the ground, and make a firm pass through the earth between his legs, and bind cloths around it so as not to prick the patient.
Then the ministers dye the leg, and another minister extends the foot to his hands or to the length of one link, so that he binds it above the foot on the neck. Then all the ministers stretch equally, and the patient should be held tightly between the legs of the ministers to restrain him when he is stretched.
Then the healer holds the dislocation equally in his hands, and another minister binds the healthy leg below it, and the dislocation will return quickly.
And when it is at its point, he applies the plaster and wadding, forms it, binds the foot to the leg, and watches the nerves that are above the ankle, so that the bonds are not too tight.
Leave it for two to three days, and if the ligaments soften, hold it in place; then release it on the third day or the fourth, and advise the patient to walk for four days; If he goes before this time, it is not certain that he will not dislocate again.
And if an abscess appears, then it is necessary to appease it, as we have said elsewhere, until it heals.
of the two
When both [parts] are dislocated, they must be stretched out gently without effort, and it is an easy thing.
And if the dislocation is in any way on the back of the foot, you must make the patient sit. On a flat surface or a table upright, and place your foot on that which opens those jointures, then press your foot firmly, until it returns;
And when it is equal and nothing opens, place a table with two feet beneath the foot of the patient, then form a strap and leave it for three days, then release it; let it rest until it heals.
Of wound and dislocation together
When wound comes with the dislocation, and it is to be restored, many times the patient dies:
If you are not presumptuous in healing, if you are not wise in the art and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not compassionate, merciful, and slow, do not be bold.
And begin with soothing abscesses with warm water, and leave the patient in the hands of God, if you see no hope of healing. and when you see hope, then reset the limb to its place, before the abscess grows.
And when the limbs are at their place, provide things to soothe the abscess, and treat the wound, as needed, with ointments desiccated;
And if with the dislocation there is a break, and small bones are crushed, break them and do what we have said in simple diseases;
And protect yourself from entering into fear, as I have said, for it is worthless to you according to your Creator, and for the wisdom of your weapon and body. Amen;
