To you, my very dear son, I have completed this book that is the end of the knowledge of medicine together with its fullness, and I have made an end of it through its explanations and declarations. And it came to me in a vision that I will complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
And since the work of hands is lost in our region and is alienated from all things in every way, the science and craft are perished, and nothing remains of them but the small descriptions in books by the ancients that the hands have corrupted. And from this comes the errors and vanities, and are closed the intentions and is alienated the sciences.
It seems that I wish to revive it together with the organization of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will come together with the forms of cautery instruments, and the other tools of the work with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation of them, as necessary.
And because no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine is lost. And one who undertakes [this] must be skilled in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, to know the judgment of members, their forms and connections and separations of them, having knowledge of bones, nerves, joints, and the number of bones, and the movement and resting places, and the location of their issue.
And for this reason, Hippocrates says that names with the noun are much, and with work is little; similarly in the art of surgery.
We tell you in the beginning of this book that one who is not knowledgeable about the matters previously mentioned, should be careful not to err and not to operate on humans; thus I have seen many times more of those who engage themselves in this science and abandon their knowledge and sense experience.
For I saw a foolish man who cut open one abscess of scrofula from the neck of a woman, and cut the arteries of her neck; therefore so much blood came out that the woman fell dead in her hands.
And I saw another man who pulled an arrow from an old man, and the arrow was large; it took a piece of the bladder with it, and the man died within four days.
And I had already been called to treat him, and I saw the condition of the patient and the size of the arrow, and knew well that if it were cut he would die.
And there was another physician who took care of one of our land's dukes, who had his leg broken and with the break had an open wound. And this ignorant physician pulled the fracture above the wound using strong force, and he did not allow any callus to form at the wound, but he let it in such a state; and he commanded that it should not be dislocated; and he waited until the leg became completely swollen and the toes came to destruction.
I was called to help him, and I hurried to come and dislocate the leg; and when I dislocated it, it was at peace and did not feel any pain.
But all ways of corruption were already confirmed or the member, and it could not be healed; and the corruption did not cease to spread through the member until the member was completely destroyed.
And there is another type of sore that becomes swollen, then inflamed due to the malice of its dominion.
When a sore that is full of melancholic humor is not in the place where it can all be removed, one should not touch it with iron.
And for this reason, dear son, it is necessary that you know that the work of hands is divided into two divisions: one in which there is danger in many situations; and I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and danger.
Therefore it is necessary that you take care, so that the foolish sore cannot speak ill of you.
If you take up your arms in pledge, and approach your patients gently but firmly, and make use of the best way so that by God's grace you may be saved and praised; and leave behind diseases that are fearsome for great health; and lay down your arms from that which causes doubt, and have faith within you so that you can come from this world to the other of glory.
Galen, in some of his admonitions, said: "Do not take care of evil disease, lest you be called foolish physician."
I have divided this treatise into three chapters.
The first chapters are about fire cauterizations and anti-fever medicinal cauteries, and they are ordered from the head down to the feet; and of the forms of instruments, and of iron cauterizing tools, and of everything necessary in the work.
The second chapters are about cutting and piercing, and of blistering and wounds, and of the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and they are ordered and of the forms of instruments.
The third chapters are about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and they are ordered from the head down to the feet, and of the forms of instruments.
Therefore, as we remember the work, it is necessary that I tell you the quality of the aid and the harm of each complexion.
I say that the qualities of help, and the harm, are the longest and most subtle words and secret responses; and many wise men spoke about this, and agreed with it; and they did not reveal their answers easily, for I shorten it.
I say that the fire cautery helps universally to all complexions where there is matter, whether it be two complexions: namely, hot complexion with matter, and dry complexion with matter.
In hot and dry conditions, some say that cautery is a great help; while others say the opposite: that cautery is of no use for illness that comes from heat and dryness.
For the nature of fire is hot, and should not be used to cure hot diseases with heat or dryness; and it is said by those who say the opposite that cautery provides great help for hot and dry diseases in humans. For when you understand the body of a man and his moisture with the nature of fire, you find the body cold.
And I agree to this statement. For I have found it once by experience.
And every way, do not interfere except those who have tested it and know by long usage the chapter of cauteries, and the diversity of human complexions, and their dispositions and causes of their diseases, and the occurrences and duration of times; we do not fear other complexions, especially in cold and moist diseases. And all the people gathered together and agreed upon the cautery.
And know, son, that cautery with fire is one of the secrets of healing and has greater goodness than cautery with burning medicine.
For fire is simple, and does not harm any other member unless it touches the one being burned.
Burning medicines come from one member to another by transfer, and bring illnesses of great suffering to the sick person; and unfortunately kill the patient.
The fire for its high temperature and the goodness of its substance does not harm if there is no excess.
I have found this by experiment and through the length of service and study that I have put into my art, and it is above the truth of things; therefore I excuse myself for the length of my speech, because I do not wish to reveal the secret concerning fire and its nature, and the quality of work, how it subdues diseases of bodies, as the philosopher says in demonstrating; take this into your thoughts.
And know, son, when it is appropriate to perform fire cauterization, and they choose friends.
And I say that cauterization is appropriate in all times, because the harm occurring is due to the help of cauterization; and indeed, if cauterization is for necessary pains except when it cannot wait until a greater evil comes upon the member.
And do not think ever, dear son, as foolish people do; for a disease that is healed by cauterization has no return; and they say it this way, but it is not as they believe, because cauteries are nothing but medicine that changes the complexion, dries the humors that cause pain, and is worth more than other medicines because of its speed in action and the virtue of its work and dominance.
And it often happens that the sick person comes according to their complexion and the nature of the disease and its power; and superfluities are gathered within him through the consumption of foods and similar things, unless cauteries are administered where there is little excess and moisture, as in the case of cauterization for pain, and similar things; but this happens rarely.
And many people do not understand why cauteries are called the rear of medicine, but they do not believe that cauterization is useful after other treatments; however, their beliefs are false, and cauteries are the rear of medicine because when we administer methods of treatment for any illness and they are ineffective, then we administer cauterization, and it is effective. Therefore, it is clear that cauteries are the rear of medicine, not as the opinion of foolish physicians.
The ancient ones said that cauteries made of gold are more effective than those made of iron, and they did not say this lightly because of the quality of gold and the highness of its substance; and they said that the heads of cautery do not cause putrefaction, but this is not true, for I have proven it, and I found that it is true in some men; and cauteries made of gold are more effective than those made of iron, as they say.
And nevertheless, when you heat instruments of gold, you are not sure when it is hot from the color of the gold, and sometimes it cools down; and if heated too much, it causes fire; and thus there is enough hindrance.
And therefore, we use iron cauteries which have been prepared according to our work.
I have ordered this chapter concerning the head from neck to feet, so that the path may be easier to find.
for the olive oil poultice
This cautery is good for moisture and coldness on the brain, and it is used because of a disease called "soda," and because of many humors that flow from the head to the eyes and ears, and due to numerous dreams and pain in the teeth and throat, and indeed for all diseases that come from coldness, such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar diseases.
The form of this cautery is that the patient should be purged by a soluble medicine, cleansing the head four or five times, according to what the virtues and age and the patient's condition can bear; and then make the patient lie down with his head.
And then make him lie crosswise between your hands, place his hands on a soft surface; after that, put the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes; and where your thumbs meet, it will bleed, then heat the cautery called "olivare," which is as follows:
And place it on the spot marked with ink, and move your hand up and down while gradually turning it; then lift your hand immediately, if you see a little bone; and if you do not see it, continue to heat the cautery as I have told you until you see the bone; after that, take one pinch of wool and place it in soft cotton within, and put it on the spot, and let it remain for three days; afterwards put a soft cloth soaked in butter on it; and let it remain until the burn is healed; afterwards treat the wound with an ointment called "tetrafarmaçon" until it is healed.
And as the ancients said, when an overwound wound remains longer, it drains more; and therefore, help it to heal faster.
And some said that one should let the fire cautery burn part of the bone and then heal what is burned from the bone and be cured.
And others said that the cautery should be let burn above and push as hard so that a piece of bone is removed as wide as a walnut, which women put in their vaginas because the fluids come out faster; then the wound should be left open for a long time; after that, it should be healed and cured.
And these two methods of cauteries do not seem good to me altogether, except in some men where there is fear; and it seems to me that I should leave them; for the head is weakened by continuous solutions of nature, as we have witnessed in other members; and even when the head of the patient is weak by nature, the first appearance of cautery seems safer and more beneficial to me, and from this use I work towards salvation.
of the ancient pain in the head
When the chronic and long-lasting pain comes in the head, the patient should use wormwood and pills called "cochie", and purgatives of the head, oils, and plasters; and if they perform the cautery as we have said before, it does not help.
Take care if the patient's shoulder is of strong nature and not too cold; then cauterize below it with a small amount as we have said above.
After performing the cautery on each horn of the head up to the bone, as mentioned before, and perform one cauterization known as "vasselz"; it is one place where bellows are put; align your hand so you do not see beyond the bone: the patient feels much greater pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak more about this later; and the cauterizations of the horns should be finer than those used for the midline of the head, and here is the shape:
head cautery When sudden pain occurs in a part of the head and the disease spreads to the eye, and the head is purged with various medicines, and other treatments as I have said in the division of diseases are done but it brings no benefit; then cauteries are applied according to two ways, namely medicine heat and fire.
The cautery of medicine heat is as follows: take a hot iron and remove the bark from it for about two inches, apply one piece to each head, then place the affected area on top of the heated iron in such a way that you can lower the iron onto the skin; when it has been lowered, hold it firmly and leave it for twelve hours; then release it and treat the wound with linen dipped in butter for two or three days.
After the treatment with ointments until it heals; and if you see that this does not work, do as I have written for using medicines which burn or for the tenth treatment of burning medicines.
The cautery of fire is as follows. Heat the cautery according to this shape:
It is called "clos" because the head of it is shaped like a claw or has about one finger's width of curvature and a small appearance; place it on the painful spot, and hold your hand firmly while you heat the iron slightly, until half of the thickness of the tip is burned; remove your hand to avoid burning the arteries, which are outside, and let out an abundance of blood.
Place cotton in oil and apply it for four days; then put dampened cotton in butter, and then treat the spot with ointment until it is healed; and if you want to cauterize this inflammation with a cautery called "cultellare," at its tip, be careful not to cover the artery in this inflammation that is not old.
of migraines
When treating migraines as we have previously mentioned in the division of diseases and it does not improve, and you find that cauteries before mentioned in medicine and iron do not help; then it is necessary that you heat the cautery called "cultellare" until it becomes white; and press gently along the side of the vein for half a finger's length, remove your hand once, hold steady so as not to cover the artery or reach the bone; watch out for the jawbone which mutes when eating, and avoid nerves having sight of the muted part and spasm coming to the patient, also watch out for bleeding from the artery when it is cut, or bleeding greatly fears and especially those who do not know and have not been trained and experienced; leave the procedure in progress; but I will tell you how to stop bleeding when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it should be found in this book.
And if you see that this cautery does not help the disease and the patient is enduring, cauterize it on the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it heals; and if you see, administer the cautery mentioned earlier or in the chapter of the extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has two blades; and this cautery is better than that one and more helpful.
of the pain of the ears due to coldness
When pain in the ear comes from cold and it has been treated with soluble medicines and other remedies as we have said in the division, and the pain does not subside, then heat this cautery called "poins", here is its form:
After touching all around the sick ear, or around both if the pain is in both, and moving slightly away from the root of the ear since you have marked its position; and place 10 hot cauteries around each ear; after healing the wound until it is healthy.
of the torture of the mouth
The torture that should be cured by fire is not suitable for those that move due to flux, as we have said in the division of diseases; and do not make a fire treatment for things that come from scab or nerve spasm.
When you treat this type of torture that moves due to flux from the eyes and purges of the head and gargarismes, it is not worth it, therefore you should cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one in the root of the ear, another slightly further back from the temple, and the third at the corner of the mouth; put the cautery in the part that opens healthy, and make the cautery towards the top of the ear a little below the horn, and another in the temple as long as a thumb; leave the cautery for as long as half of its length is burnt; and this is the shape of the cautery:
And this is the type of cautery we have mentioned earlier, but it is a little more subtle and requires that the knife be slightly thicker; after curing the place as I have previously said, let it be healed when it is clean.
When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, and it does not improve, and the patient has no fever, then do four cauterizations: two on the two corners of the head, one at the base of the head, one where it is called "vessel" as we have said before, and the last one on the mouth of the stomach; and treat them as we have said before.
When paralysis is old and you treat it as we have said, and it does not improve, and the patient has no fever, then do four cauterizations: two on the two corners of the head, one at the base of the head, one where it is called "vessel" as we have said before, and the last one on the mouth of the stomach; and treat them as we have said before.
In this illness, give the patient large yews and round pills with crushed cereal; afterwards, shave the head of the patient completely, and put mustard plaster on the occiput which is written or prepared as a plaster; and this is the way of cauterization: if you do it in this manner as I have said.
If it is healthy in this way, it is good; if not, make four fire cauterizations on the head, descending down to the neck, and leave a space of one finger's width between each cauterization. Treat them as you would others, and if you see any abscess, make one cauterization in the middle; and if necessary, two more on the two horns, and treat until it is healthy. The one that is called "olivare" should be as I said before.
from the frost of the head The head of the patient must be cleaned with years and what has been mentioned before; after that, rub the head of the sick person, then make cauterization on the head and one on each horn, and one at the back and two on the spine of the neck. If you need more, and the body is wet and the patient is suffering, and the disease is spreading, make four cauterizations on the spine of the back; leave it until the most painful part is burned, then withdraw your hand; after that, treat until it is healthy, and let the cautery called "olivare" be as mentioned before.
of epilepsy
Epileptics should not use fire cautery except for those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary first to treat the brain with years (a kind of mineral) and other cures as we have said in the division when the patient is strong and able to bear taking medicine.
And if it is an infant who cannot endure it, make them gargle and chew a treatment to dissolve the brain often with good foods; afterwards, place the head in a mill and do one cautery as we have said before, and one cautery on the navel, and one on each horn; and if the patient is outside (meaning dead) and able to endure it, do cauteries as I have said for the person who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cauteries be olive oil as I have said.
If the patient is suffocated (or drowned), make a fine cautery thus:
When the superfluidities or corrupt moisture (phlegm) flow excessively and are thick, then cauterize with such cauteries as we have said for those who suffer from paralysis.
And if due to melancholy the superfluidities decline towards melancholy and the body of the sick person is moistened, then give him something to drink that purifies the brain, according to what has been said before in the division.
After the king (the patient), make a linen bandage well made, such as a circle, put it on his head; cross the sick person, and hold him tightly from all sides; presently iron the linen, using old cheese rennet; heat the cloth gently so that the sick person can bear it; after emptying the circle inside the head, let it cool; and do this to the patient once a week with good governance, until he is well.
If you wish to perform cautery in multiple places, do this way: This manner of cauterization aggravates the brain considerably; then place cotton soaked in butter and linseed oil on top.
of the eyes When the eyes come first with the signs I mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient something purifying the head, keep it away from all moisture, and make him sweat or bathe more than once while fasting.
After that, instruct the patient to lean back and perform cauterization on his head, and make two cauteries on the temples where the discharge is coming from both eyes or one; and burn all veins and arteries beneath the skull, and let the cautery be long according to the size of the temple. Be careful of bleeding, and if you see too much blood coming out, stop it with your power as you have.
And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and the incision of the cautery how to perform it; and sometimes they make cautery or hot iron beneath the two bones at the back.
The heart of the tears
When the eyes are old and accustomed and they are above the veins, or in the hollow of the arteries that appear outside the head; and it is clear that it is due to superfluous cold phlegmatic fluids, then do the cautery as I have said at the beginning of this work: one cautery on the forehead, two cauteries on the temples, and two cauteries or hot iron beneath the two bones; and if it is necessary, cauterize skillfully above the brow with a small cautery.
The heart weeps within the eyes
When you treat the patient according to what we have said in the division, and it does not help at all, then give a sick person three hot poultices; after these, roast the head, and make a cautery or olive oil cautery, and make two cauteries called "clavilis" above the shoulders, a little below the hairline; and beware of the artery that you do not cover it. And this is the form of the cautery called "clavilis":
When the paper of the oil is softened by disease and moisture, then use the cautionary called "olivare". Here is its form:
And if you wish to perform two cauteries on the two sorcerers as long as they are like sorcerers; and do not leave your hand except when the third part of the paper is burned, according to the way that I have said.
the hair which pricks the oil Sometimes the hairs of the oils are converted into a thorn and prick oil; and in such cases cautery is performed according to two methods: namely by fire or by hot medicine.
The patient should be instructed to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they have grown and are even, then put the patient on a clean surface; after that, draw a figure of the hairs like the leaves of myrtle, with the beginning of the sign cut away from the hairs; then place cotton soaked in egg white and musk oil on top of the oil, then heat the iron cautery in this shape:
After cauterizing the figure that you have drawn many times so that the hair is burned in that place; and the signs of health for the work are that you see the paper recede, and the hairs rise to the tip of the oil; then leave your hand, and let it rest for 3 days, then soak the cotton in butter until the burn is removed; afterwards heal with ointment until it is healed.
And after that, hairs may come up, and the paper is softened then begin the cautery on the same place again, as you did before; and if the hairs are curled, cauterize them until the paper is raised to its natural level, and they are straight, and do not prick the hairs with oil.
The cautery of burning medicine is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make parchment in the shape of the myrtle leaf; then take French soap and hot water, each one .З., grind them together well; and do it quickly, so as not to cool, then spread the mixture over the shape you have made like the leaf of myrtle, and put the hairs on top of the parchment; and if the patient can only withstand one drop of oil, you should work with one, and if in both cases; and place cotton dipped in egg white beneath the oil; and the head of the patient should be healthy and your hand mostraring over the medicine, and press one finger and move it all the time when the patient feels a bite from the medicine, for it bites like fire. When you have done this for a while, remove the medicine from your hand. And when the swelling has passed, lift up the affected area, and observe if the bone is raised as it was lifted by the application of heat or incision; and if this is the case, it is good. If not, apply more medicine to the area where no medicine has worked, until your treatments are even and your eyes sharpened; then place a soft cotton wool soaked in butter on top until the burning subsides, afterwards apply the ointment called "dyafenis" and another one until it is healed.
If you need to be careful with your treatments because the medicine is causing irritation in the eyes. And if the bone becomes soft after, and the hairs prick in the oil, start applying the medicine again on that affected area which has been properly cleaned, as you did before; afterwards heal until it is healed; this is the shape of a mirte leaf:
And know that the hairs of men are different in size and according to this, your treatments should be adapted; and do not deviate from the correct path for those who study this art.
On the treatment of fistula by cautery
When treating a fistula as mentioned in the classification of diseases, and your treatments do not help at all, then you must cauterize it according to this method.
Instruct the patient to put his head on a clean surface, and have the assistant hold his head between their hands so that it does not move or tilt to one side; then place a moist cotton ball in egg oil or fresh linen on the cautery site; then heat the cautery until it is hot but not red-hot, shaped like the tip of a feather, pointed at the end, and as long as necessary for your work; however, the shape does not matter too much, what matters is that it is pointed. If you wish, it can be straight from one end to the other or in the shape of a tent; but whatever the shape, the tip is most important for your task.
After pressing the fistula if it is open and draining pus, drain it, and dry it; if it is closed, open it, and drain foreign matter; then place the heated cautery on top of it carefully, making sure your hand does not slip; place the cautery in the fat of the oil and let it corrode.
If you start with the cautery up to the bone, it would be best. If not, begin the cautery again once, and another time if necessary, and let it rest for 3 days; afterwards put soft cotton in butter on it, and let the ointment drying ointment dry until it is healed, and if 40 days pass and it is not healed, put on a corrosive medicine while the bone is exposed; and the king according to what comes in his chapter.
And there is a way of cauterizing a fistula that none of the ancients mention. Understand it as a fistula, and make an incision on its side; afterwards put in the opening one subtle cannula of which this form is made: and they make it in the amount of one cubit; hold your hand or cannula firmly, and do not let the patient move, so that the melted lead does not spill onto his eye; and you must put oil on the patient's cotton soaked in egg white or vinegar: the lead will heal the fistula, and the wound will be cured by marvelous healing.
And if the fistula is healed by the cautery as we have said, it's good. If not, you should administer warm poultices and bring the fistula back to the body heat, according to what is appropriate in its own place.
cavities in lips Many times there appear cavities in lips called "hairs", and the same happens in children's lips.
When you treat these cavities as we have said in the divisions, and the treatment does not help, then scald a small, sharp-edged cautery according to this form:
And put it quickly into those hollows until it reaches the bottom; afterwards, treat the area with turpentine until it is healed.
For the abscess of the throat
When an abscess comes at the root of the throat or in the eye, or in the palate, or in the roots of the teeth, after it becomes pustular and grows and turns into a fistula; and you treat it as we have said in divisions, but it does not improve: then you must have .i. cautery according to the size of the fistula; after opening or draining the fistula, and hold your hand until the iron is hot at its base and where it ends; and do this once or twice, after curing as we have said in treatments, until it is healed; and if it is healed, that's good; and if not, you must discover the place and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
The movement of teeth
When the gums are moistened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat them with medicine but it is of no use, then put the head of the patient in your lap; afterwards, heat up the cautery as will be described below, put a cane on the tooth; and insert the heated cautery deeply into the tooth, hold your hand so that the patient feels the heat approaching the root of the tooth; afterwards, remove your hand and repeat the cautery according to your desire; afterwards, fill the mouth of the patient with salt water and tie it up for an hour and rinse vigorously.
And in such a manner, the moving teeth are confirmed, and the gums softened are held back, and the moistures are dried up.
Of the pain in the teeth
When pain in the teeth comes from cold or wetness, and there is coldness or fever, and medicines do not work, then it will be necessary to use a cautery according to two methods: a cautery of butter and a cautery of fire.
A cautery of butter is as follows: you take butter from a cow, and the tip in an iron or horn spoon; then take cotton and wrap it around the point of a tent (a small sheet), and moisten it in boiled butter, and put it quickly on the painful tooth and hold it until it becomes cooled; and do so often until its virtue reaches the root of the tooth, and if you see the cotton and wool becoming cold in cold butter, put it back on the tooth and put hot iron near the root of the tooth.
The cautery together with fire is as follows: you take an iron or horn cane, and it should be thick so that the heat does not reach the patient's mouth; after heating the cautery, its shape will come afterwards, and put it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery becomes cooled; do this often, for the pain will be removed the same day or the next. And it is necessary that the patient fills his mouth with good butter in the urgency of this cautery, and then blow away the smoke; and this is the shape of the cautery:
When scrofula is of fever and cold humors that do not respond to medicine, then heat the cautery with the hair as described below, and make two openings for the smoke to escape from the other side; and place the heated cautery on the abscess once, or twice if necessary, until it reaches the base of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, apply the cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it for three days; then cover it with soft cotton soaked in butter until the sore is healed; afterwards cure the area with ointments and salves until it is healed.
When the moisture conquers over the channels of the throat, especially when it comes from cold complexion, then the patient should be purged first with soluble medicines; after that, perform cautery at the root of the throat, and be careful not to go near the throat, but only a little. After that, perform .i. another cautery at the jointure of the neck to the head of the spine, and let the cauteries which is called "clavile" have the form as we have said before; and heal the place as we have said before until it becomes healthy.
When the moisture conquers over the channels of the throat, especially when it comes from cold complexion, then the patient should be purged first with soluble medicines. After that, perform cautery at the base of the tongue, but be careful not to go too close to the throat, only a little. Then, perform one other cautery at the jointure of the neck and the head of the spine, using the shape as we have described before. And heal the place as we have said before until it becomes healthy. When the illness of throat is due to cold moisture, and the patient does not have fever or heat, and the illness is old, then two cauteries should be performed on the forceps in visible places; and one other cautery between the breasts; and let the cauteries which is called "clavile" have the form as we have said before.
And if you see, perform fire cautery by pricking with all the cautery known as "poins" of which the shape is described earlier in the ear disease; and let the points be no larger than 30 or around that size. After curing the area as mentioned before, let the cauteries be three fingers' width according to this form:
And because the cauteries are lighter, since you make four together.
of the shoulder dislocation When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. After holding the patient on his back and on his side; after heating the iron that is inside the hollow of your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated within, then apply the heated cautery in the shape described by these two nerves (nerve roots) here:
and cauterize the iron up to the ribs, and bring forth four figures with the cautery made of three nerve roots; because the figure of cauterization consists of several cauteries; and these nerves are according to the subtlety of a tendon, and this is the shape of the cautery that has three nerve roots:
And sometimes it is dislocated above this nerve, for which there are eight cauteries.
After applying the cautery, crush it with oil; afterwards make the patient rest and do not move the limbs for long periods until they are well comforted.
If it is dislocated above, which happens rarely, then make a cautery on the thick part of the cautery clavicle, or many cauteries in pricking. For the joints are closed, and the moisture is removed and the patient is healed.
the cautery for pleurisy
The ancient ones said one should make incisions with cauterizations of the root of Acorus calamus (Aristologe), and in this manner: take a long root of Aristologe, as large and as long as your thumb; moisten it in oil, immerse it in fire, and cauterize one cautery between the armpit and neck, and two small cauteries a little below where the beard is; two cauteries between the fifth rib and the sixth, leaning back slightly; one cautery on the side of the pain, and one more on the stomach, and one between the shoulders, and two on the sides of the pain away from the cautery which is between the shoulders; and do not press your hand, but rather make an opening as when smelling.
And an ancient said that one uses a cautery resembling a razor and heats it up between the ribs until it comes to the abscess; but if pain arises, as we have said in the liver abscess, there is fear or the patient dies now, or a fistula comes which cannot be healed.
of the mouse
When you treat the sickness of the mice that we have spoken about in the divisions of cures and it does not help, then apply three ways of cautery that are all good.
One of the ways is that you make four cauteries, or six, in lining according to the length of the mouse, according to the figure of the liver's cautery as we have said before; and do not press your hand on the whole cautery, and let the patient be conscious on his back;
And another way of cautery is that you heat the cautery with two nerves, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift the curl that is near the mouse, where the pain comes from toward the left, and let the elevations that you raise the curl according to the length of the body, and the cautery should be according to the width of the body.
After heating the two nerves until they are pierced on the other side, pull out the cautery and thus there will be four [piercings]. And if you see, cauterize all the cauteries at three [piercings]. After healing when it has discharged pus for a long time, this is worth knowing that the other treatments mentioned before should be done first.
After applying the cautery to the nerves, wait until they are inflamed and then pierce them through on the opposite side. Once pierced, pull out the cautery and there will be four holes in total. If you see, cauterize all the cauteries at three holes. After healing when it has discharged pus for a long time, this is worth knowing that the other treatments mentioned earlier should be done first.
Cautere does not help a hydropic patient, except in the manner called "asclytes". When you treat it according to the methods we have said in divisions, and your treatment does not improve, then you must make four cauteries around the belly, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the spleen, two behind the back near the spine, and one near the bladder; and let the cauteries be close to the thick part of the nerves.
After leaving the cautery open to expel pus for a long time, do not neglect the care of the patient after the cautery; and healing will be hastened, and the two intentions (healing and relief of pain) will come together with God's help.
The form of the cautery for the belly is like the claw that we have shown before; and the one for the back should be olive-shaped, as it was explained earlier.
of the swelling of feet When the feet are swollen in those who are edematous, and filled with a watery citrus-like substance, you must cauterize on the back of the foot between the thumb and little finger; and hold your hand with the cautery without turning. And do not enter too deeply, lest the watery citrus-like substance be driven forcefully, and let the cautery be shaped as follows:
After doing two cauteries on each leg with the tip of the knife; and let the cauteries be long, one below the knee in front and the other outside, in the leg; and leave the cauteries above for a while to heal, until the water heals; then treat the other wounds as we have said.
of the swelling
When the swelling of the belly comes from cold and moisture, and the digestive and retentive qualities that are in the stomach and intestines are hindered, and cannot be cured by means of treatments; and you see the patient suffering greatly and of strong constitution, then make one large cautery on the stomach according to what was spoken before about the stomach cautery, and the circular cautery; and four subtle cauteries around the belly, one subtle cautery clavicle, and two cauteries on the flanks.
And if you see abundant moisture and the patient suffering, make a cautery on the elbow, and one on each joint, and two small cauteries on the stomach near the large one, for the treatment is beneficial where there is good help.
of the treatment of hemorrhoids
When hemorrhoids are deep-seated, single or multiple, and are old, filled with large cold and moist corrupted humors, and have been treated as we said in the divisions, it does not help, if you make cauteries: 3 on the spine of the back, which is completely turned outwards below the sacrum, triangularly, and 1 under the buttock. 2 times;
If you suspect that his stomach is cooled and the meat does not cook, and the face swells, then make a large cautery on the stomach as mentioned before, and one more on the liver, and another on the spleen with all the cautery nail; and leave the cautery open for a long time. After treating the place until it is healthy.
of the carnositis called "thelul"
When you apply the cautery to althelul (possibly an herb), heat the cautery which seems like a razor, and then place it all around the althelul, covering it; leave your hand there so that the cautery reaches the opening of the vein, causing it to close; do this once or twice, and if there is much althelul, cauterize each one as we have said; after that, heal with ointments until they are healthy; and if you cauterize a large cautery on alchatim (possibly a lesion), it will have more aid.
of an improperly healed wound
If the patient cannot bear any incision or opening, as we will explain in its place, this disease comes that can only be cured by cautery.
1. Quant a any coming fistula, and it is swollen and filled with pus and corrupt matter, you must probe its entire extent subtly, and be sure to know the entire extent of it completely.
This text appears to be discussing a medical treatment for a kidney-related issue based on the context of "la vesie" (bladder) mentioned earlier in the text. The translation provided above translates the given sentence as follows: When pain in the kidneys comes with large swelling and does not improve in women, then you must perform cautery on both sides of the kidneys using the clavicle-shaped cautery as mentioned before; and if we cauterize it in the middle, there will be four cauteries in a line, and it will provide more help.
of the bladder When the bladder is weak and soft due to coldness or moisture, causing the patient to retain urine, then you make a fire cautery on the part outside the bladder, where the hair of the penis begins, one on the right side and one on the left side, and each cauterization should be as long as the knuckle; and make one cauterization behind the back, or two if necessary; and the cauterizations should be pointed in shape according to the aforementioned form.
of the marriage (or wife) When the matrix (uterus) is cold and moist and does not allow conception, and the flowers (ovum) are corrupted and their term delayed; and when they come, there is great pain: then it is necessary to perform four cauteries around the womb, as described in the cautery of the bladder, and two cauteries behind the back; and let the cauterization be with a needle, as described.
When the loins (lower back) are swollen and painful: then it is necessary to make four incisions, one above the other, on both sides of the lower back, from the waist to the buttocks; and the wound must be washed with warm water and vinegar.
When the swollen loins (lower back) descend to the abdomen and move out of their place due to this, and the signs are that one thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and it is found in the region of the hernia, then you must cauterize the patient on the lower back at one cautery, similar to a circle, and mark the location around the hernia so that the hernia is within the circle; and let the cauterization be like the one used for the stomach.
And if this fire cautery is not present for you, make four large olive oil cauterizations instead, and let them be as deep as all the others; heal it until it heals.
of the pain in the hernia When pain comes in the hernia of the groin, and it is due to coldness and moisture; the patient is cured by what we have said in the division, but the cure is not effective, and the disease is old: therefore, you must purge the patient with pills made from foul herbs or other good-seeming pills.
After performing the fire cautery; and the method of the cautery is according to two ways: namely with burning substances, and the cautery of fire. The cautery of fire is according to many ways, of which one is as follows: you cauterize on top of the bone of the thigh four triangular cauteries according to this form, and make a good depth and large incision, and have space between each cautery the size of a die, and make the cauteries oval; sometimes a cautery is made in the middle on top of the thigh bone, for which there are four according to this form:
And if you wish, cauterize with the circular cautery that we have mentioned before in the dislocation of the thigh; but make it so that the circles enclose the entire thigh, and all the fat surrounding it is burned.
And this is the method for sciatica when the pain remains in the thigh and does not reach down to the calf nor the leg. If it reaches the calf and the leg, two cauteries are made where the patient says that the pain is located, and one cautery above the ankle 4 fingers wide, on the left side a little; and let the cautery be a surgical cautery, and burn all the fat surrounding it; and if the patient feels that the pain extends down to the toes or close to the heel, cauterize there where they feel the pain at 2 inches or 4 in the cautery called "poins".
And if necessary, do more; and if the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, make a fire cautery with a cutlery or circular cautery, but take good care in all your cauteries that you do not let the cautery burn the nerves and large arteries, and that you do not cause the patient any greater harm or contraction.
And I have seen many who made a cautery on the foot at the ankle, and they let it be too long, so that the leg was swollen entirely, and also the feet, and all the toes were pierced and corrupted. After a stomach solution from which he died.
And if the pain is in two places together, make a cautery in one and in the other, as follows. // The wise ones will say in the cautery of the spine, this is the method, make one iron rod that is as thick as a nail of the thumb or a little less, and it should be between the vertebrae or one between the vertebrae up to the space the size of a nut of walnut, and the spaces between the vertebrae should be two fingers wide, and they should be like nuts, and it should have one handle of iron well made; and this is its form:
And let it be scalded until it is all red and blisters, and then place it on top of the sick person's haunch bone, turning it towards the healthy side; and cauterize once with one hot iron, leave it for three days; then make a plaster of butter, keep the wound open for a long time; afterwards cure it with ointment until it is healed.
Albucasim says that we should use this cautery sparingly due to the fear of its gaze, and few do so; yet it is a good cautery, which can withstand it, and in places where it adheres.
of the pain in the back
When pain comes to the back, either from falling or striking or excessive bleeding, or from similar causes of cold matter spreading, none of these similar symptoms are worth cauterization, except for that which comes from the infusion of cold matter.
Then, after the patient has been bled of foul pills or similar substances, three lines should be signed on the back where the pain is located, and in each line 5 or more cauterizations according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can endure; and the cauterization should be made according to the cauterization known as "poins"; and if you see, make 4 cauterizations or 3 according to the medium-sized cauterization in this form:
This disease often comes to young children, and the signs of its onset are that they have a narrow anus when they defecate, and fear; you will find it in the last spine of the back and in the appearance that comes above the other spines.
When you see this and wish to heal it, cauterize it with the fire cautery according to this form.
The porcupine quill cautery should be applied to each part of the spine, increasing it as required. And if you see, apply the fire cautery around the spine, pointing .2 or .3 inches, and let the tips be close together. After healing the place until it is healthy according to what we have said, ensure that you do not administer a cautery that is diseased with nerve spasm.
of joint pain
When the pain in the joints is due to moisture that affects every member of the body, and when pain comes in the feet, which are called "podagre" properly, and when it is caused by cold and medicines cannot cure it, it is cured by cautery as follows: make the patient sit down near the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to this form:
And if it is necessary to prick on the face of the foot, you should cauterize with a point. And if pains come up to the knees and other joints, which happens many times, you should cauterize above each knee 4 or 4 from each side, all olive-shaped; and if more is needed, do more, but hold your hand not too far away so that the tip of the coal is burnt.
And if the pains descend to the knees and back, you should administer the cautery as we have said in its chapter. And if the pains are in the hands, you should prick around the wrist 2 lines; and if there remains no pain in the fingers, you should prick on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come up to the elbows or shoulders, you should cauterize each part, and take good care of the patient and think about medicines. For if you take good care of him and purge phlegm, he will be healed with God's help.
Of the rupture of the siphon
When the rupture happens in the bladder, and the bowels descend into the cavity and this is new, if you wish to treat it, then it must not eat that day; and let him use things which relax the stomach, so that the feces descend from his stomach; afterwards make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his anus as long as the bowels are repaired, and reinsert them with your fingers, and sign over the rupture on the bone of the thumb, and at all a sign that is similar to half a circle above the body; then heat the cautery in the form given here:
Keep them white and have him pass stools. Then reinsert the bowels to their place; and let the assistants hold his hand so they do not return; and work well the thighs on the patient, and put one cushion and one sergeant on the thighs, and another on the leg which holds the hands; then place the cautery on the sign with your whole hand, and hold it straight and hold it until you reach the bone, and if you do not touch it the first time, try again until you reach the bone; and be careful that the bowels do not slip while you perform the cautery; that you do not burn them; and that by this the patient does not die or suffer other harm.
And know that if you do not reach the bone in the cautery, your work is of no value. The cauteries for children should be fine-tuned according to their size, and those for grown men should also correspond to their size; after 3 days, cure the wound from the cautery with butter until the blister is removed; afterwards, use other ointments until it heals, and let the patient lie on his back for 40 days so that the wound heals well; and it is necessary that his bandages be left long, so that the boils do not protrude when he gets up to go to the chambers.
And after 40 days, when he wishes to rise, give him a bandage made well and let it be for another 40 days; have him rest, so that he does not work too much or overeat and drink excessively, or talk too loudly; and if he follows these instructions, he will be completely healed. And I shall say more about the cure of amputation in its chapter afterwards. of abdominal rupture
When round objects appear in other wombs and are recognized as not growing anymore, then make .j. fire cautery according to its quantity, and burn the third of the navel; afterwards, cure it according to what has been said; and no old saying says that it should be cauterized at 4 angles according to this form:
Firstly, mark the place where it is to be done and make a line above the round object, and another below, and hold your hand all around the fire cautery. But the first cauteries are lighter and more easily moved.
of ancient pain in any member When pain comes in any member, either due to falling or injury, and this pain lasts for a long time, and the medicine cures do not work; then it should be cauterized with the cautery called "poins", and the cauteries should be according to the length of the limb and its smallness and weakness and its virtue and its location of twisting and of its pain. If the patient is healed by the first cautery, that's good; if not, repeat another cautery on top of it, because it is customary that the member should change with the cauteries; therefore, you should perform the cauteries as many times as the patient is healed.
In mixing
The medicines are sometimes helped by cauterization with great assistance, and the same applies to diseases that come from putrefaction of fleume (fever) and melancholy. If you see the patient being cauterized at the beginning, take care and ensure that it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and do not doubt that the corruption will affect the entire patient; then you should apply five cauteries on the head: one on the forehead towards the end of the hair, two on both horns, and one behind the neck; and leave your hand enough so that the cautery reaches the bone, and enough that the bark comes out from it, allowing the vapors of gross humors to escape; then cauterize the wound according to what is before.
And if the mixture is scattered everywhere; it clearly perishes, you should cauterize with the cauteries that we have mentioned earlier, namely one cautery on the neck, two cauteries on the spine of the neck, six cauteries on the spine of the back, one large one on the hip and one smaller one, two on the shoulders, two on the hips, two on the shins, one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; beware of the nerves that are above the last rib, do not burn them; sometimes a person cauterizes a bone in the fist, and one in the stomach bone, and another in the liver.
Know that the more you do cauterizing, the more help it provides, and it benefits him; know that the sick person does not feel pain from the cauterization as much as the healthy one does, because the body is already completely corrupted. It is necessary that the cauteries be large and small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in the ways of the irons. After curing the wound with flour several times with honey and other treatments until it heals.
inflammation
When a swelling arises in any member and is treated with medicine, oils, and plasters, but it is not healed, then the cautery is applied on the limb according to its size and smallness; and the cautery may be shallow or deep into the flesh; then cure it with poultices until it is healed. And sometimes a cautery is made and in the hand, foot, back, at the nerve's exit that makes the limb immobile, thus removing the swelling; however, no one should interfere unless they are knowledgeable about members and the nerves moving the body.
When a tumor appears on any member and it is treated with medicine, oils, and plasters, but it does not heal, then the cautery is made on the limb according to its size; and the cautery may be superficial or deep into the flesh; then cure it with poultices until it heals. And sometimes a cautery is performed in the hand, foot, back, at the nerve's exit that makes the limb immobile, thus removing the tumor; however, no one should interfere unless they are knowledgeable about members and the nerves moving the body.
When the disease known as "albaras" grows, and the medicine does not work on it, then cauterize with a deep cautery until the blister disappears and its color changes; then treat with flour and lentils mixed with rose oil and banana leaves, along with cow blood and almond blood, each in equal parts; mix everything together and bind with cloth, and apply to the affected area until it heals.
The cure of scrofula by cautery
When scrofula appears at the beginning and you want to stop it, if you cauterize it with a cautery that looks like a small circle all around the scrofula. And yet the wise ones say that one should cauterize in the middle of the scrofula; and yet this does not seem good to me, because I fear that it becomes ulcerated and corrupted, and I have seen it happen once; and a more correct thing is for it to be cauterized around, with the cautery called "circule", as we have said in our discussion of cauteries.
the swelling that cannot grow or spread
When someone has a disease called "adubelati", which delays healing or because of its excessive growth or due to the age of the patient when they are decrepit (meaning very old) and have little blood, or because of time; and you see it hastening to heal: then cauterize around it with many small cauteries while pricking; afterwards leave it. For it will hasten to heal.
And if you see it pierced completely by the cautery, then heat the cautery according to this form:
And place your hand in the middle of that disease called "adubelati" until the cautery has pierced the core, and make the cautery so that the patient feels it move out from their body in this way so that the course of the ulcer is evened out. Afterwards cure it until it is perfectly healed.
The cure for fire with iron
Another type of disease is called "corrodens", which is nothing but a corrosion of a limb, because it eats away at the limbs just as fire dries out wood. If you see this disease in a place where cauterization with fire can be used, then heat the cauterizers, both large and small, according to what is appropriate for the location or the sickness; after cauterizing all around until all the corruption is reached and nothing remains of it, remove everything that is corrupted. And then leave it for three days, and apply soft cauterized powder with oil until the burns from the fire are healed, and all the corruption. After the cure by burning ointments generates healthy tissue. If after three days you see that healthy tissue does not grow, that is good; if not, start cauterizing again on the parts that remain of the corrupted limb. This corrosion was sometimes cured with hot medicines instead of fire cauterization, but nonetheless fire cauterization is of greater help. I have already explained the cure for the disease caused by hot medicines in another section; take as much of it as you need.
the worms that come to the feet
Often times, a disease called "clos" arises in the feet according to our intention, which is a large swelling that hurts the foot. And the cauterization of this disease is according to two manners. This is to say, cauterization by fire, and cauterization by hot water. Cauterization by fire is that you heat one cautery, as a quill of a goose feather, and it should be made of good iron to the extent that it can pierce the nail on all sides, and that it has fine margins; afterwards, place it entirely hot on the nail, and turn your hand completely around the nail until it comes to the point of the nail; and leave it in this manner for four days until it begins to emit pus; then make a plaster of malicious herbs ground with oil, and leave the plaster on all night, and the nails will shrink and be uprooted from their roots. Then heal the place with soothing ointment until it is healed.
And if it is converted on the outside of the body, and this happens often in hands and feet, then you should bring a hot water cauterization; and this is done in this manner: take a goat hair string or iron, or a quill of a goose feather, and place it on the nail and hold it, that is to say, to burn the warts; and place the string so that it encompasses entirely, then put a small amount of hot water in it, and hold your hand well, and press your hand while turning so that the margin of the string comes to the root of the nail, and can find the hot water deep through to the root; and allow the patient a little bite of the hot water for an hour; then leave it as is, and it will uproot all its roots. Do this again, until you burn all those on the body, then heal them with ointments that soften the skin.
the one who cures trembling
When someone trembles due to cold or fever of quartain, or from another [cause], it is necessary that you apply 4 or 5 cauteries along the spine of the back, 1 between each spine; and 1 cautery on the shank, and 1 on the stomach with an olive-leaf cautery; this will make him stop trembling, and hasten his recovery from the cold disease.
of rotten boils
Sometimes the body emits boils that are full of corrupt matter, if they appear at the beginning it is necessary to apply a cautery on each head of the pustule: a subtle cautery made from mirte stick or a long aristologue root, or an cautery lenticulaire. And sometimes they cauterize at the beginning when they appear, according to this method, and they cannot grow beyond that, but the superfluous matter is decomposed from which they come, and they are healed; however it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
When the artery is cut Often there are great outflows of blood from the cut artery at the wound that comes to the outside, or in the incision of an abscess, or in the cautery of a limb, and similar things; and it is a very bad thing to let it flow.
And even if it happens to anyone, hasten to place your index finger on the wound of the vein and hold it very tight so that the blood is stopped under your finger, and no more juice flows out; then take olive oil cauteries, both small and large ones until they are all red; then take .i., either large or small depending on the size of the wound and where the artery is running, and place the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, and hold the cautery in place until the blood is stopped.
And if a leap happens when you place your thumb over the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, take immediately one other cautery that are by fire.
And do not stop doing one after the other until the vein is completely drained; and watch that you do not burn the nerve that is exposed, and that no other harm comes to the patient; and know that when the vein dries up from the artery, it cannot be well stopped if the artery is large, except by one of the four ways that we have said: either by cautery, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by strongly tied string, or by medicines placed on it that have the power to stop blood; and let it be tied and constricted accordingly.
Whoever brings a tightening of the ligature with cloth or puts something hot on it, or similar things, will not benefit if there is no profit.
And if this happens to anyone who has no mirror or medicine present, you should place your finger on the wound of the vein as we have said and stretch it out until it is tightened over the wound and the vein; and do not move it, but the cold moist should often be applied to make it very cold so that the blood congeals and thickens and remains; and make inquiries ahead about the person who needs cauteries and medicines.
In the first chapter we have told you about all diseases in which fire cautery or burning medicine is needed, and we have explained their uses, causes, instruments, forms of cauteries; and I have put that chapter up to the thighs and will proceed in this chapter by the same path for those things that are easier to understand.
And thus as I begin this, it is necessary, dear child, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of the cauterizations, and for this reason greater caution is required.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
I advise you not to be foolish. For there are many ways that people come in for treatment. Some of them arrive with such illness that they die quickly due to the craziness that comes from their disease, and from the great severity of its malice; and of these one should be afraid. And of these [people], he gives you his advice, and says: "Wait, I am cured"; and the sick person is stubborn. It is not appropriate that you agree with those who come to you who have this manner, but put more great consideration in your honor than in your desire, and do not open easily but wisely of those about which you are certain, and from which you can take and lose; and use prognostication and indication in the cures of your sick, so that health is converted; and this will help you to acquire good reputation, glory, and memory of praise.
Dear child, Our Lords grant you good understanding and righteousness, and if you wish to inspire with the holy inspiration of his hand, come.
Furthermore, I have divided this chapter into sections by chapters, according to what is before or in the chapter of cauteries, which I have described for you from head to feet, because you will find it easier to understand those matters which you will need.
The head full of water
This disease often comes to children during childbirth and when the head of the child is forced too hard; sometimes it happens because of reasons we do not know.
And I have never seen this disease in anyone other than children, and all those I have seen hurried towards death; therefore, it seems to me that I should waste less effort on such treatments.
And I saw a child whose head was full of water, and it grew larger every day until it could no longer support itself; and the moisture collected under the skull between the skin and the bone; and the treatments are such that if the moisture is between the skin and the bone, and the abscesses are small, you should make a large incision in the head; and it should be as long as two fingers, so that the moisture runs out; and here is the shape of the spatula:
If the moisture is more swollen, and the abscess is larger, make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
And if the moisture is under the bone, and you observe the edges where the abscess is located at each part, and when you press it with your hand inside, and it does not respond: then you must make four incisions in the middle of the abscess, according to this manner:
And after the incision, remove all the moisture completely. After that, hold down the incisions with linen and powders, and put vinegar and oil on it, and leave it like that for five days; then open it, and treat the wound with bandages and ointments, and keep the head stretched out gradually, and give the patient dry meat from a sheep's throat as much as necessary until the member is comforted and healed.
And another method of incision is that you look where the abscess is largest, and gather the pus; for sometimes it is in front, sometimes behind, sometimes on the right, and sometimes on the left.
Therefore, incise where the abscess is open, and drain the pus, and do as you can; but avoid covering the artery; and let blood flow, so that the patient dies a natural death from loss of blood and evacuation of moisture.
of scrofula
When a certain disease called "cataract" affects the eyes or becomes worse, and medicine treatment is of no help, then the last resort is the cautery by cutting into the 2 arteries.
Then, when you see them, have the patient bend his head backwards; afterwards wipe the skin of a rough cloth on the area where the arteries appear, then hold the patient's neck with one rough cloth; look for the artery openings, which are behind each ear, and place the pointed spatula (spatumile) on them; sign the edges, then cut one and the other with the sharp spatula as deep as to the bone, but not too close to the head.
And if you see it (the artery), push the spatula underneath the artery and cut through it (the artery).
And when a vein is cut, it jumps out continuously towards the top.
And if the artery does not open on its own, then it is necessary to measure a distance of three fingers, then press and cut up to the bone; and it requires seven cubits (cubitus) or perhaps a little more or less according to what the patient can bear, and the filling of the artery; then observe the wound: if it remains above the bone without spitting out pus, then the cauterization performed does not reach it. Then hold the wound closed and bind it with ointment until it is healed.
of emigration
When an old migraine comes with a sharp catarrh, due to moisture from tears and heat in the temples and a feeble and aged headache, and it is treated by means of medicine cures but does not improve; then we should open the arteries of the temples and cauterize them as we have said.
And the method of extraction is that the patient leans backwards over his temples, and listens to the artery that opens in the temple, because it opens well by beating, and is not easily retracted except in some cold-natured people; and if it has been retracted, the patient should tighten his neck with some cloths, then rub the area with a rough cloth, and moisten the area with hot water until the artery appears clearly; then take the spatula of the following shape:
then cut the skin lightly until you reach the artery, then pull it up towards the tweezers and separate the cloths that are underneath each part; and if the artery is small, turn it to the point of the tweezers, then press that part according to the size of the two cheeks. For if it is not pressed, it will not open at all.
And draw out the blood from the 5th finger joint, up to the 3rd joint; and if the arteries are large, you must tie it with a thick double silk thread so that pus does not come before the wound is closed, and there is bleeding; then cut off the excess between the 2 tendons at that hour itself, and if you see, cauterize the cauterizer scalpel up to the bone as much as the joints are cut; and this is the mutilation work, if the patient does not have fever and he is of a hot constitution.
For the cauteries is aid for finishing the sores: because it is of greater help to sores. For the extraction of arteries, one must fill the place with old cotton and put on tight bandages; and when you loosen them, cure it with dry medicines that make pus, and bandages, until it is healed; and if there is no incision of the artery as much as you work, hurry to cover it with cauterization, or use vitriol and strain it with your hand so that the wound does not become infected; and if you do not have this present, put your finger on the place until it freezes, and scrape the place with cold water until it stops, and strained as necessary; and the mutilated and easier in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein of this sharp cautery with two parts, but they should be well thickened to keep longer its heat. When the instrument (strumens) is too thin, it retains less heat. And should have between the two blades, one thick of space, and when you have marked with incision on both sides, and you place the heated iron for as long as it comes to the bone, and cut the vein in two leagues; and they should be kept apart because they are not welded from this cautery throughout; and this is the form of the cautery:
tears
When the tears from the eyes flow out of the veins that are on top of the face near the head, and no medicine helps in treating it, you see the patient's face turning pale with shivering, as if with fever; and when they are tender and moist so that the eyelashes fall off, the eyelids are scalded by the tears, then this kind of treatment is needed.
And they called it the "contused cure" in ancient times, which means you make incisions on both sides of the patient's forehead equally according to the length of the forehead, and one of the incisions should be as deep as two fingers downward along the forehead, and the others should be .iij. inches apart above the eyelids, and be careful not to cut the arteries that are on both sides above the eyelids; also keep your hand away from the continuation of both jaws, and each wound should be the size of three fingers joined together;
From the incision which is across the temple up to the second incision; and scrape all the fat that is between the two cuts right to the bone, then do another thing from the mid-incision up to the other second one, and then pull out this spathule.
Insert the instrument called "cultellaire" into the first incision. It is very sharp on one side and soft but not sharp on the other, and it has this shape: And place the cutting side towards the fat, and the soft side towards the bone, and push it until it reaches the mid-incision. Cut all the vessels that run from the eye to the hair as long as the incision is continuous until it opens the fat, and then do another thing in the mid-incision up to the other end; and then equalize the blood and express the fat for the blood taken; then put a piece of old cotton cloth in each incision, and put damp linen cloths soaked in vinegar, oil, and asafetida on top, and ensure that no pus comes out; on the third day remove the stitches, and apply a large plaster of strong ointment of basilicon with rose oil, and other treatments for wounds until it is healed.
The root of the hairs
Whenever a sharp catarrh commonly comes, you see the thin and small hairs, dimming the vision, and burned paper; and the hair follicles itch, and where the head is painful with severe pain, and the patient coughs; then know from these symptoms that those substances and the catarrh do not come from anywhere other than many veins, and the cure for this is to open them.
And you should command the patient to recline his head, then make a large incision at the back of the head, and another one wide. [i.e., two incisions]. Start from the incision of the left temple to the right temple, and let the incision reach the bone; keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move while eating; when the bone is exposed, suck out all the blood with a sponge, then squeeze between the two lips of the incision and put old cotton in it, and bind it with linen thread; then cover it with wet cloths soaked in wine and oil, and be careful not to cause an abscess to form; when the bone is removed, you must rub the bone until char flesh begins to grow, then treat it with things that promote growth of flesh.
In this manner: take 2 parts of wheat flour and 4 parts of colophony, and make a poultice with it; administer it in these wounds to alleviate pain everywhere.
of the stoppage of the ears
All that falls into the ears is one of the four things: grains, animals, stones or similar such as iron; seeds like peas, beans, lentils; liquid substances like water and oils and similar things.
When a stone or anything falls into the ear that does not fit snugly or grow in the ear, and it does not adhere to the ear, put the ear towards the sun. If you see the stone, distill a little purple oil or camphor oil, then administer extraction; and make the patient cough with congee, and block the nostrils when the coughing occurs, and place pieces of fabric or wool around the ear; and hold it upwards. Many times farting occurs through this cure; and if it does not occur, administer extraction with fine tweezers as shown in the following form:
If it jumps out at the hinges, that's good; if not, introduce extraction with a thin wire of small twisting; and if it doesn't jump out by that means, make a thread of wax and push the head of the thread or ear canal firmly, and stop up what is around the thread with soft wax so that the vein cannot enter with the thread; then pull forcefully, for many times it comes out as we have said; and if it doesn't come out in this manner, take glue from where you can get it, put any tool suitable for this purpose on it, and put a piece of cotton around it; then press the glue onto the stone or something similar and pull forcefully. And if it doesn't jump out by any of the things we have said, hurry to incise the ear before an abscess forms and spasms; and the manner of incision is that you first cleanse the patient's head, then draw blood according to the strength of its virtue, then seat the patient between your hands and turn the ear upward, and make a small incision in the root of the ear where the fat or flesh hangs; and let the incision be like a moon, until you reach the bone, then break it as far as your power allows, and suck the pus quickly into your mouth; and treat it until it is healed. And if it is a grain that swells and it cannot be extracted, introduce one thin and subtle spatula in this form:
And make an incision in that grain. But do not do so if you think the grain is moist due to the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces; then strain it with subtle tweezers and suction, as we have said, so that the extraction is aligned.
In the ear that drips water, the patient should first use warm mustard poultice and stuff the ear with old cotton. The patient should lie on their side over the affected ear. If it jumps out due to this, that's good. If not, take several small and light pieces of stone according to the size of your finger, heat them slightly in fire; then have the patient put one end of a thin stick in the ear and hold another piece of wood over the stone in the ear; continue striking stone against stone until the water jumps out completely, and it should jump out fully; and if you observe, take a piece of thread, push one end into the ear, and the other end hold near fire until the thread closest to the ear is burnt; then repeat this process with more threads until the water has jumped out completely, as we have said in the above passage.
In the extraction of an animal, if it has a small body like fleas and similar things, treat it as we have said in the division; but if it has a large body that can be felt, use the extraction method with tweezers; it is easier to remove lighter objects from the ear.
In the extraction of worms from the ears, when you treat it as we have said in the division and in treating distillations, and the treatment does not help, then you should look at the ear in the sun: if any worms appear, take them with fine tweezers, and if none appear, take a reed of this shape.
And make it narrow within and wide without. And push the most subtle tip into the ear according to the degree of suffering of the patient, then suck out completely the reed; do this often until all the worms come out. And if they do not come out, stop up the reed with cotton as I said in the previous section; and if they do not swell out as we have said, administer distillations that the ancients have proven effective in the treatment of worms, and you will find them or treat distillations; and if you distill your oils and medicines into the ear using this apparatus as you see:
And make it of silver or tin narrow within and wide above to distill; and for pressing inside the distillation, one instrument made of tin is required; and if you see, take a grater and wrap it around the tip with cotton; then pour your oil or juice, and whatever medicines you have in the reed, and the reed should be in the ear; then push the grater with all the cotton inside, and press your hand evenly until the oil is distilled or boils out of the ear; and let the patient smell it within, and the distillation should be one pot heated by fire in this way that it is distilled in the ear; and ensure that it is not too cold, for the medicines will not be as effective.
Of the stoppage of the ears
No child is born without some imperfection in the ears; and this same thing happens to men by stoppage of a wound or pus coming from within the ear, and this stoppage comes completely into the ear at times when it cannot be seen; and sometimes there is a drop or two of pus protruding, and it can be clearly seen.
Therefore, if it comes completely into the ear and cannot be seen, it is difficult to cure in various conditions, and in such cases, you must place the sick person's ear in the sun; look inside: if you see the obstruction clearly, open the affected area with this spatula-like tool that is shaped as shown below:
And it should be cauterized and incised all around, both in front and behind, so that it does not touch the ear; if the swelling is of new flesh or cartilage of the ear, hold it with subtle forceps and strike gently until the flesh is completely burned out.
If the swelling is deep in the ear, take a subtle razor and scald slightly with fire, then place it against the cartilage of the ear. If you feel the swelling, causing pain to the patient's hearing, pierce gently, ensuring not to damage the nerves of the ear; then put a linen patch according to the size of the wound in the ear and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.
Do this every day until the wound heals; take a linen patch and moisten it with rosewater, and sprinkle powder of vitriol over it; if you see the ear swelling, it is necessary to remove the linen patch and apply another moistened linen patch made of rose oil and beeswax until the swelling subsides; then heal it until it is healed.
And if bleeding occurs, dip a sponge and cloth in cold water, place it on the ear, and use other treatments that stop the bleeding, which are either to treat distillations.
of the paper charcoal
This althelul that comes from the hairs when they are moist and dry, it is necessary to stretch them with tongs and tweezers, and then crush them with a spatula of their roots; then put vitriol powder on the place.
And without removing [the affected part], if you cauterize with the subtle cautery of lenticles, and after incision is necessary to be cauterized; and many times they heal, since nothing remains from their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
of the hailstone
Many times hail-like things come on paper with a condition resembling hail in shape and hardness, and because of this the disease is called "grandine," which is a collection of thick moisture on the upper and lower layers of the paper; the procedure is as follows: take care to ensure that the hail does not move from one side to another, and it is an easy thing to know; then make an opening, followed by scraping off each part gently, then grasp with pincers and squeeze. If you cannot cover it without piercing the paper slightly, do not worry the patient; if the tear is large, assemble it with a stitch and heal until it is healed; but if it is small, do not apply force because the liniments restore it soon and cause pain.
And if the stone is descending inside the ear towards the upper part, turn the paper and place the stone in tweezers, press it from both sides; and if the paper is pushed back by the incision, it does not matter; and when the stone is pressed, apply oil of brine to the affected area, and treat the wound of those who are injured until the patient recovers.
of the fat from the eyes
Exinach is a fat that is rendered in cloth from the abovementioned papers, and this happens more often in children than in adults, and it causes great discomfort to their eyes, and they get catarrh in the mornings, and cannot look at the light of the sun because tears quickly flow into their eyes; and for this reason, they lie down on their faces immediately and sleep, and their papers are moistened beneath their eyelids covered with exinach which opens in oil. And when you press the affected area with your fingers and feel the exinach between them.
And the method of work is that the patient places their head on your lap; and then take one linen cloth and prepare a tent in the shape of a circle according to the size required for each part, then place it over [them]; and press with your hands from both sides so that the parts are assembled within the circle; then make an incision in the middle of the moist area with a sharp spatula, and it should not be larger than the wound made during vein opening; and cut through the skin completely to expose the incised area; and in various positions the incised area comes from the incision, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Then take a piece of coarse cloth between your hands and spread it apart until it is scattered; and ensure that you do not widen the incision or bring the spatula to the oil, do not pierce it.
If the incised area does not open at the beginning of the incision, raise it slightly; then spread it as we have said, then wet cloths with oil and water, and place them on the wound, and hold bandages.
And if such men who grind salt and put it on to corrupt the moisture that remains, then heal it until it is clean. And if an abscess heats up at its place, then treat with plasters soothing it until it is clean.
of the papers' hairs
When paper grows hairs other than its nature, and is nurtured, it harms the eyes, and brings about manners of diseases such as the accustomed tears and swelling of papers and albugine, to the destruction of the eyes; and the cure is according to four methods: either by cautery with fire, or by medicine for ague according to that which is before in the chapter on cautery, and it is done either by incision and suturing or by canes, according to what I will say.
You must place the patient's head on your sound side, then turn the paper with the oil on your left hand; if it is converted (turned), that's good; if not, push an awl through one filament (hair strand) of it; and cut the hair adjacent to the hair strands, and draw one filament above the entire paper, then scrape it flat; then make a hole in the part underneath the paper, beneath the hair, all the way from the large fold to the small; then extract one filament, and place a small tent of cotton and linen beneath the paper, then mark on the paper a figure like the thorn of blackberry, and note that the figure should be according to the quantity that you see will raise the paper which has been designated for all.
And if you need to apply a large amount of paper according to the softness of the paper; then make a hole along the entire span of the two lines that you have marked, and begin from the large fold to the small; and let one of the cuts be near the natural hair in the thickness of a root, then insert the onion into one of the angles of the key, then peel it all; then sew the two lips together with a needle and thread of fine wool, and squeeze out the blood, and tie up the excess hairs above the two scissors with any adhesive substance, if you wish to do this; and if not, do not care about it, then leave the suture and the hairs until 2 or 4 days; then treat the wound without suture with drying and constricting substances, as the paper will heal at the edge of the wound and its assembly, but the suture is rotten (as they say in the old), and this is a risky procedure.
and if you use another method: it is that you mark the paper with a figure like the thorn of blackberry, as we have said, with four openings according to the shape shown here:
Then bind (or tie) equally the parts which are above the small ones, according to the form shown here.
And if you do not have the ability to hold the pliers, and the parts are not equal, take a needle with one thread, and stick it into the figure; and insert another thread of the large one through the great incision, and the second thread through the small one, and assemble the threads equally between your fingers; then move your hand equally, and move all the skin so that you have signed it, as we have said, then sew together the two edges of the wound with stitching, and heal it until it is healthy; and if an abscess comes to your incision, calm it with ointment and similar soothing balms.
And sometimes the hair of the papyrus is converted, which requires you to use what we have said about incision; however, stitching in one and the other is more artful.
The cure for canines is as follows: You should fold the paper and place it inside as I have said, then make two canines by art, and two subtle threads of the same length as the paper and the width of a needle hole; take the two heads from two parts where you hold the threads; then put one on top of the other subtly over what is above the paper of oil, and bind the two canines from the two parts; leave it in this state for some days, and the skin that is bound will die and rot away, until it falls off.
If it takes time, if you have to force it, then treat it until it heals completely; and when the wound is closed, and no more hairs can be felt, and this is the form of the two canines that you will make according to this figure, and according to this length and width:
The workings are as follows: You take a fine needle and insert one thin thread of silk; then assemble the heads and place them together subtly, and make sure that the length of the threads is about one palm (5 inches); then tie another fine silk thread briefly to the end of the canine; then place the patient's head in your hand and ensure that the work is done in the sun, as this is a subtle and delicate procedure; then insert the needle into the entire sheath next to the natural hair root and pierce the paper immediately so that it pulls up the natural hair; then pull out the hair until it reaches the end of the canine, and put that hair in the canine, if there is one or more; then pull your hand until the hairs come out completely with the natural hair in the paper.
And if the shot (arrow or other projectile) is expelled but the hairs do not come out with it, you shall draw the shot beneath to its full length that you have ordered, until the shot comes forth through the wound and you see it by the sight of the eye; then, you shall draw out the shot and the string, close the eye and leave it closed for 2 or 3 days, until the hair regrows in its place and flesh grows over it; and if the hairs are small, accompany one long hair from a goat's beard with it, and let it be grown along with that which you leave, until it is distanced and then cut it.
of the purulence of the eye
When this disease called "aleacrati" or purulence comes in the eye, it happens in two ways: natural and unnatural. It occurs suddenly due to injury, wound, cut, or similar things.
And the method of work in it is that you cut the joint, separate the sides of it, put thread soaked in flax within it and bind it until it heals; and do not use drying and constricting agents in its treatment. For if you do this, the illness returns worse than before; but for this kind of work, use softening items, such as fenugreek; boil flaxseed and linseed oil, strain it and wrap a linen cloth around it, and treat with this.
And the key to your treatment is to ensure that the joint does not heal in its former shape; and this work that we have mentioned has no effect on this illness unless it corrects its shape so that it does not return to its former state.
of the fat from the oil
This disease that is below, which is truly called "axacrati", and is both natural and accidental. The accidental part comes from wounds and cuts and cauterization and similar things; the method of treatment in it is that you take a needle with double thread and stick it in the flesh, and make it pierce from the left tear duct to the right one, so that the threads come out in two joints of the flesh; then place the flesh over the whole needle, and the handle at a distance of one spatumile.
And if the figure of the stone returns according to what is required, that's good; if not, take a rasp and place it in the wound, and turn the stone, and make two wounds where the stone lies within the flesh; and let the joints of the two wounds be at the angles of the incision you made, and make one angle so that when they are assembled, the figure is like the figure of a letter with no "I" Greek; then remove that flesh, according to the thickness it protrudes below the stone, and join the two detached parts with linen thread; then treat as we have said for the medicines softening and ointments until it heals.
And if the disease comes from a wound or stitching or cauterization, it is necessary that you make a deep incision under the hair of the paper, as mentioned before; then separate between the two layers of linen, as I have said; and the work should be done according to the shape of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and the wise masters prepare any tool with all possible means to return the figure to its natural shape; and the patients themselves, according to what is necessary for the work and tools in various positions.
Sudden blow of paper
When this suture happens in the hands of men in such a manner that the paper above is glued with white oil and it cannot move or perform its natural functions, then you must insert the point of a razor beneath the paper, lift it up; and hold it with pincers, until you reach that which is at the root of the splinter, which should not be too sharp nor too jagged, so that the patient does not suffer from too sharp a splinter piercing the oil; and your incision, from which you scrape away the assembled mass, should be gentle, so that the paper returns to its natural form; and this entire assembly is healed, and at times it becomes infected with foul oil and produces pus and colic; then put between the paper and the oil a tent of linen, and place on the oil damp wool in abundance of egg; and after the third day use warm colic and healing ointments until it is healed.
of the nail of the oil
Know that the nail is of two types: one is nervous and resembles a hard horn, and another which is not nervous but resembles white frozen moisture; when it is touched by iron and cooked with tweezers, it cannot move; and both types begin towards the large root and grow little by little until they cover the entire nail bed and light and the movement of oil.
And the method of incision is that the patient places his head in your hand, then you open the eyes; take paper with your hand, then grasp the nail with tweezers of small double curvature and hold it above; then take a needle, put a horse hair or cow or bull hair and a strong thread on it; double the tip of the needle a little and pierce it into the nail, and poke it all through, tie the nail with the thread and hold it above, and shave off all the hair from the side of the nail that was under the cuticle and the silk to the hair up to the root, then crush the rest in the root of the big toe to a very subtle paste with small forceps, and leave the natural flesh or root, so that the corpuscles do not flow out as is customary; and sometimes the nail grows only at the onychium (the upper part of the nail) and along the sides, as we have said; then shave off all the substance of it in this way:
And be careful that the spatumile does not touch the flesh and tear it apart, and that the pulp is not pierced; and after the incision, pour a little oil of sebum (oily matter secreted by skin glands) and collyrium (medicine used for eye problems), and leave it until the next day; then cure it as needed until it heals.
And if the nail is not nerveous, and you cannot insert the needle, and the unguent can't enter, this resemblance of a nail is often cured with medicines; and they grow as I have told in the division, and if you see it covered, it works the oil of the patient, and take the spatulum lightly and sharp according to this shape:
Gently press the nail above, and if you see that it does not soften and reason does not apply to it, distill from your mouth into the colyrium oil made of litargirio and red collyrium powder and sulfur, and let the oil rest until the next day; then repeat the work according to this same process until it is completely removed.
If nothing opposes in the oil, as with an abscess, then let it drain, and cure the abscess hot until it is healed, then repeat the work as before, until it is healed.
And if the appearance of the flesh around the armpit harms in oil greatly, suspend it at the onion, and cut a part of it but not all, so that no tears come from it; then distill in the oil colyrium red which is made with litharge.
of the flesh that arises above the eyelid
Sometimes red flesh grows in the eyes of some men, covering the eyelid and pressing against the paper and turning towards the outside, looking like a rosebud; and the treatment for this is that the patient places his head in your lap, then you open the eyes, and take off all the red flesh as far as the appropriate incisions according to what follows in this chapter, holding it with force; then cut the first piece of red flesh, and continue cutting until finished, making sure not to harm the oil at the work; and make the incision with a spatula as we have said in the incision of the nail and with the small instruments of which one removes the seed, as the form after this chapter demonstrates.
And when the incision is completed and all the flesh is removed, apply oil of turpentine or distill red collyrium and similar corrosive medicines, put cotton soaked with egg white on top to ensure that it is hot; if anything remains, and the wound becomes inflamed, and you doubt about the heat of the incision, leave the oil and treat the abscess with cooling medicines; then return to your work until it is healed, and do this with every char that is treated in this manner.
However, it is necessary that you alleviate the cure of each oil with a natural remedy; and for an accidental treatment, in work with iron; do not put your hand in any of these treatments until you see that this member is strong enough for that work.
veins of the eyes
When the veins are red and covered with oil, they appear to perform their work and weaken the oil for all days. Therefore, it is necessary that you first examine if the oil, in which the vein is located, is indeed the problem, and not another disease; then proceed as follows: instruct the patient to place his head on your healthy surface, then suspend those veins completely according to your wisdom, and let the incisions be subtle doubled according to this form:
And let there be two incisions by degrees in one body according to this form:
Then carefully apply force to those veins subtly, and squeeze the blood out hour after hour, until you see the veins move away from the oil; also ensure that the oil is not pricked by the tips of the lancets, and perform this task at noon in front of the sun, and be very diligent in your work so as to not spoil the veins; and when you have completed this, if it distills green and red collyrium for correcting those that remain affected by the sebel.
And if you cannot catch [or bind] all of it in that hour, make a plaster on the oil of soothing things for the pain of the eyes, and leave it for some days until the pain is soothed and assured of healing, then resume according to this manner which is beforehand until it is healed; and this is the form of forces:
of the fistula (small tube) of the oil
The mire (a cyst or abscess) is called "arissati" fistula: when you treat it with cautery and burning medicine as I said before, and it is not healed, there is a device within it that you should cut open on the abscess where it must break, and drain all the moisture that is there, until the bone is exposed.
And when the bone is exposed, and you see the corruption and blackness, if [the area] is ready with all the instruments as mentioned here; it is called "sharp head", and make a hollow [cavity] of about 1 inch deep, pointed like a chisel as shown in the present form:
Then turn the bone corruption between your hands and press with your hand slightly to ensure that the corruption is removed; do this once, then restore the joint with medicinal poultice.
If the joint is swollen and pus forms, and the back of the bone is swollen and remains so for 40 days without improving or abscessing, and it appears healthy; if not, there is no other means except to bring the fistula to the surface of the neck as shown in this form: you should expose the bone a second time with an iron, and with medicines that burn, and when exposed, take one awl according to this form, and let the head of the iron be at four angles, and the shaft be slender up to the tip as you see here:
Then place it on the bone of the ulna (a forearm bone), and move your hand away from the oil or marrow. Then turn the drill completely until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it if they hold their hand on their elbow; and then restore the joint with dry medicines as I have taught you, and when the flesh hardens and strengthens the joint, the matter goes to the elbow; it is a lighter thing for the patient.
The translation of this line is: "of the oil's discharge" or "from the discharge of the oil".
When the eye is completely open and there is no need to disturb the nose or reduce it, you must hold the patient; then clean the eye, then apply poultices or hot oil to help heal, then place the oil (a mixture of aconite, aloe, incense, and sarcolocca) on a linen thread and tie the eye, then apply ointment on bands and cloths; and the manner of the cloths is that you take soft cloths, fold each one in four, and then place one on top of another according to the amount needed by the eye; then tighten with a strong bandage and repeat the poultices to help heal without hurting; then remove the poultices and leave the tied eye for a day and night, and if the thread wears out, you must tie it tightly again; then remove the thread after the day and night, and if you see the eye healing, that is good; if not; repeat the ointment, cloths, thread, and poultices until the eye is healed.
The dislocation of a torn membrane
When disruptions occur in a torn membrane, they open up and fart like paper, similar to grains of resin and are visible; then you must cover it. The procedure is such that you insert an awl into the root of the affected area until it reaches above, then insert another awl where there is a double thread from the edge of the tear; pierce it, leaving the first awl in place according to its position; then tie the end of the double thread and wrap a part of the membrane around it, tightening it, then remove the awl and apply oiled linen cloth moistened with egg; leave it until the threads grow with the membrane, then cure the area with comforting substances until the wound is healed; and sometimes the wound is held closed by the membrane on both sides in a circular bandage of fabric until it is healed.
And if the eyes appear large, pierce it with a fine spatula coming from oil and remove the moisture and pus, then enter immediately; then pull out until it is healed.
From the bone of the oil (can mean "from a bone soaked in oil")
This disease called "alcunnati" is not found in any bone other than the one assembled in oil, resembling an abscess draining, but it is not an abscess; and the method of its appearance in the work is that you make the patient sit on a chair equipped and upright. Then take his head between your hands with two parts, and move him until you see the bone come up to your eyes. Then pierce it, and do not drain and open the lumen, and let the patient see things as he usually does; and if it does not drain below, know that it is an abscess, and if the emergence of the bone is not prepared as we have said, make the patient sit between your hands. Then take the fine spatula and put it under the horny membrane .i. piece along the continuation of the conjunctive with the horny membrane and the corona, until the bone comes out; and when it is issued, let it distill into hot oil mixed with honey or fenugreek boiled in honey, then cure it with another treatment until it heals.
diseases of the oil (can mean "diseases that occur from bones soaked in oil")
1. We have the appearance of the eyes in division, and what is necessary for piercing; do this according to health. You must make the patient sit between your hands crossed, away from light due to sunlight, and press the holy oil strongly onto him and hold it tight; then put paper soaked with the oil on your left hand if the eye is on the left side, or on your right hand if the eye is on the right side; then take in your right hand (if the eye is on the left side) the instrument called "almagda", or take it in your left hand (if the eye is on the right side); then place the tip of the instrument under the crown through the thickness of a finger into that part of the oil at the smaller tear duct, then push the instrument named "almagda" vigorously and hold your hand steady until it pierces the oil, and feel that almagda comes to the empty thing; it is necessary that the measure of the way of almagda be at the full measure of the space which is from the pupil to the end of the iris; and this is the crown of the eye; then you will see the bone in the paper due to the clarity of the perforated fabric, and then put the instrument until it reaches the place where the eye is, then press it along another path. If the eye comes out now, the patient sees it before him and the instrument in its oil.
After a short rest and if the eye returns to its second path, place force with the instrument, and when it is well fixed and does not rise again, gently rotate almagda around your hand little by little; then put a small amount of gemstone oil inside. Then pour in oiled cloth or damp linen soaked in rose oil and abundant egg, and bind it with holy oil. We, and those who are of our time, place on top a mixture ground with abundant egg.
And if almagda cannot enter the oil due to its hardness, because there are some men who have too hard eyes, then you must take the instrument called "alberit", which is shaped as follows:
And therefore pierce only the conjunction (suture), and do not go too deep, but make .i. (one) thin incision, then apply the ointment, as we have said; and for the completion of the work arrange the patient to lie on his back in .j. (two) dark rooms; and be careful of all movements, and take light foods, and do not move his head neither to the right nor to the left, and bind him according to his disposition until three days; then unbind him in the same dark room, and test his sight, and make him see some things, and then rebind him for up to seven days; and you should not perform this, except during the cure or after the incision, but you should alleviate it, because the pain increases rapidly.
If abscesses come up, you must unbind the oil before the seventh day, and direct the one who soothes the abscess; and when it is soothed, then uncover the eye and put on it .i. (one) linen cloth to cover for any day, and be there in the dark room. Then slowly leave the house, bit by bit, and return to his cases; and know that no disciples should interfere in this case.
And one came to us who was from Iram, who told us that in his land they pierce almond ointment, so that the pain subsides, but I never saw anyone do it in our land, nor have I ever read it in books of ancient times; and perhaps it is a new thing.
And these are the resemblances of the forms of almagda, because those who do not know them see them; and they are from a rain properly speaking:
And be the heads of these from the same subtlety, and the rear parts in four angles pointed.
from the flesh on the neck
At times, diverse charities that resemble scorpions in their base are born; and if there are such [charities], or if a char is swollen of a dark color, and if a char is soft with a good color. In those cases of the soft char, but not swollen, you must make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun; and open his nostrils, and spit the urine on these charities, and pull them out; then catch what you can hold with the sharp subtle spatula until you know that this char is completely removed.
And if there remains anything that cannot be caught, open it with all sorts of subtle instruments lightly, so that nothing remains; and if the abscess is swollen, or an arrow, seek aid as necessary; and if these are malignant abscesses, hasten and cauterize until the wound is sealed and all charities are removed, then spit bile or hot vinegar or wine.
If the abscess does not open and moisture goes up to the mouth, know that it is healthy; if moisture does not drain as necessary, know that there is pus in the bone above, so instruments do not come for cutting: then you should insert a thick thread of linen, coated with oil or wax, between each stitch about one finger's width, and have the patient hold the threads inside his mouth as far as he can, and pull until the pus comes out through the nose; children in school often do this, and it is easy for someone who wants to do it. Hold the head that comes from the nose with one hand, and the other head that comes from the mouth with the other hand, and know each other's position while we are inserting the thread. Do this until you know that the threads have corrupted the pus, then pull out the thread, drain the pus, soak the thread in Egyptian ointment, and put it back into the abscess as before; do this for four days or more, until the ointment has dissolved all of the remaining pus; then place a plank of wood near the abscess for several days until it is healthy, and if there is need for drying medications, use them. This is the form of the instrument to purge the head, as oil and medicines are distilled through the nose:
And it shall be of silver or bronze, resembling an open lamp, like a cane, and lead it thus; and if you see, make a closed cane, and let the tool be plain for purging the head; and have one handle on the head for holding when heating the oil or any liquid.
of the chest on the neck
Often a disease named "telul" arises on the neck of the head and grows large over time until it is visible; therefore, it is necessary to treat it from the beginning, remove all pus, and then apply fire cautery or burning medicine to it; if it is not treated promptly when it first appears, and it becomes hard, dark, with poor sensation: do not touch it with iron because it is an aggravated abscess, for when it is touched even once, the patient experiences great harm; and if the abscess is soft in texture but does not have a foul color, you can cover it entirely, let the patient relax without fear, and treat the surrounding area with drying and constricting substances.
When the nails are cut and sewn
If inflammation of continuation comes in one of these cartilages, it helps little, except in some men. Therefore, when this occurs in any case, you should examine if the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then bring the two lips together to a stitch, then heal it until it is healed; and if the lips are already separated from one side and the other, you must cauterize all the parts of them where there is pain, then bring the two lips together to a stitch, tighten it, and sprinkle powder of dragon's blood, and incense ground; and place the powders on a piece of plaster of strong or another plaster adhering, and let it stay until it heals by itself, then heal it with ointment until it is healed.
The method of sewing is such that you assemble the solution: either with needles, as I have told you in abdominal stitching; or with thread, as I have mentioned before.
for abscesses of the lips
When abscesses occur within the lips that are hard and grain-like, either small or large, then you must turn the lips and cut through each side with scissors and take it out with tweezers in each part; afterwards apply vitriol powder to the incision until the wound is cauterized; and then apply alum to heal the wound of dry things until it becomes healed.
of the flesh of the jaws
Often flesh grows adjacent to the jaws that the ancients call "albulus"; it must be held with tongs and cut at its root, leaving the vein or blood to flow; then apply vitriol powder or other drying and constricting powders on the place; and if the flesh returns after incision, which often happens, cut it a second time and cauterize it: it does not return again after cauterization; and these are the forms of the instruments for covering.
boils
Sometimes, teeth or gums assemble together at the jaw, inside the mouth between the gums; these are ugly and rough; and sometimes the tooth is black and citron colored and sharp, until corruption comes to the gum, and the tooth is foul-smelling; then you must make the patient sit between your hands, and his head should be in your lap, and peel back the teeth or the roughness that appears, as long as nothing remains; and in this way do with the blackness and the greenness, and the yellow and other stains, until they are removed; and if one removes what is at the root first, it is good; if not, then begin again the second day and the third, as long as you have everything removed; and know that teeth require various forms of instruments for cleaning, according to the work that shows, because the cleaner who cleans the teeth has other forms than the one who cleans between the teeth; and these forms and others should be prepared with you.
When you are treating the tooth from its pain, it is necessary that you pull slowly as much as you can, for this should not be done hastily; for this is a very high substance until there is no excuse to scrape. Then when the patient is constrained to pull, it is necessary that you are certain about which tooth needs pulling. Many times, the pain deceives the patient and thinks that it is a healthy tooth, and pulls the good one; but the pain does not depart at all until the bad one is removed, as we have seen in the past; and when you are absolutely sure of which tooth needs pulling, then you should scrape around the tooth everywhere. Use strong spatumile to protect the gums from all sides; then move it to your hands or subtle tenailles at the very tip and tip, until they are completely loosened, then tighten the tenailles firmly; and let the patient's head be in your lap and hold him so that he does not move.
After straightening the tooth without breaking it, if it does not come out by itself, take one of these instruments and gently push it in from each side, and move it as you did before. And if the tooth is pierced and eaten, it is necessary to fill it with bandages where the perforation is; and hold it delicately with pliers so that it does not break when pulled; and it must be operated very carefully around the gumline to remove the tooth.
And take good care not to break it, and if a part remains in the patient due to the root causing greater pain than the first. And take care not to do as foolish lords often do, who by their haste and recklessness sometimes break the cart, and never bring what we have described; but sometimes they cause great disease through the roots that remain or through the cartilage that they break, as we have often seen; and when the tooth is pulled, wash the area with wine or vinegar and oil, and if bleeding occurs, which often happens, use vitriol powder; and if this does not work, cauterize it.
The shapes of the instruments, which initially silence the teeth, should be long points and thick handles, so that they do not twist when you pull the tooth; and these are their forms:
And let them be large members which do not yield when drawn, and let them be made of hard iron and sharp-edged to hold fast.
from the root of the teeth When the root remains when pulled, then you must place cotton wool soaked in butter on it for 1 or 2 days until the tooth loosens, then insert the tongs called "algefri", which look like a surgical probe; and inside them make holes as with a chisel and this is its shape:
And if the roots do not want to come out with all these tongs, you must cut open the skin all around the root, and put the instrument called "althali," which is known as a pincers, there; this is its shape:
It should be large and thick so that it does not break, and if the root jumps out through these tongs, that is good; if not, help with all the instruments, and here are the shapes that follow:
And if you use this instrument with two prongs, here is its shape:
And other instruments which are in front of the teeth, and of this tool that seems like large pincers, whose shape is:
And this tool should not break, and know that many instruments of teeth are; and likewise other instruments which are not counted; and the wise masters skillfully find their own tool according to what their work and the sickness show, for there are such diseases where the ancient ones did not teach any instrument due to diversity among them; and if it breaks a chariot or another bone that it could have healed, then search for the instruments that are needed, which I told you, and help with gestures, of which this is the shape: And be large and well-holding to hold the bone, so that it does not slip, but can hold and remove; and then restore the place with medicines suitable for this, and if there is pus in the bone, which is small, grind all this instrument:
When the teeth appear not as natural according to the body, and the shape is ugly, even in virgin women, then you must know that if the tooth has not erupted after the tooth, and it is not in the correct place, and it cannot be straightened or filed: then file it; and if it is near the tooth, take this instrument with the following form, and resembling a small beak, made of sharp metal at the end:
And the coping file should be used with much care for the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the others, and if it appears that one can file it, then file it with a small file like this shape:
and is also like the file used to make needles; and with a light touch file the tooth little by little, so that it does not move too much when it emerges; then smooth the end in any way with any smoother, and if the tooth is excessively sharp and it bites the tongue, then you must file the sharpness until it is even, so that it does not bite the tongue or corrupt speech.
When the teeth fall out
When the teeth fall out either by being knocked out or falling off, and the patient cannot press them back in place so they do not fall again, and you treat them with medicines that restrain, it does not work; instead, you must tie them up with a gold thread, for silver threads turn green and rot, but gold threads never do. The thread should be neither too thick nor too thin, according to the space between the teeth. And if you see that the teeth are moving, take the thread and double it between two healthy teeth, then place the pliers between the loose teeth, whether there is one or more of them, as long as you can see clearly up to the healthy tooth on the other side; then cover again up to the part where you started, and hold your hand delicately and carefully, so that they do not move. Make sure your knot is at the root of the tooth so that it does not escape. Then take the pliers with the thread and assemble them, and place them back in their original position, making sure they do not bite the tongue; then leave them like this as tight as possible for as long as they can stay in place, and if they slip or the thread breaks, tie them up again with another thread. If they remain in place and serve for a period of time, it is the form of the teeth and the method of the alignment of the two healthy and two loose teeth, as you see:
And when the teeth fall out and are put back in their place, freshly, as we have said; and do not let anyone interfere who is not wise and patient, and sometimes a tooth of bone from a cow or other animal is made and placed where the missing tooth was, and it is tied in as described above, and it remains and serves for a long time.
To cover the ligament of the tongue
Sometimes, this ligament under the tongue occurs naturally or by accident due to a wound. The procedures are such that you open the mouth of the patient, hold his head steady, and lift the tongue; then cover the nervous ligament with a broad bandage, until the tongue is dislocated from its position, and if there is hardness or knotting, and it is due to sudden injury, press the incisors and cover that area with a broad bandage; ensure that the wound is not too deep, as there is an artery beneath it. Once done, lift up the swelling with warm rose water or cold water. Then put a linen tent over the tongue. Make him bite it every night to prevent healing. If bleeding occurs, apply vitriol powder. If the bleeding continues, cauterize with a slow cautery, which is good for this purpose; then treat it with other medicine until he is cured.
and if you see it of a thin color or black or hard, such that the patient does not feel it, do not touch it, for it is cancer; and if it is spreading towards blanchor, and there is moisture, apply the incisors, and free it with a slender spatula from both sides. And if bleeding continues at your work, apply vitriol powder until it stops. Then return to your work until you remove all pus. Then lift up the swelling with warm rose water or cold water and treat it with other medicines until it is cured.
From the abscess of the throat
Sometimes come within the throat boils called "godath", which are properly called the two almonds. When you cure them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, take care: if it is a hard abscess of small size and light color, do not touch it with iron. And if it is red and the base is large, do not touch it with iron, also for the flow of blood; but let it be until it is ripe, and then you will cut it open or it will burst by itself; and if it is of white color again, and the base is thin, prepare the instrument for covering, but first check if the abscess is calm and appeased. Then make the patient sit in front of the sun, and his head should be in your hand, and open the mouth and take the sergeant between his hands, and press the tongue under all the instrument, as follows; it is of silver or subtle iron like a knife:
Press the tongue to all this instrument, and if you see the abscess, take the hook and poke it into the almond, and pull it up more than you can; and pull anything from the cloth with it, then strike it on the instrument, as follows, which resembles a forceps; and even though the head is curved, one side to the other, and they are very sharp, and made of iron or brass:
And if you do not have this instrument present, hold the iron with pliers, of which form follows:
And if you do not have this instrument present, hold the iron with pliers, of which form follows:
And I treated a woman with an abscess that was inside her throat, namely one of small size; and I had tightly closed the entire throat, so that the woman could not exhale through the narrowed passage, and could not eat or drink, and would have died if she had lasted for a day or two. The abscess was so high up that it had been placed two fingers deep into the throat. I hastily cut through it, and pulled out a large piece of pus; then I closed the other opening in the throat, and opened her mouth and pressed her tongue; after cutting through the abscess again, I took part of it, and no more pus came out than a small amount of blood; and thus the passage in the throat was unblocked for the woman, and she began to drink hot water and then wine, and did not stop cutting away at the abscess for a long time; and the abscess grew again, and filled the space that I had vacated, becoming very large; then I tricked it and cauterized it inside her throat: in this way the growth ceased; and I left those parts alone, and only God knew what happened to them afterwards.
of the eye
When the eye swells and becomes long, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is large and round, it is called "eye". When it is treated as we have said in the division, but the treatment does not help, and you see that the abscesses are soothed, and it is subtle, then you must cut it; and if it is large and rounded and not long; and it is bloody or of dark color or black, then you must make an incision in it. For there is great danger for the patient. Therefore, when you see it as described, according to the shape and size, you should have the patient sit facing the sun, and press the tongue with the instrument mentioned earlier in this treatise; then insert the probe into the eye, pull it out, and cut it in .i. or 2 places as I said in the incision of the 2 almonds. And do not make an incision beyond the natural limit; for if you do, it causes pain to the voice and speech; and after the incision, use what was said in the incision of the 2 almonds, and treat it until it is healed. And if the patient fears the cutting, then you should use an instrument for cauterization to lessen fear. The manner of cauterization is sharp heat. It is that the patient places their head on your lap, and then presses the tongue with the instrument mentioned in this chapter on cauterization, and press it with hot coals, so that it is not too thick or too clear; and use the handle of this instrument, which has the following form:
And have a hair or oil pot where one puts the medicine, like the scoop of a spoon, and place the instrument on top of all the medicine over the eye; and let the patient lie on their side, so that saliva and mucus flow from their mouth into the medicine without it descending to the throat or the nose; then hold your hand on all the medicine and press it on the eye for the amount of half an hour, until you see the pus and the inflammation of the medicine are soothed; and if you see, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, moisten the cotton in the medicine, and insert the instrument into the sheath over the wound, until the cotton adheres to the eye; and do this repeatedly, until the cauterization is complete, then let it dry for 4 or 5 days. And if you need to restart the cauterization with the medicine, restart it, and after the cauterization drain the pus around the eye with cotton wrapped in butter, and clean what is around the medicine; and wash it with cold water and heal it with gargarisms until it is healed.
This cure is more effective by fumigation than by cautery; if it is treated by fumigation in this manner, take camomile, yarrow, origanum, rue, and wormwood, and assemble them all or some of them in one pot, and place it on a fire to boil; the pot should be well sealed with strong clay, and in the pot have one opening covered with fine cloth in this manner: And be it of silver or tin, and let one of the eyes be pushed into the mouth of the patient until the vapor rises to the eye through the tube while the eye is being mortified; afterwards repeat often, as long as the eye dries out, and ensure that you do not start this at the beginning of the abscess's heating up, for many things may happen then; and do not use this unless it is during the declination of the abscess's heating. And if this instrument is not present, take a tube and put an eggshell crack inside the patient's mouth so that the patient does not have too much heat in the mouth; for the eggshell crack does not let the vapor weigh down the mouth, and it is good medicine along with salvation.
Many times an arrow or bone lodges in the throat or somewhere else; therefore, you must draw out what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun with the whole instrument, so that you see the thing move; and if it does not open and is lodged in the throat, you must make the patient vomit before the food is cooked in the stomach; perhaps this will loosen the thing through vomiting. Or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of cotton, or a radish root, or one morsel of dry bread; tie a thread to the sponge, and then swallow it; and when it comes to the place, it will stick, and then you will draw it out; and if it does not come out from what we have said, take one instrument made of wood in this form:
And let the instruments be curved at the head so that it can enter more easily into the throat, and lift the head high; watch that you do not touch the epiglottis, that nothing harms it or push the bone inside; it is better if the patient pushes the instrument, because he can move it or the thing is air; if he pushes down, or pulls it all the way out, the instrument should be pulled out equally until it is out.
the saliva from the throat
Sometimes medicine is the saliva, as I said in the division, by the cure of medicines; and when this does not help, then look in the throat of the patient towards the sun, since you press his tongue with the instrument that I told you. And if you see the saliva, take a small pair of scissors or fine pliers that are suitable for this purpose. If it is not suitable, take a thread and insert it into the mouth of the patient, then insert the end of the thread into a heated iron and do this repeatedly. Dye the patient with cold water throughout the day. Then take a full ounce of cold water, open his mouth, pour it in so that he can swallow it, and move it with your hand frequently; and as soon as the saliva feels the cold water, it will fall out.
And if it does not fall as we have said, subdue the patient with asafetida, at the instrument I mentioned in the fumigation of the eye; do this many times, for it will persist. The method of the fumigation is that you take one pot or it has charcoal inside, and cover it with a perforated cloth in the middle, and put the head of the instrument in it; then pour your fumigation, and make the patient hold the tip of the cane in their mouth, and close the mouth so that the smoke does not escape, but comes only up to the nostrils; and the nostrils will now persist, and if it does not fall, resume the fumigation many times; let the patient endure thirst, and eat salty and sour things, and drink no water; and then it will be necessary for it to come out under this management.
The form of the instrument for treating the nostrils is like curved tweezers to enter the throat; and resemble the beak of a syringe, and it should have abrasive limestone so that what it takes, it cannot release; here is its shape:
The chapter on abscesses
Many abscesses resemble each other, according to what follows later in this book, and they differ in perforation and cutting; and it is in .ij. ways that one of them resembles itself and is due to moisture. And the second way is for the joints where they are in the body. because abscesses on the head are different than those on the foundation, and abscesses on the shoulder joint are different from those coming at jointures, and each one should have its own judgment in the work.
And if abscesses should not be perforated until the boil is ripe according to its completion; and if there are such that it must be perforated when they become hard, and do not die according to their completion, as boils coming at jointures. Because boils coming at jointures, if left until they are covered over, there may be corruption of the ligament and nerve of the joint, causing contraction in the limb. Or if the abscess is from the main member, and you delay the perforation until it is ripe, this will harm the main member; or if it is from the foundation, if you perforate too soon when it is not yet ripe; and you should not perforate a hard abscess without digestion completed, except for one that is from the foundation, which could burst open, and become long inside, and a fistula forms; and it may not heal within a long term.
And you must know the time of perforation of the abscess that is ripe according to its completion, and this is when the pain is alleviated, and the subsiding of the fever, and the reduction of pain and redness, and the loosening and shrinking of the head of the abscess, and other signs; and you must make the perforation sit on a lower place nearer to the abscess, and where it has opened; and the perforation should be along the body length, and if the abscess is on the hands or feet, in joints, nerves, arteries, and in all equal places where there is no hair growth.
1. When it strikes (affects), do so according to that member. And when an abscess is in the charred flesh, it is better to leave the perforation until it is confirmed in complete digestion, as we have said. For if you pierce it beforehand, the body will be filled with much pus; and possibly harden the lips and deepen the wound. And for any abscess that are pierced according to the width of the body, according to what the limb requires. 2. It is necessary that you bring small perforations, small wounds; and large perforations, large wounds, and many cuts according to the resemblance of the size of the abscess; and for such abscesses where it is necessary to cover the wound, and bandage; when it has become as thin as cloth, and is swollen, it is necessary to do as with babies: and for those that are cut into four angles, and for those whose wound is coped like the leaf of myrtle, like abscesses from wounds; and for such wounds where a round incision is made, and other similar cuts and bandages.
If there is no head (no pus), like a superficial abscess, it is necessary that you pierce it fully; and when the abscess is large and it has collected much pus, and you pierce it, do not draw out all the pus in that hour, but draw out a part; then stop up the abscess until the next day, then draw nothing out of place; do this many times gradually, until the pus comes out entirely. This should be done carefully, especially if the patient is weak, or a woman bearing a child, or small children, or old men who are decrepit. The pus sometimes jumps out with the discharge, possibly killing the patient, and you must avoid this danger. Therefore, avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced your abscess, clean the wound, and see if the wound of the abscess is small; and if it is a large opening, bring linen or old cotton threads; and if it is a large abscess and there is much pus, it is necessary that you stuff in each a thread so that they meet; and if you have cut into the skin of the abscess and shaved it around, it is necessary to fill with old cotton or wool of linen without moisture, and bind until the third day; then remove it, and heal it with ointment until it is healed.
And if bleeding occurs during your work, bring cold water and salt, and wet one cloth, and place it on the wound repeatedly.  And if the bleeding persists, provide treatment and care, and the powders that I have mentioned in this book, and if it is winter, and the limb or abscess is very nerve-racked, you must put hot tents and damp cloths over it; and if it is summer, and the limb is fleshy, you must put damp cloths over it with cold water and oil, or cold water and oil, until the third day, as we have said; and then lance the abscess and drain it, and treat it, as necessary, until it is healed.
This must be known universally in wound treatments: now I have told you how to proceed with the treatment of abscesses, and here is the chapter.
boils
1. For the small abscesses that come in the head, there are ways known to us, such as those enclosed in linen, just like a gourd's knot and it has many resemblances. Some of them have fat with moisture, as pulses; and there are some hard and rocky ones at the base, and there is no doubt that the arteries do not oppose. And the operations of the neck are such that you should test everything. For what is called "entromissoire" determines the shape that follows, what it contains. If it contains moisture, they should be done above the long way. And when the moisture is emptied, scrape skin without leaving any remaining, as it returns again if something is left; then put cotton in Egyptian ointment, if available; otherwise, water and oil, and use it on the wound, and leave it until the next day; and those who remain overnight will recover. And on the second day, repeat the cotton as before, on the third day, as long as you know that it does not remain overnight; then treat the wound with ointment as appropriate, until it is healed. If the abscess is full of fat, press according to this form, along the length; and pour your eyes, and scrape from all sides, and apply your entire care for draining it where it lies; and if the arteries oppose you, do what I told you earlier. And similarly do with the hard abscess, and treat and cure as I told you.
And the cutting on the hard and moist abscess is lighter, for they have little blood. And if any of these abscesses or head has no moisture, and among them was one abscess that I pressed or head of an old woman; and found the abscess as hard as a quartz stone, rough and white, and could not break; and if you had cut any of it, you would have made a wound as deep as a quartz. In other abscesses coming from the heads, namely those that come on the heads of children and at the roots of the ears, they should be opened every day depending on the situation, to allow pus to escape; and treat them as appropriate.
of scrofulas
Often this abscess appears at the neck, under the chin, and in groins, and sometimes it appears elsewhere on the body, and they are very large, and they are joined together. And each scrofula is specifically within its rib cage, as the abscess of the neck and the aposteme of the head, as we have said; and the appearances of these scrofulas are numerous. There are some that contain moisture, and there are some that are malignant and do not want to obey health. Therefore, when you see a good position in the patient and resembles the color of the body, and is silent from all sides and is not swollen around the neck or the artery or the duct, and is not deep; then you should cut it open from above, and peel off each part, and put the two edges of the knife close to the incisions, if necessary, as we have said in abscesses of the head; and pull it gently and carefully, and ensure that you do not cover the nerve or the vein, and do not be too aggressive with the spatula or lance, so that the hand does not slip, and do not look too far ahead, so as not to cover what should not be covered.
And if you cut the vein or the artery and it does not let you pass, put vitriol powder in the wound, or some powders that stop bleeding, and hold the wound; and leave it until the abscesses are calmed and the wound softens and begins to purify. And when the pus is drained, return to your work as long as you complete it; then look for your guide if there remain small scrofulas in the root of the scrofula, cut them off and clean them up. And if there is a large scrofula in the root of the scrofula, do not cut that scrofula at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread, and let it drop through; then use old cotton dipped in Egyptian ointment, then heal it.
And if you excise the entire scrofula, it is necessary that you close the two lips of the wound and sew them now, as there should be no remaining superfluity due to the largeness of the scrofula. It is necessary that you understand to cover the root and draw pus, and sew as we have said. Those scrofulas with superfluity, pierce there where it has matured; and pierce in such a way as the one mentioned before, depending on it, then introduce tweezers with ointment and similar things so that it corrupts what remains of the corruption; and when the wound is well cleaned, apply ointment-enriched charcoal until it heals.
The patient should lie on his back, with the affected leg raised and supported by a cushion or similar object. Then, using a sharp instrument, make an incision from the groin to the knee, following the natural creases of the thigh. This incision should be wide enough to expose the underlying tissues but not so deep as to injure the femoral artery or veins. After making the incision, carefully remove any necrotic tissue, pus, and other debris from the wound. Once the wound is clean, apply ointment-enriched charcoal to promote healing.
The ancients spoke of the shape of the throat; but I never saw anyone do it in our land, and this is their written word.
For those who have squinting (squinance), the incision of the throat called "epiglote" should be opened; and it should not be helped by these [people], because all the veins and the passageway for the sickness are at those who have an abscess hot in the mouth, or in the throat or in two mandibles. When the sickness is in the passageway of the throat, it should be covered to avoid the danger of strangulation.   (When the sickness is located in the passageway of the throat, it is necessary to cover the epiglote to prevent strangulation.)
Therefore, when we want to cut the epiglottis, it should be cut below four circles or four small slits through the center, between the four circles, or according to the size of the slit, not in the cartilage.
and if the patient is susceptible to the incision of the epiglottis, there should be no cartilage, and the veins are long in length for this.
And if the master is afraid, then it is necessary that he extends the skin of the throat to its entire length, and cuts open the neck until it reaches the chin; and removes the veins containing blood, if you see anything, and then severs the trachea as we have said.
And it is demonstrated by the section of the river of the chin that jumps due to the fractured jaw and by the lack of voice;
Leave the wound open a piece.
And when the hour has passed in which there is doubt about strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound with care and sew up the entire area against the cartilage; then administer medicines that produce healing, until it heals.
Al-Zahrawi says not to do this until the throat is completely stopped up and the patient has been judged dead, and then let the bird fly away. Then press on the epiglottis because the patient cannot cough, and they breathe through the wound, and in this way they are kept from death.
and the ancients commanded to leave the wound open until the badness of the disease has passed, and it has passed in three or four days. And then they commanded to sew up the wound and heal, until it was healed;
and I will tell you what I saw. I saw a young girl took one knife, and stuck it in her throat, and cut part of the windpipe.
and I was called to heal her, and found her as dead.
I found the wound and saw the blood coming out of it, and knew that she did not have any vein or conduit except for her throat, and the wind was going through the wound.
I hurried up, sewed the wound, and healed it until it was cured.   Si com li malaide avoit dit, il n’avoit aucune voine ne conduit qui issi fust mort.
And it did not happen to the maiden except that her voice was hoarse, and afterwards she returned to her position.
Therefore I say that in the condition of the epiglottis one should not have fear.
from the large throat
This abscess is called "throat hernia" and it is a large abscess of a greenish color, and it is common in women.
And it is according to .ij. [two] ways: nature, and accidents; where nature has no instrument.
And the accidents are according to .ij. [two] ways, where one is similar to fatty tissue and the other way is similar to abscess which comes from us due to arteries. and there is fear, and it should not be worked on without force except in the one that is small, and [it] proves and searches at all the entrance. if you find it similar to fatty tissue and it does not open in any vein, if you press it, as one presses the nose, and draw it completely, if there is any; And carefully examine it entirely, and treat it as appropriate, until it is perfectly healthy.
We have found that... (Incomplete sentence due to missing text)
Many ways of ours are there, which I will describe all the similarities;
And it is necessary that I say all the differences that exist between a notch and an incision.
I say that dislocation is heat and fever lasting, until the boils have passed and the porridge is complete; then the fever and heat subside.
With the newborn there is no heat, fever, or pain, and it contains one bladder, which is its own sac and is of the same color as the body, and begins like a blister and becomes large.
And they are according to two kinds: greasy or moist, and much of their color is as I said in the classification.
It is necessary when you come to the cure of the newt, that you examine and test first all the instrument which is called "entromissoire", according to its form or chapter that follows.
The manner of the incision for abscesses is that you take or the moister place which you find in the abscess, and turn your thumb little by little, until you feel that the instrument has pierced through, then according to the size of the abscess.
Then pull the entromissoire (the instrument), and take care that it does not fly out.
If moisture runs out of the wound, make it have the same color as I have said for other abscesses;
and if after the incision no moisture comes out, knowing it is fatty, then make a cross incision, take hold of it with the forceps, peel it slightly from both sides and guard the coat where it lies so that you pull it safely with the suture;
and if you cannot pull it out safely, pull it out in pieces so that nothing remains.
If there remains nothing, the nose repeatedly returns many times;
And if it remains a little and does not bother you, apply some corrosive powders to the wound, hold the wound tight, place warm things on the abscess to alleviate the pain, and treat it with other treatments until it is healed;
And if the nose is large, you should cut two lips from the wound, and treat it with whatever heals flesh.
And if the vein beats against you or otherwise is opposed to you, or if you hasten and employ the leech of vitriol crushed, let it lie for 2 or 3 days until the wound heals, and let the boil of blood rest; then return to cover what has remained unhealed.
Here are the forms of incising instruments, and they are of four kinds: large, medium, and small; and if there are four squares which are called 'albaret', and one which is called 'breb', and of three kinds: large, medium, and small, to encircle the abscesses with fistula.
and they are similar to the needles with which witches are sewn, and they are of citron wood, or iron, or silver, and those that are yellow are more valuable, and they are more experienced in black plank for encircling the swellings of fistula.
And there are three kinds: large, medium, and small, according to the width of the wound.
The shapes of the ulcers are much alike, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and if an ulcer has two bumps in four ways as well;
And if an ulcer has four bumps, it is also of four kinds; and if an ulcer has two bumps and one without a bump, they are all necessary in their place.
The head of these [bones] which are being cut is sharp, and those who do not cut it from one side, only from part, as we scrape the nerves, for this reason that the vein or nerve is not struck.
And of these intrusions [arrows] are the splinters returned in bandages, so that the patient does not pierce himself at the opening of the abscess.
and they are of four kinds: large, small, and medium-sized, as you see;
And one should not use it [the cautery] elsewhere except in charnu, such as legs, arms, breasts, and similar places;
And at times, another small instrument resembling a set of tourniquets is used, shaped like this, to draw blood.
And it is placed at times on the place where wounds heal quickly from veins and arteries, and sometimes round in this large shape.
At times, the breasts of some men swell when they begin to rot, so that they resemble women's breasts.
And they remain swollen and inflamed, and whoever wishes to cure them, it must be done according to this form of the following line b to g: Then scrape off the fat, and apply medication to the wound with soothing char, then close the lips of the wound together with stitches, and let it heal until it is healed;
and if the limb bends downwards, and is deformed due to its large size as it often happens with women, then divide it into two pieces above by two similar incisions; With this, one should hold the other at the end of each, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line 'b' up to line 'g'. Then scrape the skin that is between the two lips (of the wound), remove the fat, and apply what we have said about stitching and powders, and whatever is necessary in the treatment, until it heals.
and if it is not healed or the incision is not completely made because the patient does not want to rest or due to bleeding, then you must fill the wound with cotton moistened in corrosive oil. And let it heal as it consumes the remaining flesh and fat, then cure it until it is healthy.
From abscesses of the buttocks
These abscesses that come under the buttocks are handled as hard scrofulas where there are coats and if it contains moisture.
Therefore, those containing moisture should be cut according to this form, from line b up to line g: And when all the boil that is in the abscess is emptied, use old cotton on the wound and leave it until another day, then remove all the cotton, and apply ointment afterwards until it heals.
And if the abscess resembles scrofula, cut it as we have said in the incisions of scrofula, and if the wound boils again, apply a cautery as we have said before.
of the rupture of an artery
When the artery is ruptured and the skin closed over it, it often leads to abscesses, and the same thing happens with an opened vein and abscess;
and if one knows it by this sign, then the abscesses are long in length; and when you feel it with your fingers, it feels tight; and when it is for the vein, it appears rounded in appearance;
It is foolish to cover this abscess, especially when it is under the armpits and groins and around the neck and in other places where it is large. The iron cure must be avoided, and so must the one at the head. In the case of inflammation of an artery, cut through the skin from above.
The iron cure must be avoided, and so must the one at the head. In the case of inflammation of an artery, cut through the skin from above. Then cut open the belly along the usual incision, and carefully separate the artery from the linen, leaving it exposed.
Then insert an awl beneath it, and make it pierce to the other side, and hold the artery with a double thread in 2 inches, as I have shown you in the extraction of the 2 arteries that are in the temples.
Then push the area between the 2 joints with an instrument until it bursts open and the abscesses are separated.
Then apply the cure of beechwood bark as long as the joint cries out. Then treat this [injury] with ointment, until it is healed.
and if the abscess is due to the opening of the vein, then you must sign your hand with it all over the skin. then insert the needle under the skin that you hold with your hand, and make it go through, and have one double thread on it, so that you draw it from the other side. then tie the abscess as I told you, or sew one of the two parts to each of the two eyes with thread.
And if you doubt that the thread isn't inserted, push another needle through one of the threads beneath the abscess at the incision of the first needle, and pull the threads in four lengths;
then cut away the abscess until the excess is removed, then cut away the curdled and leave that which is bound;
Then put a damp cloth soaked in wine and oil on top, then apply treatments with bandages and ointments until it is healed.
of abscesses from nerves
As in the artery and vein come abscesses, so do abscesses of nerves when they are wounded or by excessive labor, and similar things.
This happens more often in the shoulder and the arm, and all joints where there are connections, which is called serious abscesses, and its color resembles the body's color, and it feels pain in various positions.
and when it is pressed firmly, the patient feels pain, but not throughout the body, but only under the skin.
And it should be bound tightly from all sides, and neither go forward nor backward, neither above nor below, and he who is in the joints should not be covered with iron: perhaps there would be contraction.
And he who is at the head or forehead, scrape the skin with a spatula. If the abscess is small, take tweezers and strike its root.
And if it is large, support it at the neck, and peel off the skin, then the bone and close the wound with stitches, and let it heal until it heals.
hanging large growths Sometimes happens in bellies and not elsewhere, and it is a disease called "fungus" because of its resemblance to mushrooms, and it has subtle roots, and large heads; there are small ones and very large ones.
and I saw one man who had two bellies that resembled mushrooms more than anything else, and there was no difference between them, and they were white, and had a fine root, and were cut open, and ran continuously with moisture.
I found and weighed one at 16 ounces, and the other at 7 ounces, and in the incision it is important to note that if the patient is moist and the color of the artery is pale and moist with a subtle root.
If the wound is large, and in your presence the fire cautery is required. For there are often excessive bleeding during the cutting process, and if blood escapes without cauterization, then hasten to cauterize.
and if you see the patient frightened and afraid of the incision with iron, take one thread made well, tie the artery as we have said, and leave it for 2 days.
And then hold it (the shoulder), and not stop pulling on the cord of the pulley until it dislocates the joint, and you feel work being done; and if the roots are thick, be cautious about pulling too much from the belly, but you can certainly pull half of it.
Then burn (the shoulder) so it does not return; then treat the wound, and be careful not to pull on the cord that is of a dark color, weak sensation, and poor sight.
For this is an enlarged abscess, and I will come to the treatment of scrofula afterwards.
When the buttock (or anus) is open/exposed
If the appearance of the buttock (or anus) comes from a wound or fissure due to cautery, and is on the abdomen and in some of the buttocks, as happens in other cases, or bleeding from veins or arteries, according to what is before, or diarrhea;
And if it is through the fissure of the anus and the opening of the bowels, its appearance resembles the color of the abscess, and it causes little pain, and has an open wound with various discharge. And if it is due to the issue of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when it is pressed with the fingers if it shrinks back, and then returns, and possibly if it is hardened, and greatly enlarges at the entrance of the bath and by great effort.
If it is due to moisture, it is an easy thing, and opens readily when you press it with your hand, do not constrain it; if it is due to blood, it opens by these signs: the abscesses are large and hard, and they are pierced according to a quantity.
and if it is due to gas, it yields easily to the touch, and the procedure is that you observe whether its appearance is due to blood from the artery or vein, or gas. It is necessary that you leave it (the patient) to heal. For there is doubt and fear, as I told you in the chapter on abscesses, due to the artery and the vein.
And if the appearance is due to the intestine or the belly, you must command the patient to strain his anals, and be stretched out straight, then press all around the abscess. then command him to press gently with your hands, Then go around the joint that you have signed with the spatula. Then spread the half of the abscess above to all the great uncine.
Then work half of the abscess extended over the ligament, and insert your finger, and search for the intestine. If you find it attached to the ligament, dislocate it, and push the intestine out of the abdomen.
and if you find the bowel, take hold of it at its root, and cut off the excess.
and if the arteries or veins are obstructed, go carefully around it, then return to your work and take two needles, and insert two thin wires through them, and place the two needles in a cross shape around what you have made pierced.
Then press the abscess for four leagues above the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and leave the place as it is, and cut the dead flesh by itself. When it becomes subtle and can be pierced, then treat as necessary, and cover the abscess as we have said.
When it becomes subtle and can be pierced, then treat as necessary, and cover the abscess as we have said. draw out the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the area as necessary, and stitch up the wound.
two boils
We said in the previous division the resemblances of boils and how one should treat them with medicine, and how to avoid the iron cure; and we say that a boil starts in the groin, and great caution is required in its treatment, and the ancients said that when boils are in a place where it can be shaved as in boils that are on the breasts or in the thighs, and in similar places, one should remove them entirely at their beginning; and when they are large and old, it should not be approached because I never knew anyone to heal it; nor has anyone healed it before me.
And the operations, when in a place where it can be removed as we have said, is that you purge the patient once with black bile; then make him urinate if he has manifest fullness, then cut the patient one boin (a small knife) to perform the operation; then throw down your oncines (bandages or poultices) or boil, and shave off all the hair from all parts, and remove all the flesh without leaving anything; and let the blood flow freely, and be careful to anoint the place with your hand or something, and if the discharge of blood opposes the incision of the artery or vein, cauterize it until the blood is coagulated; then cure it with another treatment until it is healed.
Of hydropisy We have already mentioned in the division the similarities of hydropisy and in what way water collection is made, and the signs of each similarity, and the cure that is made with medicine and the one that is cured with iron: only these two similarities are to be treated; iron should not be used for these .ij. similarities, namely tympanites and yposarche, as it is a fatal thing; therefore, when treating this hydropisy-like condition which is called "eclites" with medicine, and the cure does not help, examine whether the patient is weak or has another disease besides hydropisy, such as dropsy of the belly and similar things; if there is no iron to be used, because there is doubt; but if you see the patient with great strength, who has only hydropisy and does not have any other disease, and he is neither too young nor too old, then work in this way: Lay the patient down straight on your hands, and the attendant presses the abdomen towards the lowest part of the side, then take the curved spatula as shown in this form: It should be sharp at two ends. And it should not be so pointed that it can reach the intestine when inserted, nor can it be blunted;
Then look to see if the urine is directed towards the intestines: if so, you must cut under the buttocks three inches straight up over the anus; and if the urine is due to liver disease, make the incision to the left of the buttocks three inches; and if it's due to stone, make it to the right, and it should not be done with the patient lying on the incision, so that excess fluids do not flow to the weak area.
Then pierce the skin with an instrument, push and pull your hand until you reach the bladder, just as when peeling fruit to the thickness of a nail or more; then pierce the bladder so that the spatula comes to the watery place, which is its location, then withdraw it, and bring out this tool in the form described here: It resembles a thin silver chain, made of light iron or brass, with one small hole at its base; and it has four holes on one side, two on another, and one on the other; and the head is shaped like a feather, and that's the shape of the incision where scribes cut the quill:
On the head above is the esophagus, so when the instrument comes to the water, then hold it up now on the instrument; empty the lower part or one-third, because if you empty more than necessary in that hour, perhaps the patient may die due to the resolution of his spirit from the weapon, or he may fall down, or approach death.
but empty according to the amount of its power, and according to what the condition of the patient and his pulse indicate; then draw out the instrument and stop the water, and it is now held back for the caution that stops the bleeding which is above the siphon, as I have spoken about, that you perforate in this manner; then repeat the instrument the next day if you see the patient suffering from the water, and draw out a small amount of water.
Do this every day and be careful not to keep the water for too long but just a little. And if you have doubts about the patient, and you leave him with much water, cure him with sepulture or hot sand, and by much sweating or bathing and in the sun, and anoint with wine; and cure him with drying medicines until he is well, and cauterize on the stomach and liver and spleen after the extraction of the water, as I have said before.
Of stopping the penis At no time are born children who do not have foreskins on their penis, or the foreskin is small or out of place. If necessary, it must be circumcised immediately with a very thin spatula according to this form: then place a fine piece of cloth under the foreskin and hold and keep it in place for 2 to 4 days until it wants to urinate, at which point the cloth should be removed, and urine passed, and then the foreskin is placed back; and by chance, there should be no problem, because the urine that comes out does not leave the opening closed. If the foreskin is small, it should be treated with a piece of cloth as we have said, so that it expands. Those who do not have a foreskin at its place are eunuchs because no one is born with the foreskin on the head of the penis; therefore, they cannot urinate before lifting their penis, and they cannot enjoy sex because matter cannot come to the opening, which is a bad disease.
And the method of work is that the patient lies supine on their back, their head should be slightly elevated and the neck similarly to the thickness of a feather, so that the patient's chin touches their chest, as required; and guard against bleeding which occurs frequently, and if it happens, stop it by pressing the area that is bleeding, and treat the wound until it heals.
of boils on the penis Often this albathion appears in the penis, and it is an appearance of ugly genital warts; and there are both malignant and non-malignant ones; you should take them one by one with a subtle instrument, cut and clean all of them, then put cotton moistened in Egyptian ointment on top; then treat it with the ointment diafinicon until it heals. And if the elbow is diseased with a putrid color and swollen, you must apply cautery. When you have heated it, and if the elbow joint is inside the arm and has both parts within the flesh and outside, you must first remove the diseased part that is inside; when it is seared, you should treat the outside. For when you are treating it together, the limb of the arm is not assured that it will not be pierced, and it becomes darker and corrupted in the arm and joint; therefore, you must scrape off all that is black and corrupted, then put it on a plaster of honey and flour made from the peel of pommegranate rind and various herbs, and treat it with other remedies until it becomes healthy.
And when bleeding occurs, apply the lunar cautery according to this form: The cauterizer should aid in two positions at once: namely, for bleeding and corruption; and if the limb of the arm is corrupted and retracted, you must bring or cause a cord made of yew wood from the arm, and make the patient urinate; when the hair is loose at the tip of the arm where it occurs in those who have not been circumcised, or it occurs due to injury or abscess, then you must shave it with one instrument, until the ligaments are loosened, and the limb of the arm is freed from all sides.
And if it is a grave matter to speak of this, you must shave it with one razor blade, a little bit of hair from the tip of the arm and the flesh; then squeeze it out very gently between 1 and 2 hours, and place 1 linen cloth dampened with cold vinegar on it so that it does not become inflamed immediately.
Of circumcision
Circumcision is not just a cutting like other wounds; however, when we perform this work of our own will and specifically on infants, it is necessary to make the best and easiest work for salvation.
I say that the ancients did not circumcise their children, for they did not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired by experience.
For I have wanted the greater part of masters and saints who perform circumcision around day one, and for forces, and in all cases with a novacule; however, it is feared because there are two layers, and by chance if one above is cut, the one below may remain.
Now it should be covered, and the pain is doubled; and at the amputation which is deep in the limb, there is no assurance of the point of the member; and during the amputation of the nail, by chance the iron may slip, and spoil the work, and many times it is not necessary for amputation, and I have seen this.
In amputation which is done with the forceps, I have found the advantage of the experiment, because the forceps cut evenly both above and below.
For when you press your hand, you cut evenly all the time; but that the thread should be tightly wrapped around the skin; and follow the method of the first work, so you make the child think that you will not tie the thread only around the rod, but rather let it be free in all the ways that you can. Then make it be between your hands straight, and reapply the forces between your hands or under your feet so that the infant does not see, nor any of the instruments; then push your hand to the shaft and blow or scream, and draw it up as far as the head of the shaft is in; then clean it well of the filth that has accumulated there, then tie the joint with a double thread, then tie it under one peg to another link; and hold it with two fingers by the second knot, and press between the links, then quickly pull the core upwards and draw the head of the shaft;
Then make it be between your hands straight, and reapply the forces between your hands or under your feet so that the infant does not see, nor any of the instruments; then push your hand to the shaft and blow or scream, and draw it up as far as the head of the shaft is in; then clean it well of the filth that has accumulated there, then tie the joint with a double thread, then tie it under one peg to another link; and hold it with two fingers by the second knot, and press between the links, then quickly pull the core upwards and draw the head of the shaft; Leave the pus to flow out drop by drop, for it is the poison; and put powder on top and above the powder, one cloth glued with a mixture of cooked egg white steeped in rose water, combined with fresh rose oil, let it remain until the next day, and treat it with another remedy until it is healed.
The form of the forces for cleansing is as follows: the two heads should be tender and sharp, and their heads should be as large as a hand equally:
The error in the incision of the womb is when the bowels inside are cut; therefore it is necessary that you stretch it with your nail so that the opening resembles an abscess, and then press it equally, and if you cannot hold it with your nail, grasp it with forceps, and then press.
And if they exceed three days, and what is beneath the scrotum swells, leave it until the abscesses are appeased and gently incise the skin; then press as you can move it, and be careful of the part of the scrotum, which will not harm it.
Therefore, treat the limb with things buried in a wound with the powder we have mentioned or how to treat wounds with powders, and if you press too hard, it will go upwards, but it will not harm; therefore, treat it as we have said until it is healed.
Retention of urine
Retention of urine is due to obstruction by a stone, or congealed blood, or pus, or frozen urine, or similar things, as we have said in the division;
And if the urine is not released and you see that retention occurs due to the stone lodged in or neck of the bladder, it is necessary for the patient to be bent on his knees; and his feet should be placed on a chair or the back, and he should extend his abdomen from above the lower back, and restrain the patient as much as possible; then pressure is applied to the neck of the bladder to push out the stone, so that the urine is released.
And if it does not occur as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, you must administer extraction with all the instruments called "syringe," of which this is the form: it should be made of thin delicate silver tube, like the quill of a bird; and the tip of one and a half palm length, and should be fine at the end.
The way to extract urine is that you take a double thread, tie one end of it to a piece of wool or cotton, and stick the end of the thread into the syringe; then tie the excess wool and stick the end of the syringe, then oil or butter and egg white should be applied to the syringe, and make the patient sit on a chair, and rub the bladder and penis with moist oil of olive and cold water.
Then gently insert the syringe into the penis until it reaches the root of the penis, then bend the penis upward towards the anus; then insert the syringe in front up to the bladder, and make the patient feel the urine coming up to the empty place, and this is not done according to this order unless because the conductor guides where it goes is twisted; then the thread is attached to all the wool pieces, and the urine follows the wool, then remove the thread, and correct the urine;
And fill the syringe until the bladder is empty, and the patient urinates.
of diseases of the bladder
When scorching or blood comes into the bladder, or pus is collected there, and you see it distill liquids and medications, do with all the equipment that is called "clepsydra", and this is its form:
It is closed, and has three openings: two on one side, and one on the other, as you see; and the limbs join by which the medicine can be applied so that it stops the flow of moisture well, if it can draw out the moisture, and push when necessary;
and when you wish to throw your medicines into the bladder, place the head of the cupping glass in the moisture, and draw out the drawing that is within; if you draw out the moisture with the cup, and then forcefully push back the drawing inside, the moisture will enter the glass, and come to the bladder immediately, so that the patient will feel it;
and this is the form of the subtle enema by which one administers an enema to the bladder:
And it is made of silver or iron, and the head [the dislocated part] is raised higher; below it there is one breast or the ligaments fall; then take a sheep's bladder and fill it with the moisture you use to cleanse the bladder, then tie it between two breasts using a good thread doubled, and heat one end of the moistened bladder over the fire; then insert the head of the clistere [a tool used for introducing liquids into the body] into the urethra, then hold your hand above the bladder with all the moisture coming towards it, until the patient feels that the moisturized bladder has reached the bladder.
And if you do not have the bladder, then take a piece of parchment, and make one circle, and pierce it roundly all around; then insert a strong thread into these holes, then assemble the circle like you would assemble a syringe, and put inside that which you use for oil, moisture, and water, and seal it in the instrument; and do as you did with the bladder, to press with your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
of the stone
We have already said in the division about the ways of stone, and extraction combined with medicines; and I have said the difference between the stone embedded in the flesh, and all the signs, and when to operate on it by cutting; and in the bladder, and in the member; and I will tell you clearly and briefly.
The stone embedded in the bladder often happens to children, and this is a sign that the urine jumps from the bladder like urine in its subtlety; it opens a hole, and makes the patient's member swell, and he pees many times, then strangles himself; and many foundations occur due to these jumps; and it is easy for children to heal until they are 4 years old, but it is severe in adults, and it is in the middle range for those who are between youth and old age; and it is easier to cure those who have large stones than those who have small ones.
And when we come to the cure, first it is necessary to cleanse the patient with an enema, to draw out all the feces that are in the intestines. Because it sometimes obstructs the search for the stone.
Then take the patient by the feet, turn them and move them downwards, until the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and never move it up again; then make him sit between your hands, his hands below his thighs, so that the bladder is completely inclined downwards; then press and touch it with [something].
If you feel the stone in the space, hurry now to cut it above the stone. And if it does not fall with the touch, wet your index finger of the left hand, if the patient is an infant, or your thumb, if the patient is a young adult; and push it into its foundation, and squeeze the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, move it to the neck of the bladder; then press down on it, and push it towards the place where you intend to cut.
And instruct the assistant to press the bladder with his hand, and command him to extend his right hand upwards, and with his left hand remove the skin that is below the scrotum in the part where the cutting is done; then insert the spatula covering it, which is its form:
And it should be between the coccyx and the pelvis, not in the middle but on the left side of the lower back; and it should be straight across the stone, and your hands should be close to or at the base, and the incision should be wide at the top and narrow inside, according to the size of the stone, not too large;
In case the hands pressing down at the base jump due to strain, know that there is this stone or it has angles and edges: it is necessary to be careful; if it is soft like a plum and round, where the opening is light.
For the one who has angles and edges, make the incision larger; if it does not open, you must tighten with pliers like a chisel at the tip to press the stone so it does not slip away; or you can use a small curved instrument at the tip to press down on it. And if you cannot deceive it in this way, make a small hole and cut through the stone without taking it out, then tighten with vitriol;
1. And if there is more than one arrow, push the largest one first into the bladder's neck, then strike it, pull it out, and the smaller ones afterwards if there are any more. And if it is very large, it must be cut open, and make a larger incision.
Once you have completed your work, apply the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and hold it together, then place one damp, oil-soaked cloth on top of it or oil and cold rose water and cold water to cool the abscess; then make the patient lie down on his neck, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day.
And when you loosen the bandage, clean the wound very well with oil and water, then treat it with ointment of defyacinicon and basilicon until it heals.
And if an abscess comes in the wound and corrosion occurs, and blood congeals in the bladder, keeping the urine back, which is known to occur without pain with the urine: therefore press your hand on the wound, draw out that blood, for if it remains, it will corrode the bladder and cause its rupture;
lift the wound from water and pus and dressings, and help in all ways you know, until it is healed; and it is necessary that you tie up the two legs of the patient, and gather the medicines on the place.
If the stone is small and it is conducted by the urine and fixed inside, and the urine cannot be expelled; you should cure it with what I say next, namely, to cut many times, and excuse yourself from the cutting by this cure. I have already proven this thus.
Take one iron rod of this form and sharpened at four angles on one point:
then take one thread and twist it around the rod under the stone so that it cannot return into the bladder; then push the rod gently into the rod until it reaches the stone; and turn the rod slightly in the stone bit by bit, as much as you can pierce the stone from the other side; if urine comes out immediately, press your hand on the part of the stone that is inside the rod. It will soon be broken, and pass with the urine, and the patient is healed.
and if you cannot do that for any reason that prevents it, then tie one thread under the stone and another above, then push the rod towards the stone between the two threads, then pull it out, and untie the thread, and clean the congealed blood in the wound; and heal it until it is healed.
Of the stone of women
It rarely happens that a stone appears in women, and if it ever occurs, it is a great grief for the woman, and it is forbidden for four reasons: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a woman who knows herself well enough to be examined by mirrors, especially when she is chaste.
And the third way is that perhaps one cannot find a woman skilled in this art of hands; and the fourth way is that the stone of the woman is deeper than the stone of a man, therefore it requires a more profound incision, causing great fear.
And if you need assistance with this matter, then you must find a skilled midwife, and if you cannot find one, do not hesitate to call upon one chaste virgin; and present a wise woman in the life of women, or a woman who knows some part of the art, and order her to perform whatever you command regarding the incision of the stone.
And pay close attention to whether the woman is a virgin; then you should insert your finger or probe and search for the stone; if you find it, confine it under your finger, and advise her to push with her hand where the patient is in pain, and press her left hand against the bladder.
If you find it (the stone), you should make her push it gently from the entrance of the bladder towards the root of the thigh until it reaches the root; then strike on the stone at the root of the thigh near the middle of the vagina, where it is moved apart, and feel the stone in that area; do not move your finger above or below the stone, and cut it into pieces at the first small piece.
Then push the root (of the stone) into the thigh, if you feel the stone, press the wound so that the stone can come out further, and know that there are many types of stones: small or large, rough or smooth, long or round, and those with grooves. Know their characteristics to determine the outcome.
And if the wound opens up, apply powdered vitriol and hold it in place for an hour until the wound stops bleeding; then return to your work, while the stone remains hard, and have tools that I told you about for extracting the stone from a man to help you in your work.
If the wound is an artery that has been cut, place powder on it and bind with bandages, do not start again and leave the stone untouched and do not draw it out for fear of killing the patient; then heal the wound.
When the heat of the blood has subsided and the swelling has decreased, return to your work while the stone remains hard.
of a fleshy hernia
Aqueous is not otherwise called an accumulation of moisture or white chyle, which is beneath the bladder, containing the egg; and it is called "chyle," and sometimes it is properly in the egg's membrane, if one thinks that it is another egg; and it is the skin of the bladder between the white chyle we have mentioned; and this does not happen except when there is an empty space.
And the growth of this aqueous is due to weakness that comes from the bladder, and that matter is spread out.
And sometimes there comes percussion on the head, and this moisture can have various colors: either it is yellowish declining, or without red, or black, or watery white, and this happens more often.
and these are the signs to recognize this assembly, for if it is white as we have said, then it is an abscess, that is, long like an egg's figure, and does not open the head, because it has moisture all around.
and if there is moisture in the actual cloth, it is an abscess with part of an egg, and for this reason, they think that it is another egg.
If moisture is between the skin and the white flesh (subcutaneous tissue), it can be felt easily; therefore, to know the color of the moisture, probe it thoroughly with the intruder, so that you can determine its form as described before. Accordingly, judge what is inside through the intruder.
Accordingly, judge what is inside through the intruder. When we cure it with iron (using a fire cautery), the patient should be purified as much as possible and his body should be filled. Then lay him on his back, on something slightly raised, and put many cloths underneath him;
Then he should lie on his left side, and command the minister to be on his right, and extend the arm towards one of the two ribs of the chest.
Then take the spatula, strike the chest's skin between them along its length until reaching the nipple, and make your incision straight in dividing the chest's skin up to the white line, and peel off the skin gently according to your ability.
Then pierce the white part with one large hole and drain all the fluid, then put your thumbs, and stretch the white part upward; and do not touch the nipple but only the white part; strike everywhere or in pieces gently the rib of it if you don't strike it well, the fluid will return.
And if the egg (fetus) jumps out of your work, reset it in its place when you have completed the procedure with the knife; then gather the two levers from the knees and stitch them together, then treat it as for other wounds, until it is healed.
If the egg (fetus) is corrupted by another disease, then it is necessary to tie the vessels that are suspended, fearing the release of blood; next, cut the cord entirely and extract the egg, and treat it as we have said.
And if the egg (fetus) is assembled in two parts joined together, know that these are two branches; then cut the other part as you have done the first equally, next squeeze out the blood, and put linen soaked in rose oil on the wound.
And place other moistened wool in vinegar and oil on it, and put two coins on top, and cover with double cloths, and tie it above all the band that is in this shape:
Then take two cloths, and use moistened linen according to this pattern and assemble them in the loincloth strap, and one of the coins should be placed on the bottom up to the back, and the other at the hilt part; and the other coin on top of the two angles, and assemble the rest of the strap in the buckle of the loincloth.
And sometimes this remedy is a cautery ramie in the size of an iron knife, and you should take one subtle cautery cutlery, and make the hide of the coins hot as we have said, so that the white pus that contains the water is exposed.
If one takes the fire cautery in this form, and pierces it through to the bones at once, and burns it with this subtle cautery heat:
And make it in all ways as you can, until everything is heated up; and be careful that the fire does not touch the egg (meaning: do not burn too deep); and know that this work is more salutary; and always be cautious about the flow of blood, and take care to avoid cutting into the bone.
And if anything happens contrary (to what you expect), either an abscess forms or the flow of blood or something else, then treat what is happening contrary to you, according to what has been said before.
And if the patient is afraid and does not want to endure this work due to its horribleness, you should perform puncture, as I tell you, and it is that when you are certain by the signs we have mentioned that ramice aquouse is in place,
place the patient on a raised seat (or chair); then pierce the abscess in the lower part with a broad lancet and make the puncture long along the body length; ensure that the wounds are wide enough for all the pus to flow.
then put cotton over the place and hold it (the puncture site), letting the remaining pus flow out, then care for the wound until it heals.
And if the white linen cloth does not allow the fluid to flow from the wound's mouth, you must insert a needle or the instrument used to treat the fluid of edema (as described previously); enlarge one-half inch the wound, and verify that the fluid returns, and assemble it after 5 months or so, and when it is assembled as before, the patient will pass his days.
From the abscess of the eye
Verify that in the section of this treatment many people are afraid with various dispositions, which is why it seems to me that one should leave it.
And I will tell you the work and the similarities of the abscess.
Then, many abscesses come from bodies or heads; this happens often.
It is known by excessive sour and hot fluid spreading in the head, or due to injury.
The color of the abscess is according to the color of the body; it does not bring pain, but is a severe abscess.
And by chance there is an abscess hard and painful, and of such color, and sometimes comes from the artery, or from swelling of the vein.
When it comes from the artery, it is known by the abscess being hot to the touch, when you press on it with your fingers. And you should not touch it at all.
A person who is swollen with vein is known by his disposition at the expression of touch on the fingers,
and can easily make an incision on this appearance, and on other charms; and it is that you cut the core of the cyst, then the egg is raised high, and draw out the white pus from its center and release the suspension (or suture) from all parts of the egg.
If the egg is already soft with these born characters, then it is necessary to draw out the egg and cut it;
And if it is air within the bladder, or in that which is inside the bladder, you should release all of its contents and strike it repeatedly.
And if the birth of the bladder is at the back, you should strike it all, and extract the egg, as we have said.
And when your work is completed, you should apply the wound with damp wool in oil of roses and wine, then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
of the abscess of the tonsils
This is an abscess covered by a swelling resembling a boil, with the softening of the tumors. and the patient moans severely when he walks.
and the cure for this disease is as dangerous as it has been previously described.
And yet we shall tell you its workings, according to what the ancients did.
It is required that you make the patient sit on a raised seat, then push the suspension from the hips downwards to your hands. extend all the vessels which are close to the penis and brand them with the master's iron, and stretch them out correctly.
then cut the sharp spatula wide across the vessels, until they are exposed.
and then peel off on both sides, as we have said in the extraction of the arteries that are in the temple.
Then insert an awl where there is a single double thread, and tie it to the first place where the wound is, and tie it straight to the other end. Then press the bones in midline straightly, according to the length of the body, and remove the corrupt humors.
Then treat the wound as in other cases where one applies bowen, so that no evil smelling matter flows from either of the eyes.
because by doing this no harm will come, and if all the humors flow from the eyes, it is necessary to drain all the humors. If the eye loses its nourishment due to the incision of vessels, they dry up and cannot be helped.
Of the rupture of the sinus (or sinew) The occurrences of this hernia are through the section that comes or through the sifac (ligament), or extension on the abdomen in the area of the groins; because the intestines descend from that rupture to one of the anuses.
and this hernia is either through the sifac or its extension, and there are these two ways of its most common causes: either due to impact, jump, strain, lifting heavy objects, or similar things.
And the signs when it is of the extension of the fracture, are that it happens little by little, over a long time, and does not come suddenly. And the abscesses are equal up to the full depth because the fracture presses on the intestines.
And the signs when it is of the section of the fracture, that it brings sudden pain at the beginning, and the abscesses appear variously under the skin near, and this is because of the issue of the intestines and the body turning away from the fracture.
And sometimes the intestines protrude through the circle, and it is retained, causing great pain to suffer by the patient, especially when pressed.
And in these iron treatments, there is fear, so it is fitting to avoid them.
And the method of work is that you command the patient to insert their hand inside the intestine into the wound, if it can go in. Then place him supine on his back, with his legs lifted.
Then cut the skin above, and remove all the hair with length. Then insert your fingers into the wound as needed to open the abscess, and make sure they are thick enough for the pus to come out.
Then scrape the underlying tissue that is under the skin of the hump, until the white underlying tissue becomes hard and is exposed all around.
Then push your finger into the cavity, into the space between the white bone (synovial sheath) that is under the eggshell membrane (the periosteum), and between the second synovial sheath.
and move it back behind the eggshell, and between the second synovial sheath; then move your right hand inside the joint cavity, and lift up the white bone (synovial sheath) to your left hand, and remove the eggshell towards the lower abdomen. and instruct the assistant to extend the eggshell upwards, and detach what is in front of the ligament.
And if the intestines are wrapped around your thumb or hard white matter is found and you discover anything of the sort, push it into the stomach beneath.
Take an awl with a large thread made of 10 strands and push it into the back part of the white matter, which is behind the skin of the cockscomb; after the waist, then cut the limbs that appear to be attached with threads, until there are 4 threads left. then assemble the threads one on top of another in a cross shape and tie the white matter (which is behind the skin of the cockscomb) with a strong thread of 2 parts. Then wrap the heads of the fingers, and tie them together with strips of cloth, so that no servant who feeds them can enter inside, except an abscess cloth does not come in. and place the ligature according to the first ligature long by 2 fingers of that length, and afterwards leave the siphon (or opening) which is below the neck large enough for a thumb to pass through.
and after that (ligature), according to the roundness that an egg carries; then strike in the part which is below the skin of the knuckles, as much as it needs, and bend, as we have said before.
Then bring moistened linen in oil, put it on the wounds, and bring the thread that we have mentioned. And sometimes white boils are cauterized as we have said, after incision, out of fear of the discharge of blood.
For this happens many times, and leave the thread until it falls out by itself; and if it does not fall quickly, it should be burned with hot water, and put on what we have said until it falls.
Then cure the wound with another remedy, until it is perfectly healed.
Of a carnous hernia
In this remedy, I have never seen anyone dare to perform the treatment with iron.
And the ancients said that it is done in a manner similar to the remedy which includes a nail, in such a way that you tie the vessels, above the wound lightly below;
Then, insert the nail and heal the abscess of those who are opening, as long as the vessels leak; and heal it as we have said, until it is healed.
Sometimes rot comes in wounds, as we have said, and they are opened; no intestines should be removed from the openings, and if some are, it is little, and repair them every hour.
Moreover, if it remains too long at this point, the wound or ulcer grows so much that the intestines come out.
And this happens because of the swelling of the ulcer in wounds, as we have said, since it is extended, then softened and opened the flesh.
And the cure is by cautery, as we have previously stated; and sometimes it is cured by iron in this manner:
and the patient lies supine on his back between your hands, then strike the swelling along the rupture with a flatiron of three fingers width;
and draw out the pus that is under the skin, then take the rod and put it on the swollen area of the sore;
and press firmly with the abdomen, then cut the two visible areas of the sore on top of the rod, and cut both;
Then straighten the head (of the patient), and do not apply any oil or cover it with an egg nor extend the eye nor anything else, as I have told you in the treatment of the ramyke (abscess) of the intestines;
Then treat it with wound treatments. And when you apply threads, if he suffers from an abscess and treats the wound until it is healed.
The ointment is confined and has no appearance in the wound, and cauteries are made here and closer to salvation.
Of the softening of the skin around the eyes
Often the skin around the eyes becomes soft in some men, because the glands within are softened and there is pus to see; and when it is observed that it needs to be cured, it is necessary to make the patient lie on his back, and to strike the softened skin with the natural skin; then bring together the two lips at a stitch, and if you see, sew the excess of the softened skin at three or four stitches firmly; then strike between the stitches, and let the cure be as for other wounds, until it is healed, and stitch the threads.
When struck with a blow
1. Know that castrations are condemned in our law, and I would prefer not to speak of it in this book; and it is necessary only for two reasons: one is that the eyes answer when questioned about it and its cure; and the other, because we often need castration of certain animals to help us, such as a pig, a sheep, a goat and others. I therefore say that castrations are done in two ways: by attraction or by incision. In the method we do by attraction, we seize the animal in hot water until the genitals soften and swell; then we grasp it with our hand, keeping it pressed until it is put back and you no longer feel it.
The translation for "des hermofrodites" in this context would be "hermaphrodites". This term refers to individuals with both male and female sexual characteristics or reproductive organs. In medieval times, such individuals were often considered abnormal or even monstrous by some societies due to their ambiguous gender identity.
Hermaphrodites are of two types: in men, there is an opening between the two genitals as in the figure of nature of a woman, or it has hair and sometimes urine from inside. And in women, it has something like a penis and two genitals. The treatment for men and women is to cut around the scrotum and heal them as with other wounds; but in the second case, for men who urinate through the skin of the genitals, there is no cure.
Of the torture
The torture is a boil located on a natural part, which is too ugly to look at; and some women have as large a boil as a hand, and it is called a cure. It is necessary that you dye the surplus of the boil with your hand or onions, and gently strike it; do not go too deep so that blood does not come out, then heal it with another treatment until it becomes healthy again; and at another boil that arises from the mouth of the sore, use it, and perhaps jump out and resemble a cow, and for this reason they called it in ancient times "kowe disease". If you must strike it, as we have said about the boil, then heal it until it becomes healthy again.
Of the eructation
1. The erratic is when the nature of a woman is not discernible, or it is small; and it is natural by birth, or accidental due to disease that comes about; or it is by false union, or from subtle or thick sperm, and it is complete in the marriage, or outside, wherever it may be; and they must conceive, give birth, and sometimes produce flowers; and their knowledge of this is through the observation of the belly. If the effusion appears imminent, whether at your hand or side, if it is subtle sperm, and it is near the two leves (levels?), hasten and act in this way: place your two index fingers together, and the woman should be on her back, spreading her legs; then form the two leves (levels?), so that the subtle sperm is rounded, and the effusion is stopped; then take wool, wet it in oil, and put it on the spot, and have the woman lie down at home every day, so that it does not heal. And if the sperm is hard and thick, you must cut it with a spatumile (spatula), shaped like a mirte leaf. If the effusion is of blood, stop it at the onyx (clitoris) and cut; have medicines to stop bleeding, such as acacia, dragon's blood, incense, along with much egg; then bring a wide plank bandage so that the wound does not heal; and in this way, it should be long-lasting, and bring a linen dry tent; then cure other wounds until it heals. And when in marriage, char nee (blood) comes, it must be covered in this manner, unless there is an abscess festered. For the abscess festered that is in the marriage, one should not touch to heal.
Emorroidal lesions
Emorroidal openings are exposures of veins, which without treatment usually occur; and when emorroidal openings become old, they swell; and as we have said in the division, their resemblances, signs, and cures have been explained. I will now tell you those that respond to treatment. I say that emorroids and the swelling, when they are fully formed in the anus, cannot be felt, unless they are treated with iron. Those at the opening of the anus can be felt, and these are those that can be cured. Therefore, you should put the woman in a cold house, then attach the swelling to the tweezers, and cut off its roots. Then sprinkle medicinal powders on it, such as acacia powder and dragon's blood powder and incense and similar things; then press her feet against the opening for an hour, then immerse her in cold water. And when bleeding stops, place her in a decoction of sumac and grapefruit peel and hawthorn leaves and similar things, and then take barley flour, mix it with honey and oil, and make one poultice on her back. If it itches, that is good. If not, fartether blisters on the back and near the nipples without piercing them; then take linen, wet it in juice of plantain or jujube tree leaves with old wine, and apply it to the area. And when the abscess rests, cure the area with ointment until it heals; and that which is called "albathir" is red, and resembles a rough crust, which should be covered as I have said for the swelling; and then treat it until it heals.
abscesses in the anus
Many kinds of abscess come in the anus, such as boils, hard and painful abscesses, herpes, ulcers, fistulas, emorroids, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in the division. Therefore, it is necessary for me to tell you here about the hot abscess that comes in the anus, which is not one of the boils that are round; and if you want to know how to use iron, observe if the abscess is hard at the beginning of its appearance, filled with heat and fever, and turns red when touched. Then do not hurry to pierce it, but let it ripen until the pain subsides; and then place the patient on one seat, or two small seats where he can lean, and support his back and feet against the legs; and spread his thighs, and place his arms under his knees, and tie them well with a good rope; then direct the pus towards the right side, and bring out the tool for opening the anus, as follows: when you bring this tool, it is necessary that when you introduce it, it does not go in too far and does not hurt the patient; if the tool is larger, it is necessary to cover the depth of the anus with cloth, so that the tool does not hurt it; and it must be inserted with the cup of the tool on top, and tied. And when the abscess opens, and one massages it by hand, it should be covered with a linen cloth at the head, and with a spatula made of soft leather or waxed paper; and when the pus is emptied, it should be covered with tents moistened in rose oil or dry green oil; place the tent over the wound towards the back and over the anus and over the handle with clean, wet linen that has been boiled or macerated. Then treat it after two days with ointment as previously described until it heals; and sometimes the anus and the wound are lifted with water and honey, and then long root of lis or aristolochia root cooked in water is applied; then return to the ointment. And if the wound returns to the anus, it is necessary to avoid using iron, but treat it as we have said in the division.
Of childbirth
The midwife must first recognize the figure of natural childbirth and its signs when she sees the woman dilate in the lower part and desire to smell the air; then hasten for the infant to come forth; thus know that this childbirth is according to nature, and is born through the vagina, accompanied by a second one; and when you see these signs, it is necessary to press gently on the woman's belly so that the infant comes out quickly; for when it descends towards the head, the second one follows it, and the husband cleans himself of his superfluities with good purification; and this which comes otherwise does not come naturally. For sometimes it comes over its feet, or the body or the shoulders, or the hands, or on the belly, or on the back, and is turned by chance over its neck, and in other evil ways; therefore it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and skillful in these matters, and to avoid error and deception, and I will show you all the figures on how one should assist.
If the infant comes out over its head naturally and the woman gives birth painfully, and her strength is weak, make her sit on a saddle or have other women hold her; anoint her nature with oil or fenugreek that has been cooked, then the midwife should insert a small spatula of this shape: 1. And split the second [birth canal], and strike its tip with its nail until the moisture which is within it comes out; and hold the woman's belly as the baby descends, and if it doesn't descend, you must plaster her with musk-based poultice of fenugreek with camomile oil; then make her take in deep breaths and vomit, and keep her mouth and nose closed for an hour: this will now help the baby.
3. Of the birth of the child on its feet When the baby comes out on its feet, you must push it upwards; And then turn the thigh bone by thigh bone, until they are even.
Then take a piece and stretch the thigh bone by thigh bone.
Can it jump up to the knees if commanded, and make it expel everything inside with a push? If God wills, it will jump.
And if it is not as we have said, turn it bit by bit, until it is according to the natural figure. Then it will be easily.
And if it does not come as we have said, take muskroot of height, and oil from the sage plant, and melted resin, and grind all in one mortar. and put this ointment inside the female's nature (i.e., the vagina).    The text is referring to a treatment using an ointment for a medical issue that involves the female reproductive system, but it doesn't specify what the issue is. The translation provided is a guess based on the context of the surrounding sentences and the meaning of the words used. It is always best to consult with an expert or multiple sources when interpreting historical texts. Then make him sit upright in great pain down to his chest.
And when it is softened beneath, make one myrrh collar and put it underneath, leaving for an hour. Then make him sit on a chair, then make him vomit and hold his mouth and nose shut, and press his stomach gently because the child is about to jump now. from the birth of the child on its knees When an infant comes in this form, place his hands apart bit by bit;
The discharge from the child comes down one hand wide. It is necessary to devise a way to return the hand. If it cannot be returned (to its place), raise the woman (patient) and go.
If she cannot walk, make her lie down on a bed and spread her legs apart.
then apply the musk oil that I mentioned earlier.
And if it does not give birth [to a baby], make her sit on a seat or stool, then study the method of repositioning the hand. And have her push out the baby according to its natural shape, make her vomit, and tell her to hold it until the child is born.
Hold the baby by its neck and spread out your hands, then turn its face towards the back of its mother. The ball should hold [the baby's] hand, then gently pull and twist it [in a clockwise direction].
And when it is even, place on top the muscle balm of high altitude and oil, as we have said, then instruct it to move slowly;
Then, once you have done this, make her sit on a chair and instruct her to grab hold of herself; then make her vomit. In this same way, you must follow it through to the end.
In this same way, you must follow it through to the end. When it comes to this method, you must continue the procedure until the moisture is drained by squeezing the instrument with your fingernail.
And if the infant is placed on its face and neck, press down on the abdomen, so that it is not held back, and the infant dies.
then push the child inside until you have put it as necessary, and command the woman to take care of herself once.
from the birth of twins Know that twins are born often, and sometimes triplets or quadruplets; and this is not strange and rarely happens. Twins are rare and do not live long if you call them by name;
I know that they are multiplied, and they are destroyed by the scribe who divides them, who is associated with death.
And sometimes it occurs as naturally as one gives birth, as we have said.
If it comes forth laboriously, as the treatment has been described and let the balm be subtle, make it quickly and lightly as required. And make it according to what is worth moving towards salvation. of many children
of many children Sometimes they are formed in the womb, one or two or three or four or five or six or seven, or more up to fifteen, and they are all formed in the shape of a child by the measurement of the sagely grown,
and it is necessary that the bailiff knows this, for by chance similar things may happen; Then act according to what is necessary.
Of a dead child
When you cure the woman of a dead or unborn child, as I said in the division, and it does not come forth, and you are forced to work by hand; it is necessary that you know if the woman is of good virtue, and has no sickness or fear of death;
The woman must lie on her back, with her head inclined downwards, and her legs raised.
And the midwife should pull on both sides of the woman's belly, or tie her to the bed so that she is not treated in the delivery of the child.
Then rub the mouth of the woman with moist oil mixed with musk and aloe and flax seed, then anoint the midwife's hands with these oils and these mixtures. Then push gently into the joint, then hold one joint where it pushes in until it can be moved.
and prepare if the bone is dislocated upward towards its head. insert fingers in the joint or neck or mouth or palate or below the beard or wrist or near the sides.
if the dislocation is at the feet, insert or press and apply pressure to the middle of the bones.
And it is necessary that the onyx be held with the right hand, and place the concavity between its two hands of the left hand, and push gently with all his hand, and pierce the onyx in one of the positions we have mentioned, until it comes to an empty thing;
then pierce against one other onyx, or where you have it at hand, so that the extraction is even;
And then equal it by moving it from one side to the other, so that it may move; and the joints should be set for holding it in place, as shown here:
And if there remains some part of it, the healer applies oil to some of his fingers and pushes into that part, drawing the other part.
And if there remains no part of it, put this joint or higher up and do so until it comes out completely.
If one hand comes before the other and cannot be returned by pulling,  \] If you need to turn something over, do it until it's all turned.
Then fold the leather at the joint of the foot or the heel, and in this way you should do it with the other hand, and for both feet.
And if the child's head is fat and narrow at the exit, or if it has a sharp collection of bone. If it is necessary for you to insert the sharp spinal splint between your fingers, and then press the head and draw out the fluid. You will go to the instrument called "almidach", from which the shape comes with the tools or chapter that follows this one.
And do the same with any other natural swelling. and then pull the bones apart with pliers
if the head of the shoulder jumps out and it is held in place by a splint, it should be cut open until the moisture that is deeper inside comes out.
if it cannot come out, cut it into pieces as you can.
If it is swollen in the abdomen or under the ribs, then you must cut it open until the moisture comes out.
And if the baby is above its feet, it moves lightly, and the alignment towards the mouth of the birth canal is slight.
And if it is in the stomach or the belly, you must draw it out with one swaddling cloth wrapped around the hand; And stretch the stomach or belly until the moisture that is there is corrected.
and if other members are dislocated, and the head remains. if you press the ball of the thumb deeply into the wound and draw it as far as the mouth of the wound; then insert one or two fingers, and pull forcefully;
but if the mouth of the wound is narrowed by a hot abscess that has come, there is no need to work; It is necessary to administer moist and fat substances; And apply plasters, soak in warm softening and moistening liquids.
And if the bone is protruding from the body and you can make it level, then administer what was said for live bone.
And if you do not have the ability to do this, break it into pieces and remove nothing from the second part (the broken bone).
And when you have done this, bring him what we said in bandages for abscesses that come in marriage;
and if bleeding occurs, apply sharp binding, and bring other treatments.
I saw a woman whose belly had been stillborn, then consulted with another on this matter, and revived the other. After a long time, an abscess came in the armpit, and swelled so much that it opened, and began to cause great pain.
I was called to heal, and I thought for a long time, but could not close the wound.
I applied a strong plaster of attraction, and afterwards, some bone came out, and after several days another one did. I marveled much, because the stomach has no bones.
I thought that it was the bones of a dead child.
I probe/examine the wound and insert my fingers into the bone until the woman is in a better state; and keep the woman in this position for a long time, and then proceed with a little bit of pressure on the bone;
and I have not encountered this chapter but for this reason: when the master finds an unusual thing, he knows how to help it.
to return the husband to his place
Here comes the first sentence to translate: Here is the translation:
and let the length of the rod be one palm and a half, and the width of the hollowed-out part of the prongs be one finger's breadth, and their length one span. And between the two limbs should be two joints of the same bone, which are joined together firmly in one and in the other, half a palm's length or slightly more;
And this pair of joints are driven into the mouth of the jaw to open when turning the two horns.
Another form, more subtle and lighter in appearance, should be made of ebony or boxwood, resembling pliers. And let the two shoulders have two joints, as you see, of one palm's length, and two fingers' width;
and when you wish to open the woman on all the instruments, make her sit on one bed, her feet hanging and legs apart; then push the two shoulders together towards the woman, and hold the head of the instrument beneath her thighs; Then take your hand to all the tools, just as you have done with the scissors equally, according to the amount that you wish to open the mouth of the wound, while the bailiff does what he wishes.
These tools are all mounted, and have similar appearances; and when the smith has equipped them, he works more quickly, and higher for men according to their size.
Do not disdain the tool that you have not equipped, for its necessity is not excusable.
When the afterbirth is retained during childbirth, it is necessary that you instruct the patient to hold in her urine, and then make her vomit with something bitter, and hold your hands at her mouth and nose. If she jumps because of this, it's alright.
If not, take a small pot, and make a pessary or cup, and put in it herbs that can open the mouth of the woman, such as rue, anise, chamomile, camphor, and centaury.
All these herbs or some of them should be cooked or boiled in water over the fire; then put a cloth or lid on the pot, and the other end into the mouth of the patient.
and let it simmer until the vapors reach the patient; then make him vomit as we have said. If the patient suddenly falls down.   In this medieval medical treatise, the author provides guidance on various medical procedures such as cauterizing wounds, treating dislocations, and administering herbal remedies. The text also acknowledges the potential dangers of these procedures, such as the risk of death due to fear or complications. It is important to note that while the language used in this treatise may seem archaic and difficult to understand, it provides valuable insights into medieval medicine and healthcare practices. And if it remains after this treatment and does not heal, instruct the nurse to moisten her left hand in sesame oil or mustard plaster, then apply it to nature.
And if the second bone is found, seize and stretch it out straight, so that the marriage does not resist during extraction. But you must move it gently to the right and left, then pull; it will come and dislocate itself.
And if the mouth of the bladder is stretched, we have said the cure for emptying, and the fumigation of herbs.
if it does not have all that we have said, then ensure you do not draw it out.
but the one at the mouth of the bladder must be tied to the woman's thigh, then clisterize with four-ingredient ointment.
if it passes and returns, and comes out again; nevertheless, when it does so, if the patient experiences a bad smell in the stomach and head, and swells, it harms the sick person.
Therefore, it is necessary for suitable fumigations for this purpose: no ancient one has proven the fumigation of dill and dried figs.
The shape of the instrument with which one fumigates the woman for the retention of flowers and the expulsion of the afterbirth is this:
And it is made of glass resembling a dog's head, and a thin neck is put in its nature, and large cheeks over the fire.
And let the fumigation be over the coals, and the itch while it is destroyed, and begin another.
to pierce the foundation
Many children are born who have not yet pierced their foundation, but it has been stopped by some subtle means. Therefore, it is necessary to open that stoppage in the proper place, and do not pierce it with a sharp spur, and be careful not to touch the membrane.
Then place a soft cloth soaked in wine and oil on it, then cure with ointment until it heals.
And if you doubt that it will stay in place, then insert a wooden peg, and leave it for many hours, and remove it when the patient sees fit to move to rooms.
And sometimes there comes a sudden swelling of a wound or an abscess; in this case cover it with lard (i.e., pork fat). If it is to be treated, do as we have said about the wooden peg.   This text suggests that the authors are discussing how to treat wounds and abscesses. They recommend using a wooden peg for certain types of injuries, and also suggest covering them with lard (pork fat) if they swell suddenly.
of the fistula (a passage between two organs or cavities that is not supposed to be there, such as an anal fistula) from its base    This line suggests that the text is discussing a medical condition known as a "fistula" which is an abnormal passage between two organs. The phrase "de la fistule dou fondement" refers to treating this condition from its base. Bladder stones that come from beneath the foundation are nodular, and those that emerge from the foundation's side, or in the gap between two parts,   (Translation for line 1)
If there is a fistula or more than one, and when the nodular mass is old, it works, and fresh moisture wakes up pus or thin boils,    (Translation for line 2)
And sometimes these fistulas are chronic; and they are known by those who observe them when the patient has an emission or wind-passage, and in some cases, it jumps out one way or another.  (Translation for line 3)
And if the fistulas penetrate to the bladder and halfway down the penis; and they reach as far as the knee joint, and into the hollow of the cavity of the hip.
And thus one recognizes a fistula that is penetrating to its root, but not penetrating: And you insert your index finger or root into the fistula, and insert a fine awl of iron or steel into the fistula if there is no tortuosity.
And if it has tortuosity, push a thin tent of plank (or a horse's hair), as much as you feel the tent or the hair against your hand;
and if you do not feel it, and there is no purulent discharge, neither wind nor worms, as we have said:   -= No comment or contextual information added. Here's the translation only: know that it does not pierce through (the flesh); hurry up to cure it. -= No comment or contextual information added. Here's the translation only:
And when the fistula is pierced up to the bladder or the urinary passage, if it urinates through it and cannot be sealed with medicine.
If it is pierced up to the joint of the leg, if it comes out blood at the level. if it does not have tortuosity and the location of the pain is around it, then it is definitely broken, and no medicine or ointment can heal it.
And in these Persian blisters, there is no remedy but hard work, and the vain attempts of foolish doctors who interfere with them.
In those that are not Persian and not old, in hope of healing by iron, as I have experienced,  ...
and the patient lies between your hands on his back; and lift up the legs to above the knees, and have the knees inclined towards the stomach;  ... then insert a tent of linen or wood if there is crookedness, as you know where the tent comes.
If the patient feels it around the base, you must insert your finger.
If it pierces the patient through, and it is discovered or you feel between your finger and the flesh, then know that it is penetrated. and it shall not be worked at all, for it cannot be healed.
One must know that one can heal some, but it happens little;
and help is given to him, when one heats the subtle cautery according to the width of the fistula, as has been said before; and fill the entire thing in the fistula until it comes out from its base; and do this 2 or 3 times, as you know that these little charred things should be burned, which are similar to a bird's feather;
And then heal the swollen tents with butter, until the heat subsides, then heal it with a healing ointment, warm and binding.
If that heals, that's good. But if it cannot be healed otherwise,
and if the tent enters in, and does not pierce to the depth where the foundation is, and between your hand and the tent put a thick covering of skin or cloth, and you see the fistula beneath that cover with care. If the edge of the fistula begins, push it forward toward the tent, and then apply the fire cautery until it reaches the tip of the tent.
The tent will be released and cut; then take out the charred pieces that seem like a feather of a bird, and nothing remains.
And if the flesh wounds itself, cut between you and the wound; then cauterize it with fire or medicine ointment.
For the fire cauteries have two good qualities: burning of these charred pieces and stopping the flow of blood and drying up the moisture.
Then, treat wet tent wounds with butter or crushed oatmeal until the flesh becomes soft and the charred part is submerged in it.
Then treat deep, hard, charred sores with dry, sharp instruments as the remedies are dry.
For when it is restored, it becomes healed and does not return again.
And if a fistula comes up to the full depth and is removed from the body, push it down towards the foundation and examine it.   The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
If you feel the temptation and there is a thin cloth or leather or skin close to piercing it, there should be no escape but only a way of faith and hope through the administration of one of the three methods:
or you cauterize it as we have said, or you plunge it to the hilt, or if there is pus, place a lance and cure it as before;
and do not go too far in, covering the foundation's support, and let the exudations come out through it voluntarily; then heal, as we have said;
then heal, as we have said; if by chance it becomes healthy, then you remove that covering and clean it when it is cut off at the base, either with a probe or another instrument pointed. then disinfect that charred flesh that is in the wound, as much as you can;
then study to restore the wound and keep the fistula in the area away from the base: it will be easier for the patient.
And sometimes there are fistulas in this manner: and it is when you bite the tent (or opening) into the fistula, and it is where it touches the foundation underneath the skin on top. Take a small hole pierced on the cheek in this manner: and push one thread of cord through it (the small hole), and push the tent into the fistula all the way to its end, along with the thread.
If it is perforated at the foundation margin inside, then pull out the thread so that you can push your finger (or the foundation).
And draw out the head with thread, and put together the two shoulders together, and hold one to the other, and leave it for 1 or 2 days;
And hold it without moving, until the threads sew together these things that are between them, and bind;
Then heal the wound when it is sewn up and healed.
If there is no fistula, make it pierced in all ways that you can, if it is not too deep.  \[Fistula is a tube-like passage between two organs or through the skin.\]
It is not right to cover the fracture with a bandage immediately upon setting it, and then heal it as we have said, until it heals completely.
The shape of the thorn-like splint used to make a fistula is very sharp at one end and cuts through. and on the other hand it is not blunt, so as not to cover what should not be covered, as you see here.
Emordices are of two kinds: they are within the foundation, as grain of resin, and if there are small or large ones, and on the outside blood is present. and if there is one or more, they are displaced from the foundation and at the head of the foundation; but those that are displaced have a little moisture,
And still always or a little amount of citrus juice or a little blood, and have the color of the body;
and the care of those who have it within the foundation, is that you command the patient to strain themselves to urinate in chambers, until the foundations subside, and the sons appear. if you hurry, and pierce it with tongs or hold it with your nail, then strike its roots.
and if the tongs cannot hold them because of moisture, then take it with a cloth or cotton or a piece of gauze. And pull it to your arms, then strike it, and powder on top of some hot powders that are in place of the cautery; or you cauterize it as stated or in the chapter on cauterization, then you treat it with other treatments until it is healed;
and if the foundation cannot come out, clisterize the patient with a harsh and biting clyster to wash the affected area, so that it comes out openly;
The patient should not prepare himself, and if his veins are forced from their foundation, it is a light cure. And you should grasp them with your nail or tweezers and strike them, then heal them as we have said, until they are healthy and fear the incision by iron.
You should apply the stitching in this manner: take a twisted thread, put it into a needle, then draw the thread above and pierce the needle from the other side, and turn the two ends of the thread below the needle. and if it is wide, make the stitches close, then knot the thread, pull out the needle, and do the same with all the others, leaving one for draining excess blood;
Then place a soft cloth soaked in rose oil or cerot on the foundation, and place it there, and instruct the patient to rest.
And then leave it until it stops draining, and when it has stopped, heal the wound with ointment and other treatments until it is healed.
of drying from the fire or foundation   (This seems to be incomplete as it's not clear what "of" refers to) Many times there is drying from the fire in the intestines and by the constraint of nature, and when the sickness is old and medicine does not work.
It is necessary that you score the surface of a splinter or your fingernail with a pointed instrument, so it does not get moist. then heal it until it heals as it should be.
and if it cannot heal, then repeat the shaving more forcefully than before, until it heals well, and be cauterized. Then let it heal completely.
great trembling Fleas are a small parasite that enters the body deeply;
And sometimes the fever strikes, and it is felt like death due to trembling, spreading throughout the body, more in the hands than other parts.
And the remedy is that you take a cane of an ostrich feather or a strong eagle's feather and place it on the trembling (part), so that the purple circles surround the trembling completely; then turn your hand all around the cane until you cover the trembling completely and immerse it (the cane) entirely, and dry the trembling from its roots.
And if you see, do this with a cane of iron or copper according to the following form, and it should be fine-tuned both inside and outside:  (no direct translation for "subtilz desoz et traians desus" which could mean finely made on the inside and smooth on the outside)
Do not pierce, to keep it warm and press; and if you see it tremble, cauterize the quiver, as in the chapter of cautery.
Of the shape of the cluster Sometimes they make a silver or arsenic suppository, or melted lead or wax; and sometimes they make small and large instruments, according to those for whom they are prepared.
Therefore, those who are treated in children's care or who are weak and painful, are small.
The form of the cloister is both small and large, or the bellies are bound in this way:
and it should have an opening where the bellies are bound, as you see, and the chins should be pierced inside; and on one side there are two holes, and in the other one.
and the bellies where medicine is put from a beast's bladder or parchment, and should be pierced all around with small holes.
And place a space between each wound, then push a strong thread through each wound, twisted in ten or more turns around, and bind the belly as if it were a goatskin; And when the medicine is inside [the wound], tie it with a strong thread to the instrument in front, then smear with an ointment; and this is the shape of a circle;
And let the medicine not be too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head with oil or egg yolk ointment, or similar, then push it gently in.
Then the ministers stretch the patient's two hands together until they are completely visible, then remove the cloth and wash the patient's legs.
And if the medicine appears to come out, squeeze it as much as possible; and if it does not open for a whole night, it is more beneficial.
And if you treat the disease of swollen stomach with a poultice, and the medicine comes out quickly, continue to apply it until it is healed.
And if the hemorrhoids are festered or abscessed, the poultice should be as subtle as for an infant;
And this is the form of the subtle enema when the skin is tightened:
for the wounds
We have already said in the previous section about the treatment of wounds; now we shall tell you the treatments for hands and medicines, according to their completion.
I say that wounds are diverse according to what they are made of, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and for how they were made.
Wounds are made by the thrust of a spear, cut of sword and knife, or lance, club, arrow, or similar things;
or according to the rules of the body, as in a wound that falls on the neck, or the head, or the side, or the belly, or the liver, and similar limbs;
and I will tell you the cure for each wound, and I will begin with simple wounds of the head, for it will come in its chapter.
I say when a simple wound comes or a head, and the bone is not broken, be careful if it is from arrow shot or similar things, and the skin is torn completely and the wound is large, and if there is doubt about the abscess rising: make it drain from the head itself immediately whether blood comes from the wound, or on the contrary drain from the damaged area;
empty the patient of excessive wine and heavy foods.
And if it does not want to heal, reduce its flesh, and let it drink no wine, nor eat any meat.
And put on the wound, if an abscess grows there, wool dampened in rose oil only, or in styptic wine.
and if there is no hot abscess, put on the fresh wound with all its blood, which is not moving due to air, and the following powder:   ...
and if the arrow has moved it (the wound), put some ointments on it until it heals.
And if the wound is large, such as the size of a sword and similar, and the lips cannot be brought together by tension, then bring them together by stitching, as I will say about abdominal wounds, of the stitching.
If the wound is open to the bone, and pitted, and does not hold but only a little, then close it; then treat the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of skin. And command the patient to eat large foods, such as heads and cooked wheat, as well as peas and similar things.
If you find or see rotten flesh without reaching the bone, strike the entire rotten area and throw it away, then heal it.
If there is an artery in the wound or vein that cannot be stopped with medicine, cut it and find where the artery is dislocated. Tie it with a thread. If that does not help, cauterize it.
And if these wounds are small and simple, the treatment is light: it is that you put this powder on it which will harden as soon as the arsenic moves it.
The manner of the powder is: take incense one part; dragon's blood 2 parts; live coal 4 parts, and grind them finely. and treat the wound, press it firmly so that it drains well and unites with all its blood.
And then tie it up well, and leave it to heal without being untied, if it does not swell; for one does not remove the medicine until it is healed.
Occasionally, one does this with alum only, when there is no incense or dragon's blood, but the sore has not moved.
And if the sore has moved itself, it must not be put on this powder.
But place on some digested ointments, or poultices made from flour of barley boiled with water and honey, until it exudes pus; Then heal it with other remedies until it is healed.
And if a bone fracture comes with the wound, and it is small, extract it with subtle forceps;
And I will tell you after the fractures of the head.
of the wound on the neck   (or "wounds of the neck")
If a wound occurs on the neck and it is simple (without complication), it does not differ from that of the head, but if the nerves of the neck or the arteries are severed.   (or "If a wound comes about or on the neck and it is simple without any difference with that of the head, but if the nerves or arteries of the neck are severed.")
If it is the nose, there is no other remedy but to let it heal and not put anything restricting, for it harms the nose and causes it to recede. And not to put anything cold on the wound, for the substance of the nose is cold, and its continuation with the brain which is the highest member.
but let the medicine be warm, such as warm water washed in sweet oil and mixed with rose oil, and boiled water washed similarly in sweet oil. And other stones of similar kind in this manner, and always moist.
If the wound is large, tie it with strips, then treat it until it heals.
And if the wounds are deep and pus-filled, pierce or make an incision lower down.   \] Et s’il en a plusieurs, puis les cercle par une corsse en longueur et largeur convenables, si com li maistre me l'a dit;
And if the arteries are cut, bleeding will follow, so tie off the wound, and cauterization is necessary.
And if the spine of the throat or the veins are cut, the conduct should be kept so that the meat (flesh) can go through. If the vein is on the throat's neck, do not touch the throat but reset it according to its natural shape. Then let it heal naturally, and leave it for some days, then treat with warm herbs until it is healed.
And if the wound presses on the bone, cut it. And if there are pieces of bone, pull them all out as you can, and those that you cannot pull out, leave until the wound heals. make the opening narrow and even.
And if the wound is fresh, sprinkle powder on it as I have said. And if there is bone in the wound and it has a fistula, treat it as I said in its chapter.
of a wound from a lance or sword
If the wound is from a lance or sword and it is deep, check if it is breathing quickly; then know that the wound is deadly.
and if it is not healed, and it is fresh with all its blood, do not put the powder on it immediately nor bind it for the blood which will dissolve completely. return to the heart, and cut open the patient; but apply attracting ointment, and bind it twice a day;
and if you don't have ointment, put old cotton on the wound to draw out moisture,
And make the patient sleep on the wound for 3 or 4 days, or more. If it does not cause spasm or bad trembling of the heart nor drawing of the entrails; and when you see good signs, you will know that the wound is healed. Then remove the tents (bandages) and other treatments, once it is healed;
If it cannot heal and open, then know that there is a fistula; treat it as appropriate.
If the wound is from a sword or knife cut, and it is simple, deeper or on the back, then treat what is in front of it.
If it is large, sew it up; if it is small, powder it and if it has reached the bone and taken pieces of it, whether the wound or the openings are forced, treat them. And if [the wounds] are not drained, let them drain by themselves, align the extractions.
And for other wounds on other limbs, the judgement is as we have said.
The rupture of the belly
The ruptures of the belly are great and medium-sized and small.
From the large wound, sometimes the intestines or the intestinal nerves jump out, due to which the introduction of them;
and stitching is more difficult, and sometimes a small wound is worse than a large one.
because it is better to push the intestines back in, if not from end to end; because the intestines swell soon when they feel the cold, so push them back more gently.
And because it is more necessary to heal the mother's wound, it is moved (the intestines) back to their place in her, rather than in others (two).
Know that the cut of the belly follows four ways:
The first two common cuts occur in the incision of the abdomen,
The other cuts in the body and two other specific cuts are common to other wounds.
And all of them are more suitable with a stitch from the belly, and I shall say each one and declare it.
If the wound is small, and nothing from the intestines protrudes, And the groin area is difficult to reset, which is one of the two ways: For the smallness of the wound, as we have said, For because the intestines are swollen by cold.
And when it is cold, heat it in this manner: Moisten a sponge or a linen cloth only with cold water. cook in cold squill and cyperus and spike (a plant species) and open the intestine until the inflammation is removed;
And at times, this wine restraining makes it swell as if to burst open.
When you see the distension spreading, soften the intestines with water or milk and have them cooked. for this is the reason for the intestines to close up little by little;
And if it cannot enter, they make a small wound with the instrument used to cut hemorrhoids;
and the first remedy is to apply leeches. we should not cut it unless there is great necessity.
And this is the instrument to cut through:
Cut inside the hollow part and do not split, check the shape here:
And when the wound is opened up, and the intestines leap out, If you push it back in its natural shape into its proper place, If you have the power, for it is worth trying.
When the wound is wide and located in the lower abdomen, you must make the patient lie on their back, and raise their legs higher than their head; and if it is in the part below the belly,
and similarly if the hernia of the belly is in one of the two parts then put your attention on the fact that the affected part should be higher than the other.
And thus, it should be administered as I say for large and medium wounds.
For small wounds use what is prepared.
Then take a compassionate assistant with one hand holding the whole wound with his hand, And gather the lips; And this is the common method of suturing;
And this is the common method of suturing; and take a needle or more, according to the width of the wound, then leave at the top of the wound a distance of one finger's space, and insert a needle with a single thread of strong filament. And pierce the two joints of the chest with the two joints of the sawbones.
then tighten a double thread around the awl of two parts, Then assemble the two heads of the wound facing each other,
and leave one space, and insert another needle; then tie the thread as you did with the first needle, and continue doing this with the number of needles needed, until the entire wound is held in place;
and let the needles be medium-sized, neither too thin nor thick, because fine needles cut all the fat, while too thick ones cannot enter well; because they must be amputated
and it is not advisable to push the needles too deeply into the flesh and skin,
that they do not cut and open a wound before the joint.
then cut the joints with needles so that they do not hurt the patient while sleeping. And he places bands or cloths on the head of arrows to keep them still. and let it stay until the wound is sutured.
and this method of suturing arrows is more suitable for small wounds, because it strengthens an arrow or two.
The second stitch is common. and you assemble the two shoulder blades with the two ribs together with a needle, having one strong medium thread. and when you have pierced all four of them together,
and when you have pierced all four of them together, If you straighten the needle at the part where you have started, in the manner as they often sew cloths;
and put space between each stitch the thickness of a small egg;
this stitching heals the man;
and I sewed a wound that a man had in his belly,
Who was wounded by a knife, and the wound is more than one palm wide, and it exposes the intestines about two palms in length,
and the wound was in the abdomen. I returned the intestine as it had been twenty-four hours earlier,
and the wound was sewn up for fifteen days, and healed, and became healthy.
And they had judged that he would die, and it was a miracle;
and did not heal him with medicine, for I was in one place where there was none found, nor any medicines; And place old cotton above the wound twice a day, and wash it with honey water until it becomes clean.
Then I will tell you the two proper ways of sewing:
Take the needle and insert it from the outside part to inside.
When it has pierced the heart directly, if the key of the lock is inside the sheep's hide or cost [object] where you have inserted the needle,
and make it pierce from the inside to the outside until it appears there.
and the understanding of this stitching is that you sew as the tailor does with leather. and that you leave one side of the sheep's hide open at first, and close it from the other side once the stitching is completely finished.
The second method of suturing, which Galen calls specifically,
is like anyone who brings together the two parts naturally, and apply one of the edges of the skin to the other edge, in this manner:
insert a needle or the edge of the mirror nearby and pierce only that spot, And let the two cheeks of the shoulder rest. Then turn the needle and make it pierce from the outer part until within. two cheeks of the shoulder
Then pierce one and the other from the outer part until within, in the two other cheeks that are on the opposite side of the chest bone.
And it is the moistened manner of stitching, and it is the most common.
Galen said this word, and no one can deny it,
One must sew the belly with two needles, having thread in each one;
and should one drive one needle from one side, and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew leather garments.
And know that when the rupture is within the abdomen, then the stitching of the wound in the abdomen is more severe than in other parts of the belly.
The judgement of the wound is like the judgement of other wounds:
and it is that when you open the fresh wound with all its blood, just as the arrow has moved it, If one reinstates the intestine and its casing, then place powder stimulating heat on top.
If one reinstates the intestine and its casing, then place powder stimulating heat on top. and if it has moved the arrow, place any salve that is present until the wound heals. and clean the threads and tie them together with sutures and the needle. then treat the wound as others, until it is healed.
And if you have no medicine, put (something) on it as soon as it begins to emit pus, old cotton. and move it two times a day until it is drained.
For you do not need any other medicine in many cases where the wounds are simple;
and if you doubt that the wound might cause spread to the main members, It is necessary that you soak linen lightly in warm oil or rose oil, and place it around the affected areas, and underneath the blisters.
if there is pain or boils in the belly, and it happens many times, if the enemas with black wine are too hot, and especially if the boils come up to the intestines;
And pierce within, and know that when it is the large intestines, it is easier to heal than the small ones.
The intestine called "jeun" cannot heal when perforated, and it is due to the planting of worms in them, and the subtlety of the entire body, and the proximity of its nature to nerves.
And if the herb jumps from the wound, place it back as with the intestines, while it is still fresh;
And if it is old and turned black, you must cauterize the black area where blood flow should not come. For there are veins and arteries;
Then grip that which is between the ligament, And hang the two heads suspended from the part below the wound until it opens up to align the extraction, as the bones fall, and the wound bows.
of the swelling of the boil
When the intestines are round and the wound is small, If it can be restored in some men, [this refers to] dislocated limbs.
because I have seen a man pierced or wounded with a lance;
and the wound was on the right side of the stomach. and became swollen and turned into a fistula, with emission and windiness.
I applied a cure according to what I knew, and did not stop refining until it was healed, and the limbs were sewn together.
And when I saw the patient being sewn up, I feared that he had an ailment in his belly; and he had no illness, but remained in better condition, with food and drink.
And they said to any experimenters that when it has a small wound in the intestine, it should be tied in this manner: take thick thread, then gather together the lips of the wound. and when the thread has passed through the mouth, place it on the two lips,
Then put another plaster after in this manner as before, until the wound is completely healed.
and dress the wound. If the head becomes inflamed in the intestines, it does not cause any harm to the patient.
And it can be tied with a fine thread from the intestine of an animal.
in this manner: take the head of this thread made from the intestine that is very sharp. then tie it to the head of this thread with a fine linen cord. Then thread the wire through the needle, sew up the intestine, and tie it in the wound.
And this method of stitching sores is not without fear and hope.
If the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the small intestines, there is no remedy or health, unless through subtlety.
of fistula or that it be. All wounds or abscesses, when they mature, are universally called "fistula". and similarly when it is filled and bursts open.
And a fistula is according to the truth, a hard and white node, where there is no pain, and it is as swollen as the feather of a bird;
And sometimes clear and other times thick bend. Sometimes shallow, and other times quite deep.
And I have spoken of it in the division of wounds, that any wound that is not healed and there is no flesh, This is only by one of the eight causes:
It is to be known, by the small amount of blood or heart. (translation) or for its ill nature; (translation) or because there is hard flesh within it, above the lips, which does not allow flesh to grow. (translation) or if there is too much pus. (translation) When the limb is broken, and the matter is of bad quality; when the medicine is not good in the cure; because the corruption is manner of pestilence; because in the region, digestion is slow, and health slows down and declines by nature. Or there are veins or bones:
And I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the cures of medicines in the division.
And I must tell you the cure for a fistula that is made by manual work.
Know that a fistula occurs in all members of the body; for there are fistulas that come from large veins, and arteries, and nerves. or in the bladder, or intestines, or bladder, or any of the ribs. or in the spine of the back, or in any joint of the hands or feet;
And all these fistulas that are in this manner are grave healing, and there is nothing but labor and ignorance.
And if there is any fistula that does not go down to the level I have mentioned, and you are confident of the cure, and you see it recognized, if it is straight, take a tent of wax or iron, and pierce it.
And if the fistula is twisted, seek a thin probe to straighten it. because the probe bends due to twisting;
and if the fistula has many holes that you cannot probe with thin probes, if you are to use the clyster (enema) through one of the holes,
For moisture is cut from one place to another, and it is purified.
then seek out cautiously within your power, whether there is bone or nerve, and whether it is closed completely.
ask the patient carefully about the pain they feel when pressed by your hand, and where they feel it.
and when you truly know where it is, and whether it is far from a joint, nerve, artery or vein. or in any of the joints I have mentioned, if the shoulder follows what I have said,
or in any of the joints I have mentioned, if the shoulder follows what I have said, and break the fracture and corrupt bones that are within; then heal it until it is healed,
and if the fistula is well drilled in a straight line, you must cut through to the bone, as much as possible, Then he puts dampened plasters in the medication, and pushes them to the head of the fistula.
Then he puts dampened plasters in the medication, and pushes them to the head of the fistula. until the medication corrodes the excess that remains at the bottom;
and then he puts healing ointments in clean jars, while they are still clean;
and if they are not clean by this means, then cauterize them as we have said;
And if the bone is corrupted by a fistula, strike it. If neither veins nor nerves trouble or principal limbs, as we have said;
And if the bone is exposed and there is corruption and blackness, scrape it until all corruption is removed, Then heal the harmful things while it is healthy;
and if it is not healthy, then render it soft as before, know that you are not yet at the fountain:
if you discover and seek until you reach the bottom, And remove all corruption, then reset its place.
If it is thus healed, that is good. If not, know that the corruption is too deep, that you cannot reach it. if there is no other device but the natural rest.
And if there is a small bone corrupted, and you can draw it with pliers, if the extraction is possible using an instrument,
And if there are multiple bones, remove all of them, do not leave any one.
and if moisture opposes you and there is no mistake or fear, If hot and moist and fat, and deliver the bones.
And if you cannot remove them within an hour, put on the wound something irritating like mustard. and leave it until the flesh is purged around the bones.
and then they will more easily remove the bones;
And if it is a large bone, such as the leg or thigh, and press only the corruption so that the blackness is completely removed. then restore the wound;
and if there is a large part of the corruption that reaches the bone marrow; If it must be cut and covered up until corruption sets in, then heal it as long as it is healed.
And I will tell you about a fistula that occurs on one man's leg. Take it as an example and help in your work.
A young man of about thirty years had a pain in his leg due to a cause that came from within his body.
As long as the matter came to the leg, and was swollen with a large abscess, and there was no reason to open it;
but they pierced it repeatedly out of folly, so that the abscesses opened up. and they discharged a lot of matter, and it became a fistula, and much pus came out that made them all weak and full of moisture in the body.
and many people applied treatment for two years without any skilled hand in medicine.
As long as I was called, and saw his leg and the medicines with which he was being treated, and that which ran through the wounds with great pain. The young man's body turned red, and he had a yellow complexion.
I made a tent over one of the wounds, and then searched all the wounds,
And I found that they come against each other from all parts of the leg.
Then I quickly went to one wound and cut into it until I discovered a part of the bone, And I found it corrupted and pierced through, and the corruption reached down to the bone within;
I appeared to be that which was corrupt in the bone, and I thought there was no other corruption except for what I left.
And began to heal the wound with salty medicines for a long time, but could not suture.
and then I reinforced it, and uncovered the bone as before,
And I found continuous corruption in the bone, and I removed it, and then I left it to heal, and afterwards I tried to mend the joint.
but I could not as I wrapped a palm of bone around it and pull it away completely from its socket. then I restored it with medicine; and it healed and mended quickly.
and there was no need to start the work again except for the weakness of the patient who could not endure it. And because of the fear of death he had for him. For the evacuation of blood often occurred, but he was completely cured.
For the evacuation of blood often occurred, but he was completely cured. and a hard cyst grew in the place of the bone, and was of good condition and had no harm or opposite effect at all, neither in the air nor in coming.
And stretch the head so that you pull the corrupt cartilage downwards, And uncover the flesh on the place where you want to be, let the flesh not bleed. And put a splint or a plank under the bone to cover the corrupt flesh. It must be as much as one can see and feel the corruption, and it should be done again.
And if the bone is corrupt but does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or a part of it, If you uncover the flesh completely; then put one iron pin underneath.
and let the corruption from one part to another be covered with silk, and let the silk be the same length as the corruption (as we have said);
if the corruption is in a joint, cover the corrupted joint and let the bone on the other side be visible;
if the corruption is between two joints, then it should only be covered (with something).
And if the corruption is at the end of the hand, or at the heel of the foot, it is very serious. but it is necessary that you investigate this corruption, how it opened up; and cleanse it in every way possible, but ensure the vein or nerve does not oppose you;
and know that the incision and the needles for covering these bones are many, according to the location of the bone and its appearance. And their thickness and subtlety, and their largeness and smallness, and their hardness; for this reason it is necessary to prepare an instrument suitable for each type of work.
and know that the work will show you the tool you need, according to the knowledge of this art, the testimony of the ways of diseases; If one considers the tool required according to what is necessary for it.
The fire The head may dislocate either from within or from outside;
and when you have treated that corruption with medicine and the treatment does not work, It is necessary to cover that member up to the level where corruption comes. If the patient shivers because of death or due to greater evil from the member's failure.
If the patient shivers because of death or due to greater evil from the member's failure. And the signs are that the member turns black as if it were burned by fire, And afterwards, the blackness spreads, then comes the corruption of one member to another. And takes hold of the whole body; hasten to cover it.
and if it is by the strike of some venomous beasts such as sea scorpions and vipers and similar,
if the corruption is at the head of the finger, strike it and do not give it any space to come up to the hand.
If it comes up to the hand, strike at the joint so that the corruption does not come up to the arm;
And if it comes to the arm, strike at the bone; and if it passes the bone, it is death, and nothing else is needed but the quantity of its virtue;
and do as follows when the corrosion comes or piety: if it comes in the first joint, then strike after the other joint;
and if it comes to piety, strike all of it; And if it moves up into the leg, strike at the knee joint.
If it comes above the thigh, there is no other remedy for the patient but to kill him.
The manner of covering or healing the member is that you tie it above and below, and extend one minister below the tie, and another minister above it. And you sever the flesh that is between the two ligaments at one space of about a thumb's width wide, while the bone is exposed;
then put the copper or silk, and place one linen cloth on each side, so that the silk does not touch the healthy area, and another wound or abscess occurs on the patient;
And when bleeding occurs as you work, quickly cauterize the area. and apply some powders that restrain [the bleeding]; then return to your medication until it is completed.
then bind the limb with a tight bandage and let it heal until it is sound;
and I will tell you about what happened to one man in a similar situation:
It happened to him a blackness resembling burned flesh,
and that corrosion began first on his tooth root, until it ate through all the tooth;
and when the man saw the corrosion, he pierced the tooth with a copper instrument, and became healthy;
And long time afterwards it returns the corruption or tooth of the hand, and it came to me,
and I put it on things reflective after the purification of the body, and the corruption did not cease.
and he commanded me to cut off the hand, and I did not wish, if I had hope of reflection (of the matter). He also feared that if I were to cut off his hand, he would die. The virtues of a man were weak; he despaired completely and returned to his land. and struck himself with a knife on the hand, and was healthy;
and I have not heard this story otherwise, unless there is a need for it.
An abscess sometimes appears in the groin area and remains so long that it causes a great accumulation of pus; And then they run and pierce, and leap the bow, and keep the place firm, as a vassal. The skin that is above is also as thin as a delicate cloth cut open. and they do not pierce to the bone or to the nerve, and such a disease is called "wounded".
but if it (the dislocation) is so long that it reaches the bone entirely, it is called "fistula".
and you cook the meat entirely outside (of the body), similarly when it is thin, like a thin cloth. and it should not be avoided due to its corruption.
If you have suspicion that the meat (flesh) is rotten, but the corruption is not in the bone, And the skin is thick with flesh, if you cure it with a poultice like this:
look to see if the breast is large and the sore in it smells bad, Then prepare the Egyptian medicine poultice like this: Take asafetida (or "aisil"), oil, and litharge, mix them equally, and cook in one vessel over the fire, until the medicine is red and becomes as thick as honey;
and then take from this according to your need, and make it into water and honey, and anoint the breast and apply pressure (to the wound); And leave the medicine in for two hours, then draw it out while waiting.
Do this many times, until the breast is softened and pus removed;
and sometimes it is cleansed with ash water. When this medicine is not present, and you take vine ash, pour water on it.
then filter, and apply as a poultice, until you know that the wound is properly healed.
but if the patient cannot tolerate it, or the Egyptian medicine or water of ashes, if the poultice is made with water and honey and a little bit of litharge powder. or you anoint it with honey and sweet wine, that the honey has properties of cleansing and washing. and the wine makes the wound heal.
and when you have done this, and you are certain that the wound is well cleansed, if the anointing of these substances causes pus to form in them.
And you are to prepare a plaster of definite consistency, and make it with rose oil and wine. And you are to apply a plaster of certain medicines and liniments, whose properties for treating wounds I have mentioned.
If the wound in the breast is small, and the linen cloth of the plaster cannot enter, if the wound is about the width of a finger, and you place a tent of Egyptian liniment over it, Apply basilicon ointment, as it is diluted.
and if the wound is too wide, cut it so that only one inch or a cleansing cloth can enter.
and if the ulcer that falls out is above, press it down or lower than it. For when the wound is fully open, do not let any pus enter. and if you cannot cover the wound beneath as you see, arrange it in such a way that the wound points downward as much as possible,
And if you cannot cover the chest beneath as you see, then tie it in this manner: let the sinew run lightly downwards without leaving anything of the sinew; and take medicines that consolidate to put on the chest,
and lay one linen cloth over it that covers the entire chest; Then apply force to the breast wound, i.e., one slightly larger than the first, Then spread the liniment or other cloth according to the size of the wound, and place the linen over the breast wound to straighten the blow, and do not remove the large cloth immediately but after several days.
and one who is over the breast wound, often removes it in order to relieve the blow, And know what runs from the wound, whether it is poison or pus or enough, or digested, or undigested.
And beware if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not.
and when your medicine has been applied in this manner, and you see the nature jump over the breastbone, if you know that the breasts have already begun to swell, approach the healthy;
And then dislocate it in the morning or the third day, when you dislocate the wound, Change one bandage and renew the ointment.
And if the breasts are swollen improperly after many days, know that the breasts do not heal. And if subtle poisons cure for a long time, do not despair of health,
For the healing approaches. For there are men who delay the healing of flesh in their wounds, and from those who act contrary to this;
and bends improperly out of joint from the breast after many days, knowing that breasts do not dislocate;
and if the breast takes a long time to heal and is swollen, apply drying medications that are moist in substance and dry in effect; Like an eggshell defined, for there is much part of glass [or vitreous material], and it is the final remedy.
Take the eggshell-like substance defined, make it with rose oil, and rise [beat] it with aged wine of equal consistency.
then boil and use it; and the same is made better thickened, when the eggshell-like substance defined is not present,
Take myrrh, aloe, and incense, grind them together, and sprinkle the powder on honey while it is over the fire; Then dip one cloth and place it on the breast, and at times administer an Aristolochia longa. and roots of celestial lily, which is like the flour and centaur.
and roots of celestial lily, which is like the flour and centaur. and use of simple or compound remedies: grind them, make powder, and sprinkle on the honey as I said, and use. And if the patient is whole, and not treated by this cure,
And if the patient is whole, and not treated by this cure, then know that corruption enters completely, and makes an impression on the bone or hard members or ligaments; if the cure of the fistula (fistula treatment), as we said before.
of the abscess at the nailbed
Pouria is an abscess that arises beneath the nail of the finger. or in the toe, or by chance it arises in other fingers;
and when it becomes inflamed and is not cared for, one abscess follows another. and they run and throw boiling water on it until it reaches the root of the nail, and by chance it burns all of it.
And comes the corruption up to the bone, until pain smells, and the cheeks are wide, and the color turns red.
When you treat it as we have said in the section above, and the treatment does not help at all. If it doesn't work, you must cut off everything that is left of the nail. then cauterize the wound after. The cauteries are very great help if the bone is healthy, and the nail is healed.
and if the nail under the skin begins to push through, and it starts to swell and blister, It is necessary that you put the salve under the nail so that it does not push through the skin. and apply it to the top, and press down on the swelling gently and lightly, And place on top of the reset bone, hot and corrosive medicine for removing everything.
If the corrosion is in the bone, strike and draw it out, for as much as the bone is corrupted, it cannot heal.
and if you see the tooth corrupt, strike it in one blow as previously stated. then heal while he is healthy;
and if he is wounded, pierced, and feeling great pain, it is necessary that you drain him first; then cut the nail with a sharp spatula from above,
And guard that the tip does not reach the bone which is beneath the nail, because the patient would feel too much pain.
If it happens, place something on top to soothe it.
The fingers that spring up accidentally on some men are all fat. And by chance there is a tooth or bone, and sometimes a nail.
Sometimes they grow from the root of the joint, or their growth is in some of our fingers. The one born in any nail of the finger does not move, and the one born at the joint of the finger may move.
The girth (circumference) of one who is fat is light, in this manner: The girth (circumference) of one who is fat is to be measured at the root with a broad spatula.
One born at the root of a joint is difficult to cure; keep it covered.
In one who is born or should be at the navel, it is necessary that you cover the raw flesh around the bone, Then bind the bone with an appropriate splint, then heal it until it heals.
The dislocations that come to the joints all at once are due to birth, or from a blow to the wound, or by burning, or similar things.
If it is necessary to bind that dislocation, it should repair according to their natural forms; then put between two cloths or dampened linen soaked in oil roset, so that they do not adhere together; And you place between two thin pieces of wood, until the joints are soldered, as it should be.
If one of its two sides comes with the palm, then strike the splint as required.
The peasants
The veins are large and rounded, full of melancholic superfluidities that come in many members of the body.
And more often happens in the legs of those who walk and work and carry things, than in others.
Therefore, you must sometimes administer cleansing with vinegar, and then apply the basilica (a medicinal ointment or paste made from powdered herbs).
The method of iron treatment is in two ways: one is to strike it and draw out black blood; And the other way is to open the vein and let all the blood flow out.
The thigh is prepared in this manner: first, warm the leg with very hot water, making sure that the flesh does not become too thin. then hold the patient's leg from above the knee to the part below the kneecap; then cut the vein in one, two, or three places, making a large incision.
Then extract and draw out the black blood from your hand, from one end to the other, as much as the strength of the patient can bear.
And tie it up, and instruct him to eat black meat with a bitter sauce.
And begin the evacuation and purification again when the veins are full, which benefits the patient.
The swelling is treated in this manner: raise the limb of the patient, if there is much hair. Then immerse it (the affected part) in warm water, and raise the leg with hot water until it turns red, and the veins swell.
And if there is no warm water, heat it with fire, and then apply it to the vein near the knee or in the part below the ankle.
Then scrape the skin with a knife at the edge, and peel off the vein from both sides until it appears when touched.
It will appear red and black, and when it enters the skin it looks like a white cord.
Then push the shoulder blade beneath, until it is raised to the skin, and then bend it at the little angle lightly.
Then strike one other place under four fingers; then cut the skin over the vein until it appears. Then tie the shoulder again, just like you did before, and bend it at another little angle, just like you did first.
Then cut another piece, or more if necessary, then tie, and bend it to the thigh.
Then draw and drain up to the second joint; then pull it out joint by joint, until it completely comes out, then break it.
and if you cannot draw and drain, push an awl with a single, very strong double thread through [it]. and draw and pull it out, and push a rod under it, then turn your hand on both sides until it comes out. And keep it from bruising, for if it bruises, one cannot draw or lift it out, and this brings harm to the patient.
And when you have treated it completely, place on the wound linen soaked in wine and rose oil; let it heal until it is healthy.
And if the wounds are contracted, twisted, and entwined together, not straight as we have said, You must cut it obliquely but do not cover it; pull it out as we have previously said.
You must cut it obliquely but do not cover it; pull it out as we have previously said. The shape of iron used to pierce the eye does not curve and does not cut, but only pierces the vein.
and is of large curve because if it is subtle, it would pierce the vein, but be large as we have said, and here is its shape:
From the civil vein
This vein is located in the legs, in warm areas where there are no herbs or trees, and in dry land without moisture.
And sometimes it happens elsewhere than in the legs, which occurs due to rot that comes beneath the skin.
As it comes within the body and turns, insert a probe between the skin and flesh.
If the signs of the beginning of this vein are that it comes in the leg with a very large swelling, Then the swelling changes, and the vein begins to emerge, just as a root of a plant does.
When the shoulder is opened up, it is necessary that you wrap around it with a piece of wood from one and a half to two feet long, and sew it.
leave the wood in place on the leg and each time it threatens to slip out, wrap it again with the wood and sew. if it is too long, cut off a part of it and wrap the remaining part, but do not cover its root until it is completely out. because if you cut it, it will retreat into the flesh and cause abscess or gangrene or other disease.
For that thing it is necessary that it be treated little by little up to the head, and nothing remains in the body.
and this vein when it is treated from 5 fingers' length, or 10, and once an honest man came to me, from whom the vein issued from 10 fingers' length, and when you cut it, it swelled a little or leaked and pierced all the way down to the bottom,
So let everything be empty; and empty the matter that is within, and bring medicine to its place that causes no pain for three days, then heal it as in abscesses.
And sometimes at this vein, many raindrops, and especially when it opens in the joint of the foot or arm, And much blood comes out, from where it jumps out; heal it therefore as we have said before.
Worms born between skin and flesh
This disease is called in our land "cattle sickness," because it often affects cattle.
and it is a small worm that is born between skin and flesh, which travels through the entire body expanding and contracting, And it feels to him as if all his limbs are dislocated, until he tears the skin or it jumps forth.
And worms of putrefaction of some humors come towards and snakes, lice, and roundworms or belly.
And there is doubt about its malice, for when it passes through the body, and it ascends to the head, and comes to the eye, Sometimes it enters, and destroys the oil; and this happens many times.
When you see him to cure and drain, one can do it only when he goes:
therefore, you must lie the limb above and below with a strong cord tightly.
then press on top and pull hard, and if his wound is full to the flesh, you do not draw it out, if you cauterize the fire on top, until it dies;
And the greater harm it causes is that it runs oil, as we have said;
and if you see it approaching or near the oil, hold a sorcerer's wand beneath it, then strike on top and pull;
And the patient must use body cleansing with soluble medicines to remove bad humors;
and if there is corruption of meats, let it be thrown away.
Pain coming from windiness This disease is called "vakirir" in our land, and it is a pain that comes to some members, and moves from member to member; and I have seen what I tell you.
I was called to a sick woman, and she showed me her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the armpit of the arm;
And afterward, the eye rises like a worm to the shoulder, faster than nothing, just as living silver when it is cut from one piece.
the pain divides itself from that place and pierces into the shoulder,
and a little afterward it runs all through the body until it comes to the other arm.
Then he told me it was returning around the body, as I saw it.
I marvelled greatly how it moved from member to member, for I had never seen this disease in such a manner. Nevertheless, I had often seen pain move from one place to another, but I had never seen it as clearly in a woman;
And I thought it was because the woman had a dry body, and her veins exposed. and therefore that constrained windiness appears;
and it does not appear according to this reason to those who are ill and have moist bodies and covered veins.
And when you see to cure this disease, and the patient feels that pain, if it opens as we have said, If the limb above and below is pressed tightly, then press down on it until the swelling is forced back to its place. and cauterize the area; if you do not see it with your eyes,
If the cure for these swellings is by pills such as fetid pills and pill of serapion, and similar others.
Of arrows.
Arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and according to the parts of the body where they strike.
The diversity among them is that some have large points, and small ones, and blunt, and bound ones. and of those with two points, and of those with tongues, and of those that have splinters; and an arrow that strikes any limb does so in two ways: either it pierces through the principal part of the limb, or
As a brain, heart, liver, spleen, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar organs. When it falls in any place of these organs, and the signs of death that I will tell you hereafter will appear to you: If you wish to extract this arrow, you must be careful, for death may come in many ways afterwards. And when this bad sign does not appear at all, and the arrow is not fully embedded, pull it out, and heal the wound.
And when the sign of the skull appears where the arrow strikes the bone, and it breaks through the skull cover, It is when there are swelling and abscesses, scrofula and eruptions, redness and inflammation of the tongue, spasms and confusion of understanding, and vomiting of bile; And by chance, it may happen without force from the nostrils or ears; and by chance, he may lose speech and voice. And jumps out of the wound white matter resembling pus, and jumps also like boiling tar.
If this sign appears to you, hold back from the treatment, and pull out the arrow if it is not in.
The sign of the arrow when it falls or pierces through is that it is near the left breast and feels as if it has been driven into something hard, not empty. And by chance the patient becomes silent like the hair, and in a black blood flow, and coldness and cold sweat comes, and faintness. Therefore, the patient clearly senses death approaching.
The sign of the arrow that does not pierce the flesh is when bubbles of pus jump out of the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient turns pale, and breathes heavily and seeks cold air.
If the arrow falls on the bedcover of the sick person, it is dislodged from the side ribs; and it releases a lot of fluid and pain and heavy breathing; and all the limbs of the shoulder move.
And if an arrow or food sticks in its wound, by chance something from the indigestible meat might jump out of the wound.
And if an arrow or stomach, and something from the intestine passage might jump out, there is no hope in the treatment, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
And if an arrow strikes in the bladder, and the urine jumps out and flows out, and the patient feels great pain: know that the wound is deadly.
The other members, such as the face, neck, shoulders, shoulders blades, spine of the back, wrists, hips, legs, and similar, are safe according to various conditions. When the arrow is in the nerve or artery and it is not poisonous, as I shall tell you what happened to me, you do the following.
A certain man had an arrow lodged or splintered in the root of his neck. I drew it out from another side beneath the ear fat and found no injury.
And drew with force an arrow that had lodged in the oil under the paper underneath, And the arrow was set straight, and it could not reach further than the tip towards the flesh. And it was large, the size of a Turkish bow, completely sharp at one end and slightly curved towards the ears; the wound was healed, and no evil accident happened to it.
And passed through an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and the arrow had Arabic ears:
I was barbered, and made it thin until I passed through it, and the Christian was healed.
And draw an arrow out of a man, who was head or stomach, and thought he would die;
and then after thirty days, his condition did not change; I cut above the arrow, contrived it, drew it out, and had no bad consequences.
And if a man receives an arrow in his back or chest, and the wound is sutured;
And the arrow remained within it, and did not change its natural position. nor found any harm in any of its natural works.
And see another man who was pierced by an arrow in his flesh, and the wound was sutured;
for a long time he endured great pain; and many similar things happened to him.
And draw an arrow from a man of the princes, the king who was stuck in snow. and he was slightly sloping to the right side; and the arrow was completely lodged.
I was summoned for treatment after it had been three days. I found the wound very narrow.
I pierced it with a thin needle and felt nothing. He feels pricking and pain below his right ear. I thought it was the tip of an arrowhead.
I applied a soothing plaster with digestive properties, because the wounds were not swollen. and the wound of the arrow appeared.
and the wound of the arrow appeared. I place the plaster on for many hours, and heal the wound directly, and keep the patient in that state for a long time.
until he feels the arrow within his neck for one day; and he tells me about it. I put a corrosive medicine on the wound by hand for many hours until it is cured.
and I tried it, and felt the head of the arrow that was attached to the place; Then align in the opening of the wound with this astringent medicine, until the head of the arrow appears visibly.
and it passed the boundaries beyond four months.
And then I closed the wound that I had opened with the tweezers, and it did not heal from one side or the other.
Then I did not cease to refine and to try various instruments until I took a pair of tweezers well made for one day, According to the shape that comes at the end of this chapter, keep following it and return the wound.
The judgment of the mirrors is that the nose cartilage cannot be restored: Then I will restore it, and the wound was healed, and the patient was completely healed.
Here is the quality of the extraction of some arrows, If you apply your treatment to this (condition), I do not say all of it, for the books cannot entirely grasp it;
but wise masters understand a little thing, and on this that is failing; true nine work, and it is new invention, in the explanation of things that happen in this art.
I say that arrows do not enter the limbs where they are inserted except in two ways: either through the hole where they enter, or from another side.
and that which jumps out from the place where it enters is an arrow entering in a soft part of the body, and sometimes it jumps out now.
And if it does not jump out now, leave it until the flesh has healed around it and let the opening be closed.
And similarly, if it [the dislocation] is lodged in the bone and cannot come out, leave it for several days, and move it every day;
Then it jumps, and if it does not jump, pierce around it with a sharp awl wherever the joint is widened, and then pull it out.
And if an arrow is lodged inside the body so it cannot be seen, press all around it. And if you feel it, pull it out with any suitable tool.
And if it cannot be done due to the narrowness of the wound and the deepness of the arrowhead, and there is no bone, nerve, or vein, so make an incision as wide as the wound is large; draw out the arrow if possible, and if there are ears on the arrow like hooks to hold onto it,
draw out the arrow if possible, and if there are ears on the arrow like hooks to hold onto it, If bone the flesh which is pierced by two parts in the muscles that you can feel, and then break or bend the arrowhead until you can pull it out.
and then break or bend the arrowhead until you can pull it out. be careful not to break the arrow, so that you can pull it out more easily.
And if you cannot do it at once, press the flesh around it, then pull it out, for extraction will be easier. And if the flow of blood opposes (the procedure), bring what we have said about its treatment in its chapter;
and guard yourself from cutting the nerve and the vein, and use an instrument as you can pull out the arrow without risk.
either quickly or slowly, firmly or gently; place the patient according to the shape he was in when the arrow hit him. because it is the greatest help that there is, and if you cannot, place him according to what the signs indicate to you.
Arrow that comes from elsewhere, if you open anything related to it, or the skin is swollen in some place as can be seen or felt:
Then cut, so long as the pliers can grasp it, and then pull it out; if it jumps now.
And if it is retained in the bone, then round your hand and push it into the bone, expand the bone, and pull it out.
And if it cannot come out, leave it for now, and then continue the extraction until it comes out.
And if it were of an arrow inside, push it all out.
and if it were a dislocation, and you wish to administer treatment, give one instrument of traction. so that the point of the arrow enters into the hair of the instrument; then push forcefully.
and if the arrow is covered, place one sharp instrument at its point to facilitate extraction.
And if the arrow has been touched, it is necessary that you cut all the flesh around where the poison is, if possible. then heal the wound as appropriate.
And if the arrow falls or penetrates the belly, bladder, side, or chest and is near, and you can cover it, then do so.
but be careful not to cut the vein and the nerve, then pull it out, and then stitch the wound if necessary. And the treatment while it is healed.
The shapes of the tweezers used to extract arrows are similar to an eagle's beak, and here is their shape:
And there are many ways: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
of veins in the human body From veins from which one recovers are 31, of which the head is 16,
this means: it is known, two veins that are after the ears, which are called the "double 'herbech'" [literally, double herbs]; and the two arteries that are in two temples visible; and the two veins that are in the hollows of the two eyes, which are called "aspirers" [literally, inspirers]; 1) and the vein which is on the forehead; 3) and the two arteries which are in the neck; 4) and the two veins that are in the upper lip above the mouth, and these veins are called "augeherich"; 5) and the two veins which are under the tongue.
The veins commonly used for letting blood are 5 in each arm:
one is the cephalic, and it is on the left side of the chest, and the common people call it "vein of the head"; and the median (the one that was called "faste" in earlier times) is composed of the cephalic and the basilic. And the lay people call it "vein of the heart"; and the abscess is located on the right side. And the lay people call it "vein of the belly", and it is above the liver. This is the one that heals, which opens clearly above the navel.
The saviatelle is the vein that is between the little finger and the ring finger, and it has two rains (joints).
And in the leg and foot there are 3 veins: one is beneath the hollow of the left thigh, The second saphenous vein which is at the right ankle; and the vein called "anse," which is in the left ankle;
And in the other leg there are 3 veins beneath those (veins).
The vein that is after the ears helps with ancient catarrhs and migraines. And the qualities of the healer, as I tell you, and it is that you raise the head of the patient,
And the qualities of the healer, as I tell you, and it is that you raise the head of the patient, and rub the place where the veins or veins are with a rough cloth; then hold the patient's neck with a screw. until two veins appear behind the ears in two places depending on the head. then cut them with a knife where you feel the pulse beneath your hand,
Then take the lance, and thrust it beneath the vein until the bone, then pull your hand along the entire vein. And pierce the skin and the vein well with two fingers deep through, and make the blood come out as much as you see.
Then tie it and let it be until it is healed;
And I have already said the incision and cautery in the first book.
The sanitation of the two arteries which are in the two temples, is worth ancient migration, [in modern English: The cleaning of the two arteries located in the two temples has an old-fashioned curative effect] and softening, and eye treatment that is common, and for the eyes with inflamed glands;
and the qualities of sanitation are as I say: and it is that the patient extends his neck, until both veins appear clearly; And feel the pulses beneath your throat, then press on them.
Then lift the vein at the top of your neck, near the artery, and push the needle under it. lift the vein upwards and tie it off, as you have done in the two other veins, and stop the blood flow according to your need.
then release the patient, and place your hand on the vein for an hour, then put cotton on it.
And then form the ligature (a type of stitch or binding), and leave it until it heals; we have spoken about its covering and its removal, where the book begins.
The healing of the vein in the forehead is as effective as the healing of the cranial wounds from the ancient facial diseases that have migrated and turned red.
The quality is such that the patient stretches their neck while twisting it, until the vein appears; Then take the instrument called "fossoir", which has this shape:
And place the point on the vein, and press up from your hand, or something else, and let the blood flow according to the quantity that you see; Then release the patient's neck, and tie the vein when it is healthy and not at any time should the operation be done with a large flame.
Moreover, the flame should not be too sharp; and the vein should be cut across because the bone is nearby, and by chance, the flame may break if it is too thin.
The cutting of the two veins that are in each eyelid helps with the eyes, and with the temple, and with the jaw, and with the ear in oil, and with diseases of the face;
And the qualities of their sanity are such that the patient stretches their neck in twisting with any cord, as before.
Then the sanity, and it is the sanitizer of the cross, a small length of fire, a little wide, for there is no flesh.
And if the flame is fine, perhaps it breaks; then make the sanitizer of the blood, as much as you need, and then lay it on cloth, and bind it well.
The sanitizer of the vein from the neck is useful against ague, scrofula, and diseases of the face. If it swells and reddens as if coming out in a boil, especially when it is old;
and the characteristics of the pus are such that the patient compresses his neck, then squeezes his nose with your left hand. and take the subtle flame long, and thrust it into the gap between the two nostrils. for the veins do not open well there, and the blood will soon begin to flow.
And do not go too deep, and correct the blood according to your necessity, then tie it for a night, for it is soon restored.
The salves of the two kinds aid in the treatment of ulcers, the beginning of leprosy, and many diseases, and in stopping pustules, corrosion, eruptions, and sores.
And the qualities of the salve are that the patients stretch their necks under both arms, as we have said. And let the master stand over the head of the sick person, and the sick person sit on one seat,
then open the vein along a long stretch, then draw out the blood moderately, as needed;
then repair another vein on the other side, then untie the ligature, and gently compress all the veins, The patient should not strangle [himself]; and he should leave it until morning so that the wound is healed.
Of the healing of the liver The healing of the wounds on the lips above helps with the congestion in the mouth and corruption of gums, and cuts or cracks in the lips, as well as toothaches and around.
And the qualities of the wound are to have the patient sit before you, and hold his neck as I said; then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one on the right side of the lip and the other on the left. and they can be recognized because they are black, and because there are small veins surrounding them: Therefore take both, and if you do not know them, and you have doubts,
Therefore take both, and if you do not know them, and you have doubts, If you strike the largest of each part, and similarly make incisions in the two veins that are above and below, for it is the same method.
Draining the saliva under the tongue Draining the veins that are under the tongue helps after the cranial drainage and is used for narrowing of the throat, eye diseases, and mouth diseases.
And the quality of draining is that the patient lies on their back before the sun, lifts the tongue, and looks down at each side to find a black vein:
Keep then one and the other, and do not go too deep, for below are the arteries.
The incisions in the body, which are commonly healed in two ways:
or with a sharp point, large mirret flame or subtle olive oil like you measure, and it is called "anesil". And they (veins) are wide and subtle according to the width and narrowness of the veins. The form of fire mirrhine is very famous, and it is wide as you see:
It is necessary to open veins that are swollen and filled with thick, troubled blood. And this is the form of olive oil fire:
And it is more subtly pointed out, and is for healing subtle veins where there is subtle, citrus-colored blood.
The basilica vein (one of the subtle veins), helps with diseases that are below the throat, neck, chest, and abdomen.
And the master should drain it skillfully and make sure to avoid the artery that is underneath. And if it pierces the artery, and bleeding comes out, it should be cauterized, as I have said. but must not be pricked by the flame, but cut like a needle.
And if the bladder does not open manifestly, you should open it and change another one. or you wish to have any drain from it, or you heal in its place the vein into the arm: it opens manifestly; And the cup to the fire anoint, as we have said.
And if you wish to know the location of the wound, then it is necessary that you straighten the arm and touch the place where you feel the pulse. Then sign the wound, then bind the arm, and burn the vein with fire.
And be careful not to cut into the artery when you see it swollen, for that is the artery; therefore, avoid cutting into it.
And if you see it rise high like the urine of a child, and the wound is red and delicate, know that it is not from an artery: Then place your hand on top for a long time, then cut through the wound where it is red, because often there are:
tie the arm and leave it like that, do not move it for the patient; and be careful, do not move it until it becomes clean.
If the wound is not bleeding and it swells, and the medicine is not present, then cut open the artery if it is open, because it will shrink; and stop the bleeding from the wound.
And take a piece of fennel root, cut it and take one half and bind it firmly until the next day;
If it does not stop bleeding, that is good; if not, heal it as we have said, with powders that stop blood.
and the application of cauterization should not be applied in various conditions due to the small size of the wound and the thickness of the ligament in the arm.
The vein in the middle helps to drain blood from the head above, and from the body below. because it is composed of the basilic and cephalic veins, as we have said;
and it is necessary for the surgeon to wander along the nerve that is below, and if it pricks too deeply, and he finds the nerve, and it inflames and the patient may get sick, and perhaps cannot recover;
And this nerve opens wide many times, and if it does not open in any man due to its subtlety, then you must draw the instrument anesthetic on it; and pull the nerve to your power.
If there is a vein between the two nerves, make it long.
The sanity of the cephalic helps, that it draws blood from the head, and helps the eyes;
And it is necessary to cauterize by pricking with the olive oil flame or the myrtle flame, for it is the safest of all veins, for there is no nerve or artery below it.
Furthermore, you must seek the most accessible joint, and do not cause harm in the first attempt, and you can start again. And occasionally veins swell up in some men, in which case, do not cause harm in the first attempt. The quality of the wound, according to your thinking.
The first thing you should know about treating wounds is that wound treatment is not brought about except to preserve health,
and to prevent diseases from coming. And the wound should be treated in one of the four veins that are cut: namely, cephalic, facial, and basilic. And it should be bled at the beginning of springtime in goose, and in autumn and winter after eating, when signs of saturation appear;
And it should be bled the first day or third day, after two or three hours.
The bleeding that is administered for diseases has no fixed hour, but whenever need be, either day or night, at all hours and in every instance.
And it should not be bled children under 12 years old, nor women carrying a child until the fourth month after conception up to the seventh month. One should not heal the elderly who have passed 60 years.
And when someone wants to be healed in any way, it is necessary that their intestines be cleansed with a gentle enema. if they have retained many feces, so that the veins are not able to expel the superfluidities which could harm the main limbs.
one should not heal those who are excessively salted with foods, drunk, until they recover, or those who have dropsy.
and if he is wounded after colic affliction, vomiting, abdominal distension, excessive copulation with women, hard work, staying up late, and all that weakens the strength, or by something related to the weapon or the body;
then purify the bodily fluids, if they are large, through food and drinks and medications, if you have that ability;
afterwards take a bath, unless something prevents it, to purify the blood,
And heal the vein with the wound around the third part, as we have said;
Keep him that day from work, and from pain, and from lust, and similar things;
And be lying down and comfortable, and let the healer be higher than the one being healed, and rub the arm two or three times;
Then draw out the ligature slightly, because if it is too tight or loose, it cannot heal properly;
And then rub the joint with hands until the veins swell, and feel them.
Then moisten the bladder with a little bit of old oil and place your thumb of your left hand on top of that vein beneath the joint as much as you want to cauterize it. so that the vein does not burst or split when striking (or cutting). For there are veins that behave like strings in the bladder, and some are filled with windiness. If you put it over the flame, if you remove from the flame, and it cannot open the vein, and thus it is one of these.
And if it opens the vein, but the wound is too narrow, then the surgeons should be aware of such things.
And if the vein opens for the first time, that is good; if not, then continue a little more under that level or quickly above it, if the area is not inflamed.
And if the area is inflamed and the patient becomes frightened, leave him for one or two days and do not bind his arm: By chance, an abscess may come; do not enter a bath, then resume the healing if it pleases him.
and if the perforation is small or the wound subtle, and you doubt whether it will not bleed as much as you see, then be bold in that same perforation with full flame directly.
and open it a little hastily, so that the flesh is inflamed; for this happens often when the wound is small.
If you see the flesh inflamed, do not resume the healing, and put a little oil on it, for the oil cools the blood and is congealed in that place by the oil.
And thus administer the remedy of oil in each wound that you open veins, to stop the flow of blood.
And this same thing should be ground and boiled from them when it is placed on the wound; if it becomes too thick, grind it again to make it finer.
If an abscess becomes large, which often happens when the wound is not opened until that time, If you are in a hurry, place a damp and warm sponge on the wound and hold it for an hour;
And it is necessary that you do this after the evacuation of blood from the vein, and if it remains in place after several days without any blackness or greenness, it does not harm him. And if you see, place something of aloes or myrrh below the wound, poultice, or similar.
And often there is an abscess and appearance in the sanctuary of the basilica; therefore, put your hand on it, and if you feel it soft under the pressure of your hand, then it is a bad sign. Therefore, do not place anything on it from what we have said, because by chance, in court without the artery; but make one dry plaster to harden the place, then treat it with other treatment until it is healed.
And draw blood from each according to the quantity of its power, and of the color of the blood.
For if the wound is black, let it bleed until it turns red; and if you see it thick, let it become thin; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
And it is necessary for one who is full and hollow, and has need of bloodletting, to make a larger wound, and let the veins be wide.
and for one who is weak, do the opposite, and it is necessary to bleed little and often, and it should be bled by cutting across, not by pricking.
and this method of bloodletting is safe from disorder of the blood and damage to the nerve, and it is more effective than long bleeding or wide bleeding.
And for one whose body needs bloodletting, it is necessary to give moistened bread below pomegranate seeds; if he is chilled, draw blood four or six times.
And if it is of cold constitution, feed it with soft bread soaked in sweet syrup, or aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and fragrant syrup.
And if it swells after the evacuation of blood, then it is necessary for him to drink broth made from charcoal and fragrant subtle syrup.
and use other things as we have said in the section or chapter on fainting, for the evacuation of vein.
And if he wants to dislocate his arm, and strain it another time, if necessary, when it is weakened by excessive strain, it should heal little by little, according to the quantity of its strength continuously.
And whoever wants to dislocate his arm after the first strain, and it has rest for nine hours after the first strain, or after the ninth hour.
And whoever wants to heal from another part, should heal within two days or three.
Because there is much blood inside the body that has already become heated and causes fever; therefore, it is necessary to draw a large amount and to widen the opening until it yields pus. then you heal all the conditions of health, and place your hand on top of the toes when it is healthy, so that death does not come in place of pus. and this happens often, when healers are negligent;
and it is not necessary that you dislocate the arm, make blood flow a second time, and the wound has closed, but you should push firmly; If it is curved, extend the arm as much as possible, for it would not be good.
Leave it until it heals the second time; or you pierce it with the tip of the flame, until the coagulated blood from the vein has flowed out. and put on one piece of new linen soaked in hot water and press slightly.
And if the vein is swollen, leave it and do not squeeze it until the abscess is soothed.
And if it is necessary to draw blood a second time, do so in the same place, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
The vein in the arm is drawn from the vein of the head because it is composed [of the same thing].
And the method of drawing blood is that the patient places their hand in hot water until the vein turns red;
Then tie it moderately, so that the vein appears clearly, then press it firmly with your fingers, not too wide nor too long.
and make the cuts wide, and press firmly near the joint of the hand, and if it cannot be pierced, press the hot water into it, let the blood flow out into the hot water until you have enough.
And if it is summer, do not press the hot water into it, because it puts more in winter than in summer.
And the vein of this one [vein] is safer than all other veins, for there is neither artery nor nerve in it.
The vein of the left arm saves [all] liver diseases, and this is how it works:
hold the hand, and push in hot sharp [object], until the vein has escaped, if you can see it. And if the vein is crossed, and you cut it all through, it causes no harm.
And do not go too deep, because the nerves are entirely bare under the skin,
Then replace the hand in hot water, so that it does not freeze in the wound, and is unable to come out.
And when you have bled the blood as much as necessary, put oil and linen on the wound to heal quickly, and do the same for each wound.
The sore on his left hand is beneficial for the sickness of mice, and do as I told you regarding the right one.
The sore in the chest is beneficial for all diseases that are beneath the body, like the illnesses of the belly, and retention of fluids, and the sickness of the kidneys, and of the hips and old legs, and similar diseases.
And the quality of his health is such that the patient should put his foot in hot water and rub it over the vein until it bleeds. and on top of the ankle-joint, and the vein is located below the foot, and it should be rubbed much with oil.
then let him use the larger vein or one at the ankle, which is more useful.
And if [you] pierce it through the skin that is below, pierce also in the same way as in cutting; and let the flame be extinguished.
And if [the skin] cannot be pierced out, place the point in the water and let the vein drain well.
And if it requires suturing for the first time, begin a second time a little higher because the skin is salty. And do not be afraid of the nerve, as we have said, and likewise proceed with the suturing of the other foot equally.
The head of the sciatic nerve is located at the knee joint, and its pain resembles that of the heel when it is hot with blood.
And the qualities of its pain are such that the patient immerses himself or herself in hot water up to the knee joint, while twisting the leg four times.
for otherwise the vein will not open; and if it opens, you should treat it in all possible ways and by crossing it. and it is necessary that you cut it, for the nerve is withdrawn, and it is very difficult to touch with hands.
and it is necessary that you cut it, for the nerve is withdrawn, and it is very difficult to touch with hands. And if you don't pull it [the bone or limb] out correctly, no remedy will open or heal its back or its end, and beware of the nerves;
Make the vein bleed as much as possible so that you see it, then tie it and place cotton on it and press; it is now healed.
Venous Sutures (or stitching)
Venous ligatures (or stitching) are made of horns, antler, or glass; and venous ligation is done in two ways: by making an incision and drawing blood, or without making an incision.
And this ventosation, which is caused to wound, exists in two ways: it is either for all fires or with fire;
and two others in the sides of the neck; and the ventosations under the chin; And the boils on the two shoulders; and the boils on the calves. The above line translates to: "And the boils on the two arms; and the boils on the two legs." And the boils on the two ankles; and the ventosation does not treat blood, except for minor veins that are scattered in the flesh.
And therefore it should not be done at all, like we do with venesection of veins. And it should not be administered, neither with all fire nor fire sense, in any disease that comes from swelling, until the entire body is emptied.
If there is a need for bloodletting due to illness, or by custom, we shall administer it each hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and at midday and every time.
for there are some who, when they need bloodletting, have a heavy head;
And for those who find swelling and redness in their body, head, or neck, the eyes should be held steady.
And for those who find a spot of blood in their mouth and have swollen the tongue, and are bleeding; And for those who think they are pregnant, and see dark blood and abort and die, and similar things.
And when we observe these signs, especially if it is within the month, we order to fumigate after 4 hours of the day.
The purging of the mouth helps alleviate the headache that comes to the eyes; and it should not be done after the evacuation of all the body;
...and this ventilation is in place of the purging of the head.
and it should not be used by those with a cold complexion or who have constipation, as it causes them great harm.
...and therefore it should not be used by the elderly or those with cold head diseases.
And he who recovers often becomes negligent, and for this reason it is necessary to place the cupping glass slightly lower due to the doubt of negligence.
The cupping at the neck is in the place of the recovery of the head and the basilica, and for this reason it is beneficial for the fracture of the bone. and to cut through the channel of the throat, and immediately, and to fill (it).
And it must be pushed gently, for if it holds too firmly, it may cause obstruction in the intestine or stomach and heart.
The ventosation of the two ribs from the neck is worth the pains in the head, and otalgia and migraines, and strangulation, and pain at the roots of the teeth.
And it is in the position of the basilica artery; and you must command the Lord to extend his hand, so that he does not cut the artery, and there should be no flow of blood.
The ventosations (ventosation) beneath the chin is useful for mouth diseases and gum corruption, and similar oral ailments; and it is located in the vicinity of the salivary glands of the two lower lips.
The ventosations (ventosation) of the shoulder is useful for diseases caused by heat and swelling.
The ventosations (ventosation) of the ribs are as effective as four veins in the arm, For it attracts blood from these large veins;
and instruct the lord not to pierce too deeply, for the limb is bare of flesh, and knows beneath dark and arteries.
The poultice that is on the buttocks is useful for piles from their foundation and diseases below, and it should be large, made of flax, which needs to be well drawn out; and by chance, if it were fine, it would break; and it causes big wounds.
Poultices on the legs heal quickly because they draw blood from the entire body, and are useful for old pains in the knees and ankles, and bladder and urinary tract problems, and remove inflammation; and they are located between the two shins and two ankles, and weaken the body over a long period of time, causing swelling in various positions.
The manner of putting on the bladder is that you first empty it, and fill it promptly, and place it hastily, and move it equally, and not cease doing so until you see the area turn red and swell, and appear the color of blood; then tie, and replace the bladders, and take care in the positioning of the body, for there are some who have soft flesh and clear veins: it is necessary to pierce only once, and it is necessary to make large incisions, and one shallow; and suck lightly.
If the flesh is thick, it is necessary to pierce twice: the first time to refine the way of the thick blood.
If the flesh is very thick, it is necessary to pierce the third time; and when we want to draw blood little by little, we should only prick once.
And if we wish to have much blood, let us frequently remedy it; and if the wound is closed, break it open thoroughly, and let the veins be pierced quickly.
And for those with thick and hard skin, and with narrow pores, you should anoint the joints of the armpits with stimulating and dissolving oil. if it is in summer, use violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or seed oil of cucumber.
And if it is ivy, oil of watercress, lilies, chamomile, or something similar.
And if the excess is thick and cold, take amaranth oil, or balsam oil, or anise oil, and similar.
And if the one whose wound is to be healed has tender flesh and large pores, no oil should be applied.
But it should be washed after the ventilation with rose water, cold water, water of blackberries, water of cucumber, water of porcelain, or something similar.
And he who has much moisture should rise from ashes of myrtle, or water of bilberry, and similar things.
And those with excessive fluids should rise from old wine or juice of sourdock, or decoction of fennel or chamomile, or similar things.
and it is not necessary to let the blood before bath or in bath, but after the bath for an hour or two; and do not sleep after bloodletting.
And it is necessary that he urinates when he should let blood and after bloodletting. And watch for the patient who is sanguine and bilious, and if he is too sharp and inflamed; then it is necessary that he take cold things, such as pomegranates and endives and lettuces in the form of juice;
and cook peas, meat of chicken, and moist meats.
And he who has a cold complexion, should take syrup of honey and fragrant wine that is between old and new, and eat barley meal, and drink barley porridge and small birds and young birds.
and the day when he will vomit, he must drink more than eat;
It is necessary to give some men sometimes tricolor or muscat before or after vomiting, to strengthen the main members. And the wine must be made subtle, but it must not be drunk by those who are hot.
The blisters placed on wounds are those placed on the liver, spleen, gout, abdomen, kidney, and loins, because these members cannot bear to be wounded there.
and it is done only to draw blood from one member to another, as we do with the testicles when they are swollen; to remove the thickening in the member, just as we place blisters on the abdomen and the loins to reduce its size.
And alleviate the pain when there is an obstruction or arrow, if possible it draws the obstruction by its attracting virtue, or removes the arrow from its place.
And so it is done when placed upon the liver and spleen where there is retained wind.
And these windy conditions are treated with emptiness to suck only; sometimes they are treated with fire, and sometimes filled with cold water.
as in diseases of the lungs, and in this manner the windy condition is filled with hot water, or cold water where there has been cooked comfrey herbs.
The shape of the bladder (or cupping glass) treated with fire is as follows:
It should have two fingers' width in length and half a palm in depth, and it should have one small hole on each side, similar to the size of pushing an awl.
and it should be made of horn or leather in front so that it does not burn the patient when placed on the limb.
And have in the middle a rod of iron or steel, to make an incision, a puncture.
and be large or small according to the diseases and age of those who suffer them;
because the swellings of children are different from those of adults, and thin people from fat ones.
And this swelling should be placed on the limb in this way:
Use a candle of wax or linen thread, and place it through the hole in the syringe that is in the plunger. so that the light is at the bottom of the syringe so as not to burn the patient;
and then place it on the member, and your hands should be above the wound as we have said, so that when you see it, if steam goes out, remove the syringe.
And wrap it with linen as before, and repeat often if needed.
In the bladder that is administered in a case of pleurisy, there should be neither prick nor puncture, and it should not be used unless when it is full of fluid, and placed on the member only.
and this is its form:
Incisions are not applied except to members where it is not possible to apply leeches due to their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar places; and in bare skin areas, such as the hand or neck, and other similar places;
and it is known that when you find leeches in clean, sweet and clear water, you may take them;
and put them in clean water until they are accustomed to it and have nothing in their stomachs; And then let it be bled from the vein and from the blisters, then rub the limb until it turns red, and place sulphur on it.
And when they are full and hot, if it is a place where a blister can be applied, do so, because it is very effective.
If there is no place for a blister, lift the wound from ashes, then with water, very well, and then sprinkle it.
And if the wounds heal too quickly due to the sulphur, moisten one linen cloth with cold water and place it on top until the wound is healed.
And if the wound is multiplying, apply powdered vitriol (or something similar), and let it dry until it is completely dried.
Apply half a handful of peeled beans to the wound and let it stay until it dries and stops bleeding.
and if you need more, take other snakesbane (a potent poison).
And if the snakesbane is not available, apply fresh blood to the wound and insert an awl until the poison comes out. And then place [them] on top, and as soon as they feel the blood, they bleed.
And when you see that they are bleeding, sprinkle some aloe and crushed linseed or ashes over it, then they will stop bleeding now.
Here begins the book of fractures
This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine and concerns the treatment of fractures and dislocations.
Inform the foolish child that the madman throws himself out of this chapter, that he never saw any old books or read any letter from them.
and because of this reason, knowledge is estranged in our land, for I never found anyone good with it.
and I know nothing else except by the knowledge of old books, where I have studied the science, and through experience, and the custom of my life.
And I have described to you in this chapter what it contains, and I have summarized it at the end, and clearly shown the shapes of the instruments that are brought in, as I have done in these 2 chapters before.
Therefore, let us now say the prologue of this book, the subjects in which wisdom places its understanding, and dwell on truth, so that those who are experienced know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when breakage or dislocation or twisting or swelling comes to anyone, you should hasten to heal the patient from both sides, unless something prevents it, such as weakness of the body, infancy, or old age;
If the time is not very hot or too cold, and if it consumes cold foods, specifically cold meats such as eye of round and veal, and does not drink wine nor consume any fatty meats, and does not fill itself too much with meats that fill the veins with blood, until you have doubt about the abscess heating up or spreading matter in the limb; then the patient returns to his first treatment as he has used it.
And when the broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary to nourish the patient with foods that make good nourishment or have thickness, such as cooked wheat in water, meat, head, feet, pork, eggs, fresh fish, strong wine, and similar things. For this nourishment, the bones heal faster and sooner.
And know that the broken bones of the elderly and weak cannot be well recovered or mended according to their nature due to the fragility of the limbs, nor those who are too tender, such as the bones of small children.
But there is no cure, reset the broken bone, i.e. large tendons that bind and join the limb together until it heals as it was before; and not let him do any work, and for this reason, nourish him with large meats, as we have said.
And know that the fractures are various in many ways.
For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the hip, or the leg; and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures. For there is a fracture that heals by itself, and another that becomes sharper, like the tip of a feather for writing.
For there is a fracture that heals by itself, and another that becomes sharper, like the tip of a feather for writing. And if it is a fracture with an open wound, or one with just a small crack.
And for each kind there is its tool and proper instrument for restoration, as memory comes to mind.
And it is known that the bone break occurs when the place is twisted, widely open by dislocation, and sounds when compressed by the hand;
And if there is no twisting or pressure, and the patient does not feel much pain, then there is no break.
But it may have a twist, fracture, or small break. Do not move the hand, but put on medications that come after this, and then hold it gently now.
And know that the breaks that go to the artery, and are the two parts disjoined, they should now be set equally, thus the abscess will heal well.
And if an abscess comes, let it be left for some time until the abscess is calm. Then equalize it to the bone that you can easily and skillfully move, and know that the restoration of it is easier than the restoration where there are pieces; then bind it as described hereafter.
If the bone is broken into pieces, if it is in the foot or hand, or with one hand if it is a small member, or with two ropes, or with one rope and one hand:
And put the limb according to its natural shape, so that when the parts of the member are disjoined, you reset them by every means possible in their original positions, and make sure through your work that the patient does not suffer injury or pain.
Align well the two bones of the joint according to the best forms.
Feel it with your hand if it seems not to be well aligned: straighten it nicely and do not strain or press too much as those who apply pressure through their work cause abscesses and contractions in the limb, as we have often observed.
And when the limb is broken, cautiously immobilize the patient so that they do not move, whether awake or sleeping, turning, or in any other way. And ensure that the limb is securely set so that it feels no pain. For if it feels no pain, then it has not been properly set and must be re-set in such a way that it feels no pain.
For if it feels no pain, then it has not been properly set and must be re-set in such a way that it feels no pain. Ensure that it is put rightly, for twisting will result when it is restored.
And the qualities of a broken limb are as I tell you.
Know that broken limbs come in various shapes, sizes and forms.
For there are small limbs, like fingers, toes, and such: you must wrap linen cloths that are soft and thin around them.
And those who are fat, such as thighs and legs: it is necessary to wrap with a wide and hard bandage, for the large bandages embrace the entire large member and equally constrict from all sides, so that there is no sore.
Then tie light bandages around it, 3 or 4 times according to the member, and hold your hand a little on the entire bandage, then go above the break and constrict less, so that the break is constrained. Then move away a little from the break.
And soften the bandage little by little, until you take a large part of the healthy side, then take another bandage and wrap it directly over the broken place.
Then go to the part under the break, and hold it gently, not too strongly nor too loosely, as we have said in the first place above.
Then put cotton threads or cloth strips equal in length between the joints, then tie it all up with bandage, and then put well-made splints on top if there is no abscess or swelling.
And if there is an abscess or swelling, place something soothing and warm on top of it to help with the abscess and reduce swelling, and leave it like that for some days.
Then hold your arm-lengths (approximately half a cane) firmly, either with a saw or a plaster rod, or with palm branches, and they should be shaped as follows:
But the arm-lengths that one places on the break should be a little thicker and wider than the others.
and should also be as long as necessary for the small or large limb.
Then hold above the shoulders in the same way you did at the first location, then tie upwards with a thread as on the first location on the fracture.
Then pull tighter but not too much, and it is necessary that the thread be medium, neither too thick nor too thin, and made of fine linen.
for if the thread is thick, as I have seen in the works of fools who make their knots with twisted linen cords, and this is a great error, because the knot cannot be even if it is too thin, and it is not good that there should be less than two fingers' space between each shoulder.
And if the patient has a splinter in his shoulder bones after setting them in healthy places, place lin or wool padding over it to prevent bleeding.
When the wound is with a break and the veins are cut open, I will tell you the cure below.
Know that it is not necessary to set all broken limbs immediately on the first day. For when the limbs are large, it is not necessary to set bones forcefully before 5 or 7 days, or more according to your certainty of the abscess healing.
And here is the method of ancient plasters for restoring fractures, dislocations, and twists: you shall take flour that is kept in the mill walls, and mix it with an abundance of egg, and apply this mixture, neither too clear nor too thick, and use it; this is the common method for restoring a fracture in various ways, and especially for women and small children, for it is not too hot or too cold.
Here is another method of plaster for restoring fractures and dislocations and twists: take barley meal, linseed oil, elder, marshmallow root, mastic, anise, cinnamon, and gum arabic, mix them in equal parts; add myrrh, aloeswood, and seven times as much alkanet root; make this into a powder and mix it with enough egg; if the complexion of the patient is hot, use this plaster, for it has a good composition and restores broken bones quickly, and is beneficial to many men.
Another method of plaster for twisting: take mastic and marshmallow root, mix them in equal parts; add myrrh and aloeswood, seven times as much; beat well, then combine with vinegar or enough egg, and administer it.
Another method of plaster for joints and dislocated bones, soothe the pain occurring, and cut the bone, and break it: take new linen, wet it in vinegar and cooked oil, and place it on the affected area. This plaster does not restore, but it is good for easing abscess heat, and treating bone pain properly.
Another method of plaster that sets broken bones: take dried leaves of the fig tree and leaves of ground ivy, grind them together, and make plaster.
Another method of plaster for the restoration of bone fractures and to hasten the healing of abscesses. Take roots of mallow, chamomile, violet flowers, wheat flour, a part of each; grind them together, add wine, and if the limbs are scalded, use moist coriander water instead, or plain water, and apply it.
Another method of plastering, more forceful than the first, when the restoration of a limb comes due after an abscess has hardened. Take roots of mugwort, flax, balm, sweet clover, and sage, as well as flowers of violets and chamomile, all in equal parts; grind them up, and cook with salt water, sweet water, or wine, according to the heat of the member, and its state of rest.
Hippocrates says in his book that nothing other than beeswax and oil should be put on a broken limb to restore it, and it should not be too soft nor too hard.
It appears Galen says that dry and slightly warm substances should be put on a broken limb to restore it, such as myrrh, aloes, incense, and similar things, as we have said.
Another method of plaster that is beneficial for injuries and pain: take ground mugwort and crushed human hair, or feathers of birds, and equal parts of vismale and oil, and grind them together, and make a plaster from the mixture.
Then wait a little while after that, and make sure the patient does not feel any pain, nor has the bone moved from its place; do not dislocate it for many days.
If pain or itching occurs at the site, or there is no rest, swelling, or inflammation, hurry and dislocate it immediately, remove the plaster now; take a light cloth, sea sponge moistened with seawater, and immerse the affected area until the itching stops and the pain is relieved. Then let the member rest for an hour, then place dry linen on it, dampen in vinegar or rose oil, and tie it above with a nut, until you are sure of heating the abscess.
and let the inflammation of the member rest, and the pain be removed, then begin the binding again subtly, and a little plaster, and do not strain it too much as before; bind subtly until it is healed.
And if you see that the abscess has subsided and the redness, pain, and swelling have been removed from all parts, and you need plaster and linen, then begin again as you did before equally.
And if no swelling comes to the limb as we have said, do not release it before 3 or 4 or 5 or 7 days; and sometimes leave it for 20 days, according to what one sees, until the break heals, and the dislocation approaches the flesh.
Then hold it more tightly and the flesh swells, as I said before; and if you see the limb drying out more than necessary, know that nourishment cannot enter. Then apply hot moist heat to the area every time you release it, and this should be done three times a day, and slightly loosen the bandage.
By this work therefore cut the nerves in the limb and fix carefully what the foolish doctors do, who twist the limb: it is harmful, and it is a fearful work, and I see nothing but to weaken and to work correctly.
of various ways of breaking There are many ways of breaks, and various shapes, and the causes are intended.
For it has breaks made by sword blows, and the hilt strikes the whole bone up to the shaft that is beneath the bone, as happens in a hack or thrust; and for this reason, this method of breaking is called "hack-wound".
When the sword strikes the bone from above, it is called this type of break "absolute"; and the wound caused by these two breaks can be large or small.
And if there is an embedded percussion, or a fracture or falling on stone, or other similar things.
And if there is a persistent break that approaches the membrane located beneath the bone or above it, and this wound is either large or small.
And if the wound heals against the bone as thinly as hair, and the fracture is small, and because of this it is called a "hairline" fracture.
and if the wound is made by striking with stone or falling, or something similar, and forces the bone piece inside, and the fracture is closed like a potter when he puts it on the pottery oven; if the stone is inside.
And this happens more often in those who have or a moist bone head, like a child's head;
and it occurs in all these ways of fracture where small pieces are dislodged, like this; and I will speak about its treatment.
We should know all the ways of fractures by traction above them, and the probe for tenting, and the corruption of flesh that is above it.
The hair-like appearance is known by this: when one exposes the bone and rubs above it, if the fracture opens black,
In the treatment of a fracture, be aware of the symptoms of the patient; and if you see any bad accident, such as vomiting of bile, loss of senses, extension, swelling, fever, and hairs to fall out and turn red, and other similar signs in various dispositions, it cannot heal without doubt.
And if you do not see an uncertain accident, and you hope for salvation, begin the treatment.
And when a wound first comes to you in winter, you should remove the bone before the fourteenth day if possible.
And if it is a fracture, hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the tissue beneath the bone is not corrupted, and the consequences as we have said come about.
And if the fracture of the bone reaches the tissue that covers the brain, you must cut along the broken part in this way: and it is that you take hold of the patient's head with your left hand, and expose the bone above in all possible ways, and on the surface of the wound more gently than you can.
and if there is discharge of blood in uncovering the bone or an abscess formed, help it as necessary, and it is that you fill the area with dampened linen soaked in rose oil. And make the wound rest until the abscess has calmed down and you are assured of the flow of blood; then begin around the bone to remove, and this is done according to two ways of working: one way is that you cut at a narrow incision in front, and this is called the first method.
Then make another incision larger than the first one.
And the second method is that you have many incisions of various sizes, some narrow and others wide, sharp and made of iron; and work gently so as not to pierce the bone.
And if the bone is pushed out and hard, you must pierce it around, so that you provide holes with drills, but not so deep that they pass through the bone to the skin; and it should have a margin or circle on top where the point does not pass beyond the bone; and you must have several, so that each one comes in its place at the thickness of the bone, so that you have drills for all places; and this is the form of the four kinds of drills:
The qualities for piercing around the broken bone are that you place one drill on the bone and turn it with your hands until you know that the bone is pierced; then remove the drill a little to one side, and do this all around, and then cut the space of the bone between the fractures, making it as thinly and gently as possible, and lightly, as we have said, until you draw the bone to your hand or any of the tools you have, such as pliers or tweezers; and be careful not to touch the brain or the marrow.
And when you have pierced and treated the bone, it is necessary that you remove the compacted part that remains of the bone with an instrument resembling a cutter, but it must be thinner and more delicate than the other cutters.
And if there remain small bones or no scales, gently remove them with tools; then treat the wound with the remedies we have mentioned.
And another method of work is that which the Greeks call, which is more secure; and they highly praise it, and this is their word. First, you must cut open a part of the bone where the fracture has moved apart, so that when you have exposed that part, you will place the lenticular anvil underneath it as follows:
And it shall not be cut from one side, and the parts are sharp on two edges, so that the cutting is towards the bone; then strike with a small hammer above, so that you lightly break the bone all around, and be careful of the cloth that is beneath.
If it is adhered to the bone, break it gently, for it is broken badly and with fear.
If the bone does not break through the cloth, and the bone is only chopped from above, and there are small pieces, then you must follow that roughness, and remove the scales with a sharp razor, which you should have in various quantities, to provide the most convenient amount for each place, according to the work and the figure of the break.
If (the patient) shaves very closely at first, and afterward with something more subtle, and does not cease doing so until it is well done.
In each other type of haircut and break (injury), you must bring about the remedy according to his condition; this is not something that can be answered by one who has devoted study to this art.
And if the wound is open, then you must take one piece of linen, according to the size of the wound, and wet it in rose oil, and put it on the wound. then take another piece of linen doubled either twice or four times, and moisten it in wine and rose oil, and put it on the first linen; and do this more gently so as not to hurt the wound, then administer another ligature, but do not tighten it more than necessary to cover the wound.
And let it remain for one day or two, until the abscesses subside, then release it, and administer medicines like those of lilies, flour of wheat, incense powder, aromatics, and similar things; and from these things make powder, and place it on the wound, and administer immediately medicines without harm or poison.
And ensure that the wound is always clean, do not let any salve or pus accumulate, nor let it collect blood, for when pus accumulates on the brain cloth, it will rot and fester, causing great harm to the patient; for when something biting is applied, it causes pain by pressing from above.
Therefore, beware of any bad accidents happening to the patient, as we have said, it is doubtful with great certainty.
And if blackness does not come forcefully except for medicine that has been placed upon it, whose virtue is such, then you must take a part of honey, and three parts of rose oil and in gum apply one piece of linen cloth, and place it thereon. Then the care should be done according to wound treatments until it heals.
Know that sometimes the two parts of the nose above are broken, or one by itself, because there are two bones; and the one below is cartilaginous, and does not break, but instead causes swelling or twisting, and then heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, then you must insert your little finger or thumb into the nose, and place the break equal to the index finger inside the nose, and to the mouth by force, until the nose returns according to its natural shape. And do this gently, and be careful that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
And if the break is in the upper part of the nose and the finger cannot reach the place, you must place it equal to the knuckle of a finger (a thumb) on top of the nose.
And if the break is in two parts, mend it thus, and hasten to restore it within the first day, if you can;
If not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscess has subsided, then bind to the head of the wound with linen cloths if the break is in one part.
Tie another piece of linen on the other side if the break is there; let the cloths be thick enough to fill the wounds of the head.
They said that any restoration should be moistened with butter and changed every day. I do not think it is good, but they should be moistened in a mixture of egg white and flour; then leave the cloth until the bone is hard, and the cartilage becomes hard.
And sometimes feathers from an owl are placed instead of tweezers, and if there is a single soft cloth around it, and the breakage is held, and the patient breathes through it; then do as you see fit.
If an abscess bursts while you are working on it, place camphor or cotton soaked in rose oil, or a pinch of alum.
If the abscess does not burst, apply plaster outside of it, made from flour of wheat and powder of incense, mixed with egg white, then place light bandages on top but do not tie the abscess.
And if the break in the neck is small and it is broken into small pieces, extract them with suitable instruments, then make the incision, and the treatment of such things with healing charms, suturing, as plasters and ointments suitable for this purpose.
If there is no wound within the neck, treat it with bandages, and place planks of wood on it until it heals.
The treatment for a jaw fracture
When the mandible (jawbone) is dislocated beneath, and there is no wound outside, and the breakage is only external but not broken through, if it can be recognized easily, it is corbeled within.
If the breakage is in the right part (of the jawbone), you must insert your index finger into the patient's mouth; if the breakage is in the left mandible, insert your index finger from the right hand and push gently towards the breakage and align it with the other hand.
And if the fracture of the jawbone is displaced in two parts, then you must provide two equal extensions until it becomes equal.
If movement of the teeth occurs or breakage, hold them in place with a golden, silver or silk thread, then place a broken mandible splint on it, and put one double cloth on top; and place on the cloth a large well-made stud or equal piece of leather, long and wide according to the mandible, and secure it as you can, and command the patient to rest, and encourage them to eat light foods.
If you see the figure change, dislocate it again on the third day, and then reset to its original position; put a plaster over it, made from milled powder with egg or meal of comfrey, after removing the splint; place a light linen plaster over the plaster, and if the plaster swells, remove it, and leave the dislocation until it heals; it often heals in four weeks.
If an abscess comes to the surface, bring what we have said before.
And if there is a fracture and wound together, be careful not to remove any piece of the bone with the tools suitable for such.
If the wound is narrow, enlarge it as needed with fire.
And when you have removed all the pieces and there is no remaining part, close the wound, if it is wide, and apply one or more suitable bandages to promote healing until it is healed.
of the forearm The force breaks often in front of the shoulder, and the fracture is according to 3 types: either it is broken and dislocated in two places, and it is in several fragments, and it is the easiest to restore; or there is a break with an injury.
And the procedures are when the fracture is with an injury, that you have two assistants, one holds the shoulder where the force is broken; and the other extends the neck towards the part; then align the fracture to your fingers, so that the form should be as it should be, and not have any appearance or protrusion.
And if you need to extend more, place a round cushion of cloth or linen under the patient's shoulder, and make it as large as necessary; stretch and lift the fracture, and pull the cushion towards your hand, so that you align the fracture as it should be.
And if you cannot draw the head of the shoulder out by force because it comes in fully, then the patient should lie on his affected side, and place one small pillow under the shoulder; and push the ministers (assistants) downward on the shoulder until the bone of the socket is raised.
Then direct the fracture to your fingers, and if you find debris, then it is necessary that you cut above; and draw out the pieces gently, and if the bone cannot join due to any obstruction, strike one of the incisions you have made; but place this instrument under the socket to prevent dislocation.
and resemble a spoon, not narrow, and be as wide as necessary, according to the size of the bone and the power of the work; and have two prongs, as you see, and one large and the other narrow, like the opening of the wound that you made when treating the bones.
And when you are certain of the abscess being hot, if it opens and the wound is small, or you doubt that the abscess is hot, then use linen and bandages on the wound according to its size.
And if abscesses are cold, moisten a linen cloth in rose oil and asafoetida and wine, and place it on top.
The binding of the bone, when there are wounds and cuts, is to place a plaster made from flour and egg white on the bone, put light packs on top, and place a splint beneath it if necessary. Then take a very long bandage of a palm's width, then put one double cloth dampened on top of it, and apply it; then take a thin stick that is three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around the bandage, so that the end of the bandage hangs. and place the stick on the fractured bone, and turn the bandage over the neck, and under the patient's armpit, and under the healthy arm; then pull it from each side, and when you see that the splint holds the fracture in alignment, and you clearly see that the stick does not move above the broken bone, keep it in place every day, and when the swelling subsides, hold it.
and make the patient lie on his back, and when he sleeps, place a small pillow under his armpit to raise the shoulder; align the fracture by adjusting the shoulder, or tie the arm to the neck, and do not untie it unless a bad accident occurs, for up to 20 days.
Then resume the treatment, if it seems necessary to you, and hold it and keep it in that state until it is restored; and it is restored in about 28 days, and less for some men.
The break of the shoulder
It often happens that the broken or dislocated shoulder does not heal by itself, and it should only be forced back with the touch; arrange it according to the shape of the dislocation, and reset it in its natural form in all ways possible; then apply powder from the mill with plenty of egg whites, and soft bandages, and put on a double cloth; then put a broad and thin strip, slightly larger than the shoulder, over it, and if there is a hollow under the strip anywhere on the shoulder, fill that hollow with soft bandages of linen, so that the strip lies evenly; and then tighten it firmly, so that the strip does not move from its place, and watch the patient every day; and whenever it swells, tighten it again, and adjust the strip if it is out of its place, and make the patient lie on his side; and the shoulder will be healed in 20 or 25 days. And when this number is complete, loosen it, and be careful because it is not easy for bone to move lightly.
And if a bone fragment protrudes in front and not beneath the skin, raise it up, remove it, and do as we have said in the treatment for abscess alleviation by hot cautery.
of the fracture with a splint
Bone fractures sometimes occur in the middle, but not often; however, they usually break at an angle. And when it is broken inside, it slips downward, causing the patient great pain, and lack of alignment, swelling, and immediately vomiting blood. The openings in the fractured bones appear wide.
And the restoration is that the patient lies down with his face on his back, and one cushion is placed between the shoulders, then the shoulders are pressed and the ribs of the two sides are assembled to your hands, and subtly put it all together in every way that you can, until the shape of the bone is as required; then lay on plasters and poultices of salt or another light substance, wrap it in one bandage, and place it on the broken bone so that it does not move; turn the limb roundabout, stretch it gradually, and every hour check the bandage, and if it becomes soft, tighten it; and if it requires dislocation due to corrosion or inflammation that comes to the place, or pain or abscess, hurry and dislocate it, remove the plaster, and address those who have come in methods of treatment; then reset the plaster, stretch it until it is healed.
of the rib fracture
Know that the fracture of the ribs only comes from large falls on the back and in the chest, and they do not break except when they are slippery; and it is felt well at the investigation with hands.
And the resetting is that you must set the fracture evenly, as necessary. Then put a splint and bind it with a stick, if needed.
And if the fracture of the ribs is concave inwards, the patient feels very great pain and shortness of breath, like with pleurisy, because the bone pierces through; and points at the end, and immediately vomits a large quantity of blood, which is a grave illness, and the ancients have made great efforts.
And if those who say it is necessary to administer foods that swell the belly, to push the fracture outwards.
We do not let hot irons come unless they have come. If they have come, we heal them.
And someone said that we put leeches on the joint, to draw out pus, which seems reasonable; however, there is doubt whether the leeches will attract the superfluidities to the joint due to its weak composition.
And someone said that one should cover the joint with damp linen soaked in hot oil and place a splint between the ribs to make the joint equal on all sides, then it should be cured with the cure of pleurisy, meat, and medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear from the bone that does not pierce through the flesh, and doubt exists for the patient, then it is necessary to cut into the rib on the broken side, and a tool should be placed there to support it; and afterwards it must be cut, pulled out gently, and then the two edges of the wound should be sewn together if they are large, and dressed with ointment until it heals. And if an abscess arises, then oil-soaked linen cloths should be placed on it; and treat the rib while it is healing, and let him lie on the affected side until it is healed.
of the broken neck
Occasionally there is a break of the neck bones, and sometimes it bends; and similarly with the spine in the back. And when this happens to anyone, and you want to know if it will heal or not, take note if you see his hands softened, swollen and dead, and he cannot move or stretch them, and when you prick them with a needle, he does not feel it. Know that he is mortal in many positions, and if he is silent and feels well when they are straightened and pricked, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient will be cured if treatment is applied.
And if similar thing happens to the spine of the back, and you want to know if it will heal or not, take note if the feet are softened, and if there is injury in the hands, and sudden movement of the wind and evacuation without will; and when it is supported on the stomach, it moves with no will. And when it is supported on its back and wants to sit, it cannot. Know that it is deadly: do not labor in its cure.
If this event does not happen to him, it will be an easier situation.
And the cure is that you apply warm oil (either rosin or egg yolk oil) if there is an abscess, then place a comforting and drying ointment on top of it, bind it with a thread, and instruct the patient to rest; and let him not sleep on the part where he feels pain until it heals. If any bone is dislocated, cover it with oil; remove the bone, then bring together the two edges of the wound, if it is large, by sewing them, and apply a healing ointment made of charred material until it heals; and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called "the head of the cow", press your left thumb against it and align it with your right hand as far as you can, then place the ointment and dressing on top, if necessary; then tie it, and if there is dislocated bone, push it back, remove it, and heal the wound until it heals.
of the break in the shinbone (tibia)
It happens that the bone of the hip is broken, and if it happens, there is only a little lessening at the head; it extends long and breaks apart at the ends, causing pain to the patient at the place, and pierces and inflames what is broken.
And the restoration is that you extend your hand over it, as long as you are above the breakage; and learn which is the breakage and its shape; and if the breakage is only at the head, then equalize the breakage, while it is in its natural shape.
And if the breakage is long or it declines inside, then lay the patient on their belly, until the restoration of the breakage comes to you. And when you have set it even, place the splint upon it, then put a stick or a key on top, and hold the break steady so that it does not move; and keep the limb under the ribs until the break is healed.
Instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy side or on his back.
If an abscess has burst, do not touch it until the abscess has healed, and place what we have previously mentioned on top of it; then return to treatment, hold it as needed, unless there is any bad incident; and this is the manner.
Of the shoulder break
The shoulder is that which is between the neck and the upper arm, and if it is broken, it should be restored according to one of the two ways: one of which is that you take a splint made of large thread, in this shape:
And tie the two ends of the splint with two cords, and raise them upwards, and position the patient supine on one couch; then lay his broken arm on the splint, until it reaches its place, and have a hump of splint in the middle, then raise something heavy above or the assistants stretch it downstream; then place the mirrors the break equal to their hands together, until the break returns as it should.
And the other way is to lay the patient on his bed, and tie his hand to his neck, then command two assistants that one holds what is above the break with both hands, and the other holds beneath all the cord, and stretch each side separately.
And if the extraction is forced, hold one ligament beneath the break and one above it, and extend each of the assistants to their part. If the break is near the head of the shoulder, you must put a moderate ligament beneath the dislocation, and another towards the side, beneath the break; and similarly if the break is towards the side, you must put a light one without effort, as long as the break is equal on the joint, and on the side; then make it equal, as required, and hold it, if no abscess comes.
If abscesses come, do not hold it for more than 7 days, and place soft linen with rose oil on top of the abscess to calm it; then you can hold it, and the method of holding is that you put a clamp on the break, then assemble the arm onto the shoulder, and place your hand on the shoulder or the chest; and put a cloth on it, and hold it on the shoulder and on the arm so that the arm remains in place, if nothing prevents it, or if the bone is not moving.
If you doubt that the bone is moving, use wedges, and place a larger and stronger one on the break than the others, and have at least two inches of space between each wedge, and make each wedge so large that it passes over the break by four inches from each side; then hold them with wedges, as I said at the beginning of the chapter regarding the break, more firmly and less in alignment.
And if you see the abscess of the bone and the swelling, as we have said, when you are restoring the broken limb, and doubt the abscess is hot, leave it to heal for up to seven days, as we have said; then look every three days at the healing, that pus does not grow or come to the place, or new swelling comes to the member because it is too tight. Follow this advice, as we have said.
If no such accidents happen, do not remove the splint before four days or more; let the patient lie on his back, and keep his hands on his stomach; put a cushion made of equal linen under the shoulder, and look every hour of the day or night to see if the figure of the broken limb moves or if the splint becomes soft; then follow this advice by means of medicine, and give him the meat that was mentioned earlier, in such a way that the meat is initially tender; and when it begins to recover, let it become thick. It is customary that the shoulder and leg should be repositioned within 40 days of the whole accident; then you must remove the splint and administer baths and ointment-like medicines to guide the healing process. If the fracture is crooked and swollen, wait one day or two months to remove it.
on the break of the arm
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "dui" ("two"); one is small, and it is the one that forms the elbow; and the other is large, and it is the one located towards the little finger near the wrist; by accident, only the large bone may break, or both together.
When the small bone is broken, restoration and healing are easy; but when the large bone is broken, healing is difficult and more painful than when both are broken together. If it is only the small bone that is broken, you should gently extend it slightly and make it even.
If it is the large bone that is broken, you should apply more force; stretch it up to one inch, raise the elbow of the hand higher than the others, and lower the small finger below the others, and cross the patient's arms over themselves, placing a stick one inch above them to prevent the patient from feeling any labor; then extend the minister's arm to the lower part beneath his hand or to one link, and another minister above. Then make the broken bones even, according to their best form.
And if it is broken in pieces, place each piece back in its proper place, and if there is any dislocated part that refuses to return, set the bone as we have said before.
And if with the breakage in wounds, I have spoken about it in a separate chapter; take the treatment.
And if in the beginning of healing, abscesses occur, apply one cloth made of rose oil and white wax that is neither too hard nor too soft; lay one cloth on top of it delicately until the abscess is appeased. Then remove the wax and put in the plaster made from the powder of mill with egg, then insert splints; the splint at the breakage should be more prominent and a bit larger than others; you will need seven splints or more for various positions: whether the breakage is in one bone or two. Keep the splint above the breakage tighter than other places, but looser elsewhere, as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and let the cloths that are above the breakage be soft and moist, not hard or harsh; and let the threads, which hold it, be of flax, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said. And observe the member and the ligament after some days. And if any bad accidents happen to the limb, such as itching that happens to the limb, you should irrigate the limb with warm water until the itching is soothed; and do not let the limb rest. Then begin the binding, and if the ligaments are weakened and the bones dislocated, and similar things, give advice accordingly.
And if the narrowing of the anus cannot reach the limb because it is too narrow, you should soften it a little and leave for some days until the narrowing comes, then bind it.
And if none of the things we have mentioned come to the patient, you should not release him until 20 days have passed, or inquire about it within that time. Then lay his hands on his neck and make sure they are even, and keep him from movement and turning, and sleep on his back; know that this fracture will be restored in 30 or 40 days, and possibly in 20 days, according to the compositions and complexions of the virtues.
of the fracture of the hand
The fracture at the back of the hand and fingers occurs rarely, but it bends repeatedly.
And when the palm of the hand is fractured or bent, the patient must cross his arms and sit straight in front of him equally; then he should place his hand on a cloth stretched out, and extend the broken bones, align them with mirrors as they are, until they are well joined; then apply the plaster and bandages, if an abscess does not occur, then place a splint according to the severity of the fracture, and wrap it in one linen cloth.
And if the broken bone is at the groin area around the lower abdomen of the leg, make a splint from cloths, and instruct the patient to bind it to their broken leg; then bind it with a long cloth, and make sure the wooden splint is as thick as the hand, and bind it, as required.
If the fracture is at the elbow, it is necessary that you place a splint above and another below in the hand, so that the fingers are covered and straight; then bind it all around the hand, and stop the flow between the two bones.
If the fracture occurs in any of the fingers, if it is the thumb, make it straight, as required; bind it with the palm, and if you see that it moves, place a small straight splint to hold the fracture steady; and if the fracture is in other fingers like the index or another one, make it straight, and bind it with the adjacent healthy finger; or tie them all together in one bundle, as appropriate, or place a splint on top of it, as with the thumb; take care in the healing and positioning of the abscess, and treat it as I have said.
Of the broken leg
The bones of the leg are often broken and one sees it when it turns forward and backward; and the restoration is such that one tie a splint above the break, and another below. And the patient lies on his face, then each minister extends his splint equally to their respective parts; and this is when the break is within the bone.
If the break is near the root of the leg, one splint should be towards the heel, and the other splints below the break. And if it is near the knee, then the splints should be on each side of the knee, and the extension should be distal; then adjust the bone equal to its two hands, according to its natural figure, and then apply the plaster and bind, without abscess coming.
And if there is an abscess that is hot, let it cool down first, then return to your work and your treatment; the process is done in this manner. You should place a bandage made of thick double fabric for two or three layers, and let the excess be removed, then bend the leg so that the heels reach the root of the thigh, and insert one long thread between the calf and the thigh, below the knee joint, and bring the end of the thread to the top; then bend both the leg and the thigh with the bandage, then put the broken bones on either side of the bandage, and place a bone splint over the leg bone; then use soft linen cloth between the leg and the thigh to equalize the binding, then begin to tie four turns or more around the fracture; as you go higher on the fracture, loosen the bindings; then take the two threads that you have inserted between the leg and the thigh, and tie three splints that are above, then return to below the top thread, so that you can pass under the foot; tighten it, so that it does not move from its place, then leave it, so that there is no sign of an abscess or swelling or anything else.
If it happens (that the broken bone pierces the skin), you should separate them, directing where they are coming from, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of the bone that are protruding, they must be cut off, if possible; and if not, the limb must be cut open, and the flesh removed; and treat it as we have said before, until it is healed.
And sometimes the thighbone is broken so that splints are set in it, as in the shoulder and arm; however, when restored in this manner, it does not cause discomfort to the patient.
And know that the thighbone is restored within a day, or slightly less or more, according to the variations of complexions.
from the groin of the knee
Know that in the groin of the knee, there is little fracture but it bends often. And if it breaks, it is not a complete break, but rather a fissure or a piercing, causing all pain and pain sensation.
And the restoration is when one equalizes the limb that is dislocated to its joints, as long as it can be assembled; then put the splint on, and place a round piece of iron, if you have need of it, and tighten it as needed; then check all the positions that we have said in other breaks, like an abscess and others; place at each accident whatever is needed, until it heals.
Of the break in the leg
Know that in the leg there are two bones, one of which is called directly "anus" and the other is called "fibula"; and it happens equally as a break in the arm, and therefore the restoration is equal to that of the arm, and the work is all the same.
And if both the two bones are broken together, then the leg turns in all directions.
If the slender bone is broken, it bends forward.
If the large bone is broken, it causes great pain and can be seen; it bends underneath. Then apply the extension, make it even, and align the edges equally; however, if the break is misaligned and there are many pieces, the extension should be smaller and lighter; and adjust the alignment according to your skill.
And when you have completed your work, take two fusts that hold the leg from one side and the other, and be as long as the leg from the knee to underneath; then wrap them in two layers, one above and one below, and secure it in the middle so that the leg cannot decline to the right or left, and thus it is good; and no one should provide a splint of the length of the leg, and it be made from fust, and place the leg for prevention of movement, and properly make it at the break where there is pain; and move the leg every day, to see if there is abscess or another accident; cure it until it is healed.
Of the break of the bones from the foot
At the ankle, there is no break, but the bones of the foot sometimes have a break and the toes also, and it does not happen often except in various positions.
And if there is a break in the bones of the foot, and you see these bones overlapping each other, place the patient's foot on the ground, as if they were walking, and then place your foot on their foot where the bones are raised, press it until they return to their places; then apply a splint and muffler, and place a small table with two flat cushions under the sole of the foot, then tighten the strap towards the affected foot, after you have wrapped cloths around it, and other things that you need.
And when four or six days have passed, undo the strap, because you will find the bones equal, whether broken or dislocated.
And if any of the two bones are broken, restore them as we have said for the bones of the hand; then set a splint on the broken bone according to the length of the bone, and let it be slightly larger; then place the padding mentioned under the splint and tighten it; and if there are 2 or more, or more, break each bone with a splint, wrapped in one linen cloth, and tighten the padding beneath the splint; and let them remain above the belly of the bone, so that they cover it well.
And you must not forget the other things that I have said about other breaks, after we have said them; and treat each injury as necessary.
of the finger bone break
When the bone of the female pelvis is broken, make her sit with legs spread apart, then incline her to the part of the back and hold her from behind; fill the cavity with cotton and put as much as a stone in it; then turn the woman, lift up the buttocks little by little, and when the cotton reaches the entrance of the pelvis, the bone will return with the stone; when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has urinated, replace it, and do this for seven days or more: the fracture will be restored. If you see, take a bladder of barley, and tie one end of a string to it, and push the entire bladder into the pelvis; then inflate the string forcefully until the bladder is swollen inside: the fracture will return; fill it with cotton, and leave it like that for some days until it heals.
And when the bone of the wrist of a man or woman is broken, restore it in the same way as we have said regarding the bone of the thigh; and these fractures should not be hidden from him who applies his study and use to them, and pay attention to my book. For fractures signify in many ways the right way of restoration: therefore, take note of this.
In the penis (verge), when it is broken, take a goose's throat and insert the penis into it; then wrap cloth around it, and leave it for three days or more, and it will heal quickly.
With break (or fracture) with wound
For the one who has a break (or fracture) with wound, especially if it is large such as the bone of the leg or shoulder or similar, it should be cleaned now, as the cleansings that we have said testify.
And if the wound is clean, anoint it with vinegar (or other solution), then proceed to restore the break in that same hour or on that day, unless abscesses appear.
If abscesses appear, wait until the ninth day for restoration, allowing the abscess to calm down, and do not touch it on the third or fourth day, because you would bring about a bad outcome.
And if the bone breaks and appears under the skin, it should be set gently with light pressure and small extension.
And if the fractured bone cannot be set equal to your hands, it should be set with this tool which is of iron, about 7 or 8 inches long, and the width according to the size of the wound; therefore, it is necessary for the mirror that he takes 3 or 4 depending on what is needed in each treatment of fracture; it should be round and slightly large, so it does not bend during the setting process of the member in your work, and it should be sharp at the tip and thick from the middle forward.
And it is called "palainche", because the curved shoulders should be placed on top of the apparent bone; and push it once, until it returns, and let it be even one against the other. If the fracture is subtle and the instruments cannot well take hold of the bone, then you must cut the head of the bone, so that the instruments have power over it.
And if you cannot bring the bone back, as we have said, if you have an appropriate instrument such as a chisel or saw, at your power; then strike that part of the bone which remains in the bone with sharpness and small chips.
And when the bone has been brought back and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place. You must continue to set it until it is in its proper position, then moisten a linen cloth in black-stiptic vinegar, and make sure it is not hot; do not apply it over the seared wound or anything that has oil, as it may cause decay and corruption; instead, administer stitches when you have restored the bone, leaving the wound exposed, and cover the surrounding area according to the size of the wound, taking care not to compress the wound with the fracture; and many times this has been done by the foolish surgeon, causing death or rotting of the patient sometimes; let the ligatures be softer and more flexible than other fractures.
And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that evil accident may come, as we have said, and you find pain at the place, do not put poultices on it; instead wrap around it, in place of poultices, hard cloths and bind it.  And when after one day or two, you see new fluid coming from the wound, remove whatever you had applied and apply healing ointment to the wound, such as therapeutic ointment and similar ones.
You should loosen the limb two times a day, in the morning and at evening, until it is healed and sound.
The limbs should be arranged in such a way that the bone moves downwards gently.
And if it remains for many days and cannot heal but continues to boil, know that there are small bone fragments, which is why you must be careful with the wound and remove all the loose fragments that cause the pain.
If a fistula or some other form of corruption appears, you must treat it, as stated in the chapter before this one. And when the bone is broken and exposed on the limb, like the bones of the thigh or shoulder, and similar large limbs, do not drain it, because many times death occurs, but let it heal by itself; perhaps it will close up after twenty or thirty days. Then treat the wound if you can; if you cannot, then leave it.
broken bones that come upon a suture
We often encounter [the condition] after health following the break, especially when it is near the joint, and it is a disfigured sight to see the form of the limb; and unfortunately, the limb cannot perform its natural functions.
Therefore, take care of the fracture: administer medicines such as aloes, incense, myrrh, saracolle, acacia, and similar others, taking any one of these things or all together, and grind them with a stifling wine or with a lot of egg white or ashes; and put it on the knot in bandages, and tighten it well, and do not loosen it for many days; and then dislocate it, and start another, until the swelling is removed; or you hold above a piece of plank well made; for the properties of the plank are such that it removes all inflammations from the limbs; and if the nodulation has turned into hardness like stone, it must be removed, if the head is exposed, and make the excess apparent; or you shave it with any rasp, until it is removed, and cure it when it is healed.
When the fracture of the bone is set and remains afterwards, the limbs are weak and delicate, this happens for various reasons: one reason being that it was tied too tightly, and was not tied as it should have been; or because there were too many ligaments, and the nourishment could not reach the member; or due to an abundance of swelling; or because of excessive movements, not within its hour; or because it has little blood in its body, making it weak.
And the cure is that you make the patient eat, and to make his body lean, until the blood is multiplied in him; then provide baths, and give joy and sweetness; afterwards apply ointment on the member, so that the ointment attracts great nourishment, and reduce the swelling often with cold water, until the nourishment goes to the member; and return it to its natural figure.
the twisted limb after healing
When members are twisted after restoration and the bones are broken open, and the shape of the limb is ugly, nevertheless it does not lose its natural function: do not believe the foolish who say that a member must be broken anew, and many fools have done this in our land; this practice is condemned, and it brings great harm, and perhaps death. However, if the nodulations and tortures are fresh, it is necessary that they should be softened with hot water or with softening herbs such as violet leaves, roots, medicks, and similar things; and you make a soothing poultice, like daqquilon well made. You also take the musk of violets, and mix it with ginger oil or linseed oil, and apply the poultice on it. Or you take figs oiled, grind them with colon flour, and similar medicines that reduce inflammation.
And sometimes the node is cut off by rubbing continuously and for a long time with moist hands. Movement should be brought to the limb every hour.
And if the tortures are old and hardened, like stone, and it is necessary to cut it with iron, it should be covered up to the bone, at the incision made gently with a sharp instrument; and put cushions and soft fabrics in the care.
Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation occurs in anyone, now it must be returned with care.
For if one waits, the joint swells, and in case it is put back to its place with force; therefore, one should not move it until the swelling has subsided, for many times it causes pus and other pain.
Whenever this happens, clean the patient, then let him rest until all abscesses have subsided; then immerse the affected limb in hot water and oil, gently massage it, and treat each member as medicine requires at its place.
And I have ordered the chapters on dislocations of the head from the neck to the feet.
of the jawbones
1. It often happens that the lower jaws are dislocated, and the dislocations of both sides are in two ways: either they are slightly displaced from their place and softened a little; or they are completely dislocated, hanging towards the lower part, and the saliva drops out of the mouth that it cannot hold, nor can it close its mouth, and envelops its tongue with speech.
When the dislocation is slight, it returns in more ways.
And if it is complete and accomplished, you must reset it promptly, without delay;
And in such a manner that the minister grasps the head of the patient, and presses one of his fingers from one hand into the root of the dislocation of the jaw within the mouth, if the dislocation is of two parts; and the other hand should be opened, to make them even; and instructs the patient to soften, their jaws, and move them from all sides.
And the fingers are equalized, until it returns to its place.
And if it is difficult to reset, then immerse them in hot water and oil, until they are gently reset, do not force it, as we have said.
And when they (the dislocated limbs) are reset equally, the mouth of the patient should be closed and softened with a cloth soaked in an ointment made of rose oil and wax, then it should be tied gently with several bands.
and the patient should sleep on his back with his shoulders between two pillows, so that he does not move to either side nor tries to exert himself in any way, but should take light food until the pains have subsided, and the jaws should be tied.
and then he should eat lightly whatever he wants, but he must not exert himself in opening his mouth for eating or drinking, until the jaws are well tied and healed.
And if the two jawbones cannot be set right within an hour and are not converted to their proper place, fevers and accustomed sweating come, and possibly rupture of the stomach, and possibly vomiting clear bile.
And when you see this, then know that it is ruin; and many times he who experiences this dies within eight days.
of the noose   (specifically a noose used in executions)
The splint cannot dislocate within the ribcage and along the spine, and it is dislocated once to the side, and this is felt.
And the restoration is that the patient lies supine on his back and extends his arms; then presses the joint forward with your palm, and it will return; then put the splint and bind it, and hold it tightly.
and the joint that is towards the costal cannot dislocate; if it does not, but if it dislocates once, then reset it to its place as we have said; then put the splint and bind it, and hold it tightly, and instruct the patient to rest until he recovers.
And likewise, the head of the spine is reset when it is dislocated from its place.
When the shoulder joint is dislocated.
Know that the shoulder is dislocated in only four ways: The first way is when it dislocates to the lower part of the socket; and the second is at the back part; and occasionally it dislocates at the upper part, but this rarely happens;
It does not dislocate behind the shoulder or inside the nerves, and it often dislocates downward towards the socket, especially in those who have little flesh, because it can easily move out of place; for those with enough flesh, it moves out only slightly, and returns quickly.
And sometimes happens to some men, percussion or fracture, and the shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and they think that it is dislocated by this.
Therefore, you should verify [the shoulder], until you are sure; and then start the treatment.
Dislocation is known when it moves towards the joint and there is a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one. You will find a clear distinction between them. And you will find a hollow at the top of the shoulder, and below press on the lower part of the shoulder as if it were an egg; and the patient cannot return his hand to its place nor move in any way.
And if it is dislocated upwards, do not hide this, for you will clearly feel it by pressing.
This method of dislocation is not only to be returned when it is new, or if the child is ill.
And the method is that the minister lifts the patient's hand up high, then places his thumbs underneath the joint, and forces the joint upward to its place; the minister lifts the hand, and stretches it up, puts it back down; it will come quickly.
If it does not come as we have said in hand days after, then the patient should be bathed in hot water; and bring comforting and soothing ointment, such as a decotion of althea and fenugreek and melilot in hot water, and bring this.
Then the patient should be placed on his back, and put a piece of linen equal to the joint under the heel, neither too soft nor too hard, then place the minister's foot on the cloth, and pull the head of the shoulder upwards properly, and draw the patient's hand.
And another servant binds the patient's head so that it does not move downward; the shoulder immediately returns to its place, and if you see this happening, reset it in this manner:
and place a person larger than the patient on the opposite side of the shoulder, facing towards its costal region, and press the patient's shoulder down, lifting their head so that the patient hangs over the edge; And another servant pulls the patient's hand downward towards their abdomen. If the patient is too light, give them something heavy to hold, and the dislocation will return immediately.
And it is also reset in another way: and this is when a long needle is inserted into the earth, with the head being as round as a pea, and not too thick nor too thin; then it is placed beneath the patient, but with a soft cloth on top, and the patient should be lying down longwise along the staff; then his hand should be extended on the other side and the joint will return to its place quickly;
and if it does not return due to all the things we have said, then perform this cure: take a needle that is two arms long and four fingers wide, which has a round head for entering deeply into the assele (shoulder socket) in this shape:
Then lay the rod, wrapped in cloth, on top of the patient's head, so that it does not prick the patient, then place him under the cushion of the patient; extend his arm above the long rod, and tie the shoulder to the rod, and the forearm at the end of the upper arm, then lift the arm onto one iron hook of a scale with a large hole, and spread out the hands below, and leave the body hanging from the other side: the joint will be relocated in this manner.
And when it is in place, whichever way that may be, you must put an equal piece of wool under the cushion, then apply the plaster made of mill powder, along with incense and egg whites, over the entire shoulder and around, then tie it under the cushion with a thread, turn the thread around the plaster, and embrace the hand at its neck, and keep the hands in this manner.
And it is necessary to give food, as long as the limbs are comfortable, because it will heal faster; and then give more after 5 or 7 days, and move it; and if it becomes hard and does not soften, then it is healed.
And if the joint is dislocated due to moisture that has come, or for another reason, then you must administer three fire cauteries as stated in the chapter on cauteries.
If you do all of this and it still dislocates again after 7 days, and the joint cannot hold and cannot lift its arm above, then know that the nerve at the top of the shoulder is either cut or stretched or weakened; and know that the joint can never be pushed back into place.
The dislocation that is towards the thighs or hips, and the backside, is caused by forceful pushing and stretching with hands, and another method of treatment is applied; and it is cured when it is healed.
And after the healing comes swelling to the member, and it moves slowly; have the patient use baths many times until the swelling subsides, and returns to its original state.
Of the dislocation, the cost is great.
Know that the jointure of cost is dislocated at points, and at points it returns; and if it is dislocated in all parts, both front and back, and the dislocation is not repaired, for it can be seen well and felt well; and it dislocates according to each figure. And when you join the sick person's shoulder with the healthy one, make sure you can see it clearly. For the joint is dislocated and cannot bend the arm or touch the shoulder completely.
Then you must reset the dislocation as soon as an abscess opens up, for if an abscess opens up, it is harmful to reset; and perhaps it cannot be fully reset, especially when it is at the back; it is worse than other dislocations, and causes more pain, and in many cases death.
And the restoration is when it can be reset that you extend your hand to its two hands; and his arms should be spread out, and the hands of the mirror according to the shoulder around it, above and below, and push the joint back to its sockets together, or to the root of the palm, until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is at the front, it returns when it doubles its hand to its hand, and pierces the root of the palm that has been dislocated.
And if it does not return to its place, administer strong extension; and it is that two ministers extend the arm, and they bind it with two ministers, so that it does not move during the extension; then turn the arm on each side, then when you have wound a double-length and wide cloth around it;
and when the master joins the joint to the hand, he applies some oil to soften the joint, then presses the joint firmly until it returns.
And when it is in place, place dry plaster made with egg white on it and hold it firmly, and have the patient keep his arm at his neck, and leave it for some days, then release it.
If the joint is firmly held in place, remove the bandage and leave it alone; if you see that the joint does not hold properly, repeat the plaster and bandage, and leave it like this for some days until it is firmly set; then release it.
If it feels grating after the reset of the joint and it swells, bathe it well and scrub it, and press until it is soothed; or put a lamb's wool pad on the joint, then leave it for one day and one night, then remove it, and let it enter the water. And when it swells, gently rub the joint, then place the nail on top, and then immerse [the affected area]; and do this 2 or 3 times until it is healed; and if you see, place warm moistened hay wrapped in butter on it and hold it; it will return to its position.
swelling of the hand
The dislocation of the hand is quick to dislocate more than other joints; it must be returned to its place quickly as soon as it is dislocated, unless the lews are swollen or there is hot abscess.
And the re-positioning is that you place the sick hand on a table, and extend the minister's hand, and make the damaged part equal, so that it places its palm over the appearance of the jointure, and push until it returns.
Furthermore, you should look if it is in its proper position; then place the patient's hand palm down on a table for both extension and repositioning. If the dislocation is at the back of the hand, place the patient's hand palm down on the table, and make your hand over the appearance of the jointure. If it returns now, that is good.
If not, hold a warm poultice against abscesses that have been opened, and leave it to start healing.
And if it cannot bear weight, and you are unable to set it again within certain days, then the dislocated joint remains unhealed.
and it does not help the patient unless his hand is numb, and he cannot exert any pressure: know then that the nerves are cut or the arteries; there is no other remedy but to compress with a fire cautery in this case, and perhaps nothing else works.
And when the hand is in place, put the poultice we have mentioned on it, then compress and leave it for 5 days, then release and let it be as it is.
And if it cannot move well, and there is no grating, moist warm water, and rub it until it becomes clean.
Of the dislocations of the fingers of the hand.
The fingers of the hand are sometimes dislocated on both sides, sometimes at the back of the palm or belly.
Then push the finger, and apply the dislocation to your chest as it returns, then hold the head of the finger, and bend it towards the part where it is dislocated.
And let it rest for two days, then equalize it on that day; and bind it, as we have said, and release it from binding, and make it move, and rebind it; and do this frequently, until it is tight.
And do the same if it is dislocated from the abdomen of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it heals; and do the same when it is dislocated elsewhere.
the dislocation of the vertebra in the back
When the vertebra in the back or neck is dislocated, or there are multiple dislocations, there is no cure, as death quickly approaches the patient.
And the signs are that the stools pass without control and cannot be held, and many limbs become softened, such as the two legs or the two arms or one.
And many times the vertebra in the lower back becomes paralyzed, and it is called "gibbosity."
The physician should note whether the ailment is due to childhood gynecological problems, as there will be no cure or healing in that case.
And those resulting from falling or blows or similar things, the old methods of healing have spoken of in great words, but they are not always beneficial.
I have abridged it according to my intention and made instruments in various ways.
I say that in the gynecological problem mentioned earlier, there is no remedy or healing.
And similarly the one that comes straight into two sides, can be cured by no other than the one who comes from behind, as I said;
and the patient should be extended on his back in one even place, and have someone hold him under to prevent bleeding;
then insert one needle in the head into the earth, and another at the feet, and tie a rope around the ankles of the patient, and another around the knees, hips, and ankles;
And two ministers know the ligaments, one to the head and others to the feet, among the four tendons;
And let them be well closed, the tendons as we have said, and the mirrors place their hands on the spine, until it returns.
And if it does not return by this cure, take a board four spans long and sharpened at the end, and place the patient on his side, then push the top of the board under the side, then put the middle of the board on the spine; and place the mirrors feet on the other end of the board, and press well, until it returns to its place; and if you see, do it with the turning wheel that rotates by hand.  (This is referring to the use of a device called a traction splint or "tornet" to reposition dislocated bones.)
And you stick two needles in the head of the patient's arm of great length, and between each needle, an inch of space from one another;
and have one prick for each needle where the tendon turns, and let the needles be firmly in the earth so they do not move; and between two needles have one turning needle, like a rope, and have two small needles of an inch long for turning the turning needle to turn the tendon.
and then tie the cord that is among the tendons to the tendon towards the head, and the other cord towards the feet at the other tendon, and each minister turns his tendon all along the cord, and the master puts the splint equal as we have said.
And when it is even, place a drying plaster on it with much egg, then pound it, then the stick of a table-flat three fingers long, which brings out the swelling and the healthy part of the spine, then tie it with a string, as we have said, and use the patient with gentle nursing, until it is healed;
and if anything comes at the end of healing, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines with the stick we have mentioned before; and sometimes a piece of wood is administered.
And sometimes the appearance comes at the lower part of the spine, and it is thought to be a dislocation; but this is the bone that opens, for which reason one should not have presumption, because in such a case death may come.
Of the dislocations of the shoulder
Note that the dislocations of the shoulder and the shoulder joint occur only due to dislocations and not like other joints; and the shoulder joint is dislocated according to four parts: inside and outside, front and back; and more on the inside, and less so in front and back.
And the knowledge of its dislocation inside is that when one joins the sick leg with the healthy one, it is longer and more open the sick person's knee than the healthy one, and the sick person cannot bend their knee in the fire; and it is the loosened area that is swollen with abscess, because the calf of the leg comes there.   | The text means that when a dislocation occurs in the shoulder joint, it causes the limb to be misaligned, causing pain and injury to the patient. Additionally, the shoulder joint is dislocated according to four parts: inside and outside, front and back; and more on the inside, and less so in front and back. The knowledge of its dislocation inside is that when one joins the sick leg with the healthy one, it is longer and more open the sick person's knee than the healthy one, and the sick person cannot bend their knee in the fire. The swelling of the area with abscess occurs because the calf of the leg comes there.
And the sign of that whose it comes to dislocation, is that this event is opposite to those mentioned before.
And the signs of that whose it happens before, are that his leg is well set according to the completion; however, do not double the knee pain, and if you wish to make him walk, he cannot move forward, and he retains his urine, and swells the ankle, and when he goes, he passes over the heel.
And the signs of that whose it happens after, are that he cannot extend his knee, nor double it, and this leg is more twisted than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the head of the thigh is in the place beneath the ribs.
The re-alignments of this kind of dislocation are such that you observe whether the dislocations are old and remain according to their position without any treatment; and it is not necessary that there should be any assumption made about it.
In the case where the dislocation is fresh, and it is of the four kinds of dislocations, you hurry up to turn the joint, and push it inwards and outwards, and move it left and right; by chance if it returns, no further treatment is required.
If it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare one strong assistant and hold the leg firmly with two hands or with one link attached above the knee. and another minister extends his hand over in such a manner that he pushes his hands under the knees, then tightens a rope-like loop on the thigh; and another grips the head of the loop;
and they all extend up and down at once, until the patient is lifted from the ground once, and hangs there.
This manner of extension is common for the four similar cases, and if the dislocation returns, as we have said, it is good.
If not (the shoulder), it is necessary to treat its appearance. When the dislocation is at the front, it is necessary that you raise the patient on their sound side, then place the rope around the root of the thigh, and the part that is under the angle, then tighten the rope towards the angle, and towards the neck;
Then take another assistant and grasp the large part of the diseased thigh, and extend it outwards in the form of a bow; if it returns to its place now; and this method of dislocation is easier than others.
And if you cannot hold it in this manner as we have said, then tie the two feet of the patient together with a strong cord above the heels and knees, and let the diseased leg be extended two feet more than the others;
Then let him be hanged by the neck from a post, and his legs should be .j. (two) arms' length above the ground; then command one minister to embrace the thigh, and another minister should be hanging with the patient, who should then embrace the thigh, for the joint is returning now quickly.
And when dislocation occurs at the hip, let the patient lie as we have said in the one who has slipped, and draw a cord around the affected leg properly, and also around the pelvis.
Then insert two needles, one at the neck and one at the feet, then pass a needle between the thighs at the patient's groin. And it should be planted with moist cloths around, so as not to burn the patient, then each minister should extend towards him, and the mirror place equal distance from its hand to the dislocation.
If it returns, that's good. If not, put it on a table and press as we have said in the swelling, and let the patient lie on the healthy side.
And when the dislocation is in front, it should be extended immediately, as I have said; and place the mirror on the opposite side of the diseased angle, then press with the other hand, and draw it downwards towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is toward the outside, it should not be stretched out further nor raised above the ground, but rather it should remain as when a bed is dislocated to the outside, as we have said in the lying down on two beds; and it should be on its face, and the limb stretched out as we have said before, and press upon the joint against the table;
and will be in place when the patient extends his legs, and they are even; then adjust the thighs, and put the splint, and tie it with a bandage so that the bed does not move;
And it rests for three or four days, then you dislocate it, and place a splint on it; if they are even, hold them steady as before, and let it be. Three days; then you dislocate it again, and make it walk well, until the limb is comfortable.
of the dislocation of the knee
The knee is dislocated in three ways: inside, outside, and backside; do not dislocate it forward.
And the signs are that you instruct the patient to bend their leg at the knee, and if it does not bend at the knee, know that it is dislocated.
and the restoration of all [parts] is that you make the patient sit straight, extend their leg if they can, place your back on their chest, and put their foot on your feet.
then take hold of their thighs with your hands, pull them apart between your palms, then bend the two sides of the thighs together; and another servant extends their foot so that the thigh returns to its place, and the signs are that it bends lightly at the knee.
And place the plaster on top, and make the leg straight from the knee to the ankle, and let them remain together strongly for 3 or 4 days, then release it; and do not let the patient walk until the limbs are comfortable.
And if the limb is not straight, administer strong stretching, as we have said in the treatment of the hernia, until it heals.
Of the ankle dislocation
The heels are sometimes smashed, and sometimes completely dislocated, both inside and out.
And the signs are that the ankle is swollen, and it tends towards the part where it is dislocated:
The re-alignment is light, and it should be stretched lightly with the hands when it is only smashed.
And when it is dislocated completely, you must make the patient sit upright, and tie four ministers around the leg, above the ankle;
then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and then to your left hand twice, then raise it up and push the foot strongly upward;
and do this twice as we have said, by pushing and pulling the foot; if it returns, that is good; if not, repeat the process, for it will return;
and if it cannot return in this way, make the patient lie down on his back on the ground, and make a firm passageway with a stick between his legs, and tie rags around it so that it does not hurt the patient;
Then mark the ministers the thigh, and another minister extends the foot to his hands or at least one joint, so that he lies across the neck of the foot. Then each minister extends equally, and the assistants should be close between the patient's thighs to hold the patient when he is stretched.
Then the mirrors equalize the dislocation in their hands, and another minister marks the healthy leg below, and the dislocation will return quickly.
And when it is set, place the plaster and padding on top, form it, bind the leg to the foot, and watch the nerves that are above the ankle, so the ligatures are not too tight.
Leave it for 2 or 3 days, and if the ligaments loosen, tighten them again; then release it on the third day or the fourth, and keep the patient in bed for four days. If it goes beyond that time, it is not certain that it will not dislocate again.
If an abscess comes to the surface, you must drain it, as we have said before, until it is healed.
The two [hands]
When the two hands are dislocated, they must be carefully extended without exertion, and it is an easy thing to do.
And if the dislocation is at any angle in relation to the back or feet, then you must make the patient sit on a flat surface (or table) straight up and place your foot over the affected joints, then press firmly on your foot until it returns.
And when it is level and nothing appears, place a table with two legs under the foot of the patient, then apply force, leave it for three days, then release it; let it rest until it heals.
About wounds and dislocations together
When a wound comes with dislocation, and it needs to be restored, many times the patient dies:
If you are not presumptuous in healing, if you are not skilled in the art and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not compassionate, merciful, and slow, do not be brave.
And at the beginning, use cooling abscesses, and leave the patient in the hands of God, if you see no hope of health. and when you see hope, then reset the limb to its place, as soon as the abscess subsides.
And when the limb is in place, administer soothing things to abscess heat and heal the wound, as needed, with cauterized ointments.
If there is a dislocation with broken bones and small splinters, set the bone, and do what we have said for simple diseases.
And beware of entering into fear, as I have said, because it is useful to you according to your Creator, and for the wisdom of your weapon and body. Amen.
