To you, three dear sons, I have completed this book which is the last of the science of medicine along with its completion, and I have finished it through its explanations and by its declarations. And it came to me in a vision that I should complete it for you with this treatise, which is a part of the work of hands, that is to say "surgery".
And because the work of hands is neglected in our region and is foreign to everyone, thus the science is lost and decayed, and nothing remains of it except the small descriptions in books of the ancients that the hands have moved. And from this has come the error and the vanity, and the intentions are closed, and the science is obscured.
It seems to me that I want to revive it along with the organization of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and of abbreviation; and I will come together with the forms of the iron cauterizations, and other instruments of the work with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation of them, as it is necessary.
And for the reason that no good master of hands is found in our time, the art of medicine is extended. And it is necessary for the one who undertakes to learn in the science of anatomy, as Galen said, so that he knows the judgment of the members, and the forms and the conjunctions and separations of them, and has knowledge of the bones and nerves and brains and the number of them, and the movement and rest of the veins, both moving and resting, and their issue.
And for this Hippocrates said that the name is not much, and with the work is little; and we place in the art of hand.
We tell you in the introduction of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things previously mentioned, should beware so that they do not fall into error and that they do not harm men.
that I have seen many times several of those who undertake this science and if they abandon their science and their experiments.
For I saw a foolish surgeon who cut into the aposteme of scrofula on the neck of a woman, and cut the arteries at the neck; because so much blood came out that the woman fell dead in his hands.
And I saw another surgeon who extracted a stone from a man's bladder, and the stone was large; he removed with it a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
And I have already seen it called for by the healer, and I saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and if one touched it he would die.
And I saw another doctor who took in care the duke of our land who had his leg broken, and with the breakage a wound;
and the doctors, complaining of ignorance, held the breakage on the wound by strong binding, and did not leave the wound to form a scab, and they left it thus for a certain time;
and he commanded that it not be untied;
and remained thus until the leg became entirely swollen and the foot, and came to destruction.
I was called to come to him, and I hurried to come and untie the leg; and when I had untied it, he was at peace and did not feel any pain.
But all along the corruption was already confirmed in the member, and it cannot be healed.
and the corruption does not cease to spread through the member as long as the member is entirely lost.
And we see another case where the abscess bursts the swollen tumor, and then becomes inflamed because of the evil of its symptom.
For tumor, when it is full of melancholic humor, does not require anything but to be touched with iron if it is not in a place where one can then remove all that is corrupted.
And for this, dear son, it is necessary that you know that the work of hands is divided into two parts: that is to say, attention, where there is danger in several conditions;
and I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and danger.
For which reason it is necessary that you guard yourself, so that foolish people cannot speak badly of you.
Take your arms in caution, and undertake your illnesses lightly and firmly, and use the better way so that by the grace of God you come to health and are praised;
and let the terrifying diseases of grievous sickness;
and put away from you that which makes you doubt, and have faith in you so that you can come from this world to the other of glory.
Galen says in one of his commentaries: Do not take a foolish doctor to cure your illness, lest you be called a foolish patient.
I have divided this treatise into three chapters.
The first chapter is about cauterizations of fire and about cauterizations of sharp medicine, and this chapter is ordered from the head to the feet;
and of the forms of cauterizations, and of the uses of cautery, and of all that which is necessary in the work.
The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and of ulcers and of wounds, and of the extractions of arrows, and of similar things;
and it is the chapters put in order and the forms of the treatments.
The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things;
and it is ordered from the bottom of the feet to the head, and of the forms of the treatments.
Additionally, we remember the work, it is necessary that I describe the quality of the aid and the harm of each complexion.
I say that the qualities of the aid, and of the harm, are a longer speech and subtle science and secret responses;
and of this speaking many of the wise men agree;
and my writings suffice little for their words, for I abhor length.
I say that cauterization helps universally all complexions where there is matter, except for two complexions: that is to know the hot and moist complexion, and the dry and moist complexion.
In a hot and dry complexion with mixed matter, they disagreed about nothing and said that cauterization is of great aid; and the others said the opposite: that cauterization is not suitable for an illness that comes from heat and dryness. For the nature of fire is hot, and it should not be used to cure a hot illness with heat, nor with dryness;
and it is said by those who say the opposite that cauterization provides great aid to hot and dry illnesses that occur in the body of men. For when you examine the body of man and its moisture according to the temperament of fire, you find the body cold.
And I agree with this statement. For I have found it true many times by experimentation.
And let no one interfere with it except he who has experienced it, and who knows through long practice the chapter of cauterizations, and the diversity of complexions of men, and the dispositions and causes of their illnesses, and the occurrences and the space of the tension;
of other complexions we have no fear, namely in cold and moist illnesses. And all the parts gather and agree with the cauterization.
And know, son, that fire cauterization assembles in secret of cures, and has greater goodness than cauterization of burning medicine.
For the fires are simple, and do not come except to the member that is cooked, and do not harm another member unless it is named.
The hot medicines pass from one member to another by touching, and bring to the members diseases of grievous sanitation; and by chance kill the patient.
The fire, due to its height and goodness of its substance, does not do harm, if there is no excess.
And this I have found by experiment and through the length of service and study that I have put into the art, and established on the truth of things;
and for this I excuse myself for the length of the speech, for it does not please me that I withhold from you the secret which is hidden in fire, and the quality of the work, how it expels the diseases of the body, as the philosopher says in demonstrating; Receive it in your thoughts.
And know, son, that they agree on what time the cauterizations should be done, and choose taking pains.
And I say that cauterization is suitable at all times, because the harmful effects that follow are often cured by the aid of cauterization; and likewise the cauterizations are for necessary pains and hastenings that cannot wait for the time when a greater evil may come to the limb.
And do not think ever, dear son, as foolish people do; for the disease that is healed by cauterization has no return; and they say it to him thus;
and they say it to him thus; but it is not so as they believe, because cauterizations are not a medicine that alters the temperament, and dries the humors which are the cause of the pain, and is worth more than medicine for the hastening of its value, and for the virtue of its work and of its authority.
And it is possible that the disease comes from the patient's complexion, at times according to the humor of the disease and its position.
and are gathered in him the excesses by the acquisition of foods and similar things, if it is not for cauterizations administered to him or he has pus of excess and moisture, such as cauterizations of teeth for the pain, and similar things, and such pain does not return. but that happens rarely.
And many people do not understand why cauterization is called the last resort of medicine, and it is true;
but they do not believe that cauterization is worth anything after medicine, but their intentions are false, and cauterization is the last resort of medicine because when we administer methods of cures for a disease and they do not work, then we administer cauterization, and it works.
It appears well that cauterizations are the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish physicians.
The ancients said that cauterizations with instruments of gold are better than those of iron, and they did not say this because of the quality of the gold or because of the height of its substance;
and they said that the place of cauterization does not become gangrenous, but this is not true because I have experienced it, and found that it is true in some men;
and cauterizations of gold are worth more than those of iron, as they praised them. And however when you heat an instrument of gold, you do not know how hot it is by the color of the gold, and it cools down quickly;
and if one heats it too much; it becomes disfigured by the fire; and then there is enough of an impediment
I have ordered this chapter of the limbs from head to feet, so that the way is easier to find.
These cauteries are useful for moisture and cold on the brain, and in it there is good done by the cause of a disease which is called "soda", and by the cause of many humors that descend from the head to the eyes, and to the ears, and because of a multitude of noises and pain of teeth and pain of throat, and similarly for all diseases that come from cold such as paralysis and sodeness and apoplexy and similar diseases.
The form of this cautery is such that the patient should be purged by a solvent medicine clarifying the head, three or four times, according to what the strength and the age and the habit of the patient can endure; and then make the patient rest their head.
And then make them sit with their arms crossed between your hands, and put their hands on their chest;
afterwards place the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes; and there will come out your two thumbs, if it bleeds from the bottom then heat the cautery that is called "olivare", of which this is the form: And put it on the left side of the bottom, and make it descend and extract your hand little by little while turning; then lift your right hand, and show the place to you if you see the bone a little bit; and if you do not see it, then reapply the cautery until you see the bone as I have told you;
afterwards take a little silk, and put it in water and wet cotton inside, and put on the wound, and let it be for three days;
after a hand is put on the moistened bandage; and let it stay there until the chill has been drawn out; after treating the wound of the joint that is called "tetrafarmaçon", as long as it is healthy.
And the old ones said that the more a wound suppurates, the more it will discharge; and for this reason it is helped by movement.
And some of them said that one should cauterize so much that part of the bone is burned, and then scrape off what is burned from the bone, and it will be cured.
And the others said that one should cauterize so much on it, and burn so strongly that a piece of bone as wide as the needle that women put in their belts is removed, because the humors issue freely out;
and one must let the wound remain covered for a long time; after that, one must clean and dress it.
And these two manners of cauterizations do not seem to me to be good in every case, except in certain men where there is a way of fear;
and it seems to me that I ought to leave it alone;
for the head is weakened by the continuous flow of fluids from the body, as we demonstrate in other limbs;
and also when the head of the patient is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cauterization seems more safe and gentle to me, and in that manner I observe then a healthy outcome.
When the head suffers from chronic pain, and it lasts for a long time, then the patient should use yolch or pills which are called "cochie", and purging of the head and oils and plasters; and if they perform the cautery that we have mentioned before, it is not worth it. Take care that the head of the sick person's arm is of strong nature, and that it is not too cold; then cauterize the dislocated one with a cauterization a little as we have said above. Afterwards perform the cauterization on each horn of the head just to the bone, as we have said before, and perform the cauterization on the place that is called "vasselz". and it is the place where one puts ventouses; and put your hand so that you do not see to the bone: the sick person feels much greater pain in this cauterization than in others, and I will speak of it elsewhere;
and it is necessary that the cauterizations of the horns be more subtle than those where one cauterizes the middle of the head, and this is its form:
of the cauterization of the head When in one part of the head there comes sudden pain, and the illness extends to the eye, and the head is purged with medicated cleansing remedies, and one has done the other cures that I have spoken of in the division of illnesses, and all this does not profit anything: then one makes cauterizations according to two methods, that is to say with medical needle and with fire.
The cauterization with medical needle is that you prick a needle of alum, and remove the crust and apply it to the head, and then make the temple where the pain holds in such manner that you can rub the needle of alum under the skin;
and when it will be applied, tie it and bind it well and let it stay for twelve hours; and then untie it and pull out the needle of alum, and let the wound be so for two or three days; Then put a poultice on the wound, plunged into butter until it can be put in place.
After the treatment of the injury, as long as it is healthy;
and see to it if you make use of certain burning medications that I have written or twelve treatments of burning medications.
The cauterization with iron is according to this method. Heat the cauterizer of which this is the form:
And it is called "clos" because the head is made in the form of a nail or it has little curvature, and in the middle a small appearance;
and put it on the painful place, and hold your hand and turn the iron a little lightly, until the middle of the spine where the heart is, be dry;
and lift your hand so that the artery does not become hard, which is bad, and causes an abundance of blood to flow.
After putting cotton in a pouch of oil, and put it on the wound for three days; then I put moistened cotton in butter, and then treat the wound with ointment until it is healed;
and if you want to cauterize this migration with the cautery that is called "cultellare", at the tip, and beware of touching the artery in this migration which is not ancient.
of the migration
When you treat a migration as we have previously said in the divisions of illnesses, and it does not improve, and you see that the previous saying of medicine and of iron does not suffice, then it is necessary to heat the cautery that is called "cultellare" until it becomes white;
and mark thus on the painful wound a line of half a thumb in length, and remove your hand once, and hold that you do not touch the artery and that you do not approach the bone;
And beware of the jaw that moves when one chews, and the nerves do not have regard for what moves and that spasm does not come to the patient, and beware of the decrement of blood from the artery when it will be cut, or cutting that causes great fear and shame to the one who does not know himself, and who is not a studied and experienced person. and let the work be in my way;
but I will tell you how to stop blood when the artery is cut, and I will show you in this book where it is written.
And if you see that these cauteries do not suffice for the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize in the middle of the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healthy;
and if you see, administer the cauterization that we have spoken of in the chapter on the extraction of the artery, with the cauterization that has two blades; and is this cautery better than that one and more helpful.
of the pain of the ears from a cold source
When in the ear comes pain from cold, and one has applied medicines that dissolve and other cures that we have mentioned in the division, and the pains do not move, then heat this cautery which is called "poins", of which this is the form:
After puncturing all around the sick ear, or around the two ears where the pain is held in both, and a little below the root of the ear since you have signed the place of injection; and have X points around each ear;
after the cure, the place as long as it is healthy.
of the torture of the mouth
Torture that must be cured by cautery is not far from those that move with phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of the disease;
and do not perform cauterization on similar things that come from hemorrhoids and from the spasms of the kidneys.
When you treat this kind of torture that comes from a flow of blood and purging of the head and gargling, and it is not effective, then it is necessary to cauterize the patient with three cauterizations: one at the root of the ear, and another a little behind the temple, and the third at the joining of the two lips;
and put the cauterization on the healthy part, and make a cauterization directly on the back of the ear a little below the crown of the head, and another on the temple as long as a finger; and let the cauterization be so hot that it burns the heart;
and this is the form of the cauterization:
And it is similar to the scalpel that we have previously mentioned, but it is a bit more subtle and it is necessary that the blade be a bit thicker;
After curing the limb as I have said before, as long as it is healthy.
When a case of apoplexy is old and you cure it as we have said, and it does not improve, and the patient has no fever, then you should make four cauterizations: Two on the two horns of the head, and one in the middle of the head, and one on the limb called "vassel" as we have previously said, and the fourth cauterization on the mouth of the stomach;
and let it be cured as we have said before.
of lethargy
For this illness it is necessary to give the patient great and pills that purify the brain;
After treating the head of the patient entirely, and putting on the occipital area the plaster of mustard which is written or mentioned in the treatise of plasters;
and this is the manner of the cautery: if you do it as I have said.
If he is wounded in that place, it is good; and if he isn't, then have three cauterizations made on the middle of the head descending to the neck, and one finger's breadth between each cauterization, two fingers thick;
and treat it like the others, and if you see swelling, and the patient is suffering, have one cauterization made in the middle; and if the disorder is, two others on the two horns, and treat it until it is healed;
and let the cauterizations be which are called "olivare", as I have said before.
It is necessary that the head be cleaned with herbs and that which we have said before;
afterwards, heat the head of the patient, then perform cauterization within the head and on each horn, and behind the ear and three on the spine of the neck;
and if you are a skilled practitioner, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the illness is severe, then perform four cauterizations on the spine of the back; and let it be until the most tender part of the heart is dry, and lift your hand; after the treatment until he is healthy, and it is the cauterization that is called "olivare" which we have mentioned before.
of epilepsy
Epileptics should not undergo cauterization except for those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary to first cleanse the brain with herbs and other treatments that we have mentioned in the section when the patient has great and suffering pain from taking medicine.
And if it's an infant who can't yet suffer, have them gargle and chew, rubbing the brain often with good meat.
After the king of the head in the middle, and have the cauterization done according to what we said before, and the cauterization on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the patient is weak and suffering, have cauterizations done as I said to the one who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and of the neck, and let the cauterization be olive-based according to the method that I said.
If the patient is an infant, have them undergo a subtle cauterization in this manner:
When because of melancholy the superfluities or the corrupted and thick humors are present, then cauterize with these cauterizations as we have said for the one who has paralysis.
And if by the cause of melancholy the superfluous humors are declining into melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then one should give something to drink that will cleanse the brain, according to what is stated beforehand in the division.
After the king of the patient's body; after making a plaster of linen, well done, like a circle, put it around the head;
and the patient should be crossed, and held firmly from all sides;
after applying the bandage, and it is of no use to anoint with old barberry butter; and heat it with tempered fire, so that the fingers can bear the heat without suffering; after having seen the circle inside the head, and let it cool down;
and do this to the patient each week once with another good government, until he is healthy.
Or you will see yourself being cauterized by making several points on the entire cauterization.
This type of cauterization disturbs the brain greatly;
and then put on cotton moistened in butter and in fat of geese.
of the juice of the eyes When the juice comes first to the eyes by the signs that I mentioned in the division, then anoint and give to drink to the patient something cleansing the head, and warming all moisture, and make them sweat in a bath several times while fasting.
After instruct him to shave his head, and make him cauterized in the middle of the head, and make two cauterizations on the two temples if the discharge of the juice is in both eyes, or in one if the discharge is in one.
and cut to the cauterization all the veins and arteries that are near the heart, and let the cauterization be long according to the width of the temple;
and beware of the effusion of blood, and if you see too much blood coming out, then stop it with a poultice as soon as you can.
And I will teach you about the extraction of arrows and the cutting with a cautery how you will stop it;
and sometimes they perform cauterization or branding between the two bones in the back.
and one sees that it is from cold, phlegmatic superfluities, then one does the cauterization that I spoke of at the beginning of the treatise concerning the eyes: One cauterization in the head, and two cauterizations on the two temples, and two cauterizations or brandings between the two bones; and if it is more seriously burned, then cauterize carefully from above the eyebrow with all small cauterization.
When you administer medicine according to what we have said in the division, and it does not benefit him, then give the patient three handfuls to drink; after the king of the head, and make a cauterization in the middle with two olive-tree cauterizations; and make two cauterizations of the cauterization that is called "clavilis" on the two eyebrows, a little above the eyebrows;
and beware of the artery that you do not cut it.
And this is the form of the cauterization that is called "clavilis":
When the skin of the eye is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize with this cauterization that is called "olivare". of what this form is:
And if you see that it makes two cauterizations on the two sores as long as the eyebrows are;
and do not let your hand be still unless until the third part of the papier is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
hairs that grow on the eye It happens sometimes that the hairs of the eyes turn into a pustule, and prick the eye, and one makes cauterizations in two manners: it is to know about fire, or burning medicine.
For the fire cauterization, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow as long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they grow and are even, then put the patient in a warm place; After that, draw on the skin of the eyes a figure that is as subtle as the tip of a feather, and let the beginning of the sign be beneath the hairs;
Then put moist cotton in a mixture of oil and musk, applied to the eye, then heat the cauterization instrument of which this is the form:
After cauterizing on the figure that you have drawn, little by little and many times, so that the heart is warmed in that place;
and the signs of the health of the eye are that you see the skin drawn back, and the hairs lifted to the tip of the eye;
then lift your hand, and leave it there for three hours, then put moist cotton in butter until the heat of the cauterization is removed; After the treatment of the joint as long as it is healthy.
And after that the hairs grow, and the skin is softened then restart the cauterization on the same spot, just like you did previously;
and if the hairs are removed, then cauterize until the skin is restored to its natural state, and is even, and does not prick the eye of the hair.
The medical cauterizations of burning are those that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow as long as they are large and even, then make a parchment in the shape of the leaf of myrtle.
then take French soap and living ashes, one half and one quarter, and mix them together well; and make it quickly, so that it does not get cold, then spread it on the shape that you have made like the leaf of myrtle, and put it on the skin of the eyes. and if the illness is in the oil supplement, one must work on it, and if it is in both ears; and put two fingers into the ear cotton wool moistened in a little water;
and let the head of the patient be in your hands and put your finger showing on the medicine, and press the pouce and wet the mouth every time the patient feels a burning sensation from the medicine, for it feels like a burning as from fire.
When you have held it for a long time, then give the medicine to your patient. And when the burning sensation has passed, then lift the limb of the patient, and look to see if you find the skin lifted like it was lifted by contraction of fire or by incision; and if it is thus, then it is good.
If not, then put more of the medicine on the limb or the medicine has not taken effect, until your work is even, and your eyes are placed to the point;
Then put on cotton wool soaked in butter until the heart and arteries are cooled, after the treatment of the joint which is called "dyaphenisis" and others, until it is healed.
And it is necessary that you take good care of your work with great care so that there is no lack in the knowledge of medicine for the eyes.
And if the skin becomes soft afterwards, and the hairs prick in the eye, then reapply the medicine to that area which is softened by the proper skin, just as you did before; after the treatment until it is healed;
and this is the shape of the mortar for the dead:
And be aware that the eyes of men are diverse in size and in smallness, and thus should be your constructions;
and let not the right way be hidden from him to whom is the study of this art.
of the treatment of fistula by cauterization
When you treat a fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and your treatments are not profitable, then it is necessary that you perform cauterization in this manner.
Instruct the patient to put his head on your healthy side; and hold the patient's head between your hands in such a way that it does not move, nor does his head decline;
afterwards apply moist cotton to the eye or juice of wormwood on the eyelid;
afterwards heat the cauterization instrument which is suitable:
and it is shaped at the head like the form of a feather of a bird, assembled so that the cauterization instrument is ready;
if you see it, it should be pointed from one side of the head to the other, and if you see it, it should also be as sharp as a needle;
but nevertheless, this is what is of most value for your work.
After the fistula has been pressed, it is covered, and in that state the putridness, and the dryness; and it is closed, thus the opening, and through the hole the bowel;
after putting on the hot cauterization, and hold your hand on the cauterization at the part of the nail near the edge of the eye, so that your hands do not cause folly; and put the cauterization in the fat of the eye, and corrupt it.
If you come to the beginning of the cauterization just to the bones, it would be good. If that does not work, then restart the cauterization one more time, and also if you are a master of the profession, and let it be for three days;
After I put on cotton moist in a bath, and the treatment of the joint is done until it is healthy, and if 40 days pass and it is not healthy, then put on medicine with corrosive ointment so that the bone is exposed; and the King as according to what he will come in his chapter.
And there is a manner of cauterizing of fistulas that none of the ancients spoke of. Cut into the fistula, and make the place. afterwards put in the incision a subtle stick of wax where its form is; and they make the quantity of an ounce of lung; and hold your hand firmly on the stick, and let the patient not move their foot, so that the melted lung does not run to its hole;
and then one puts on the patient's hole cotton moist in a tub of water or in water;
The flesh sinks if treated with a fistula, and the blood passes through wondrous sanitation.
And if the fistula is healed by the cauterization that we have spoken of, it's good. If not, then it is necessary to administer a tube to the navel, and to bring the fistula to the body of the navel according to what is proper for it.
of cracks in the lips Many times there occur cracks in the lips that are called "poil", and similarly in the lips of infants.
When you treat these cracks of what we have said in divisions, and the treatment does not benefit, then heat a small cauterizing iron according to this form:
And thrust it hastily into those cracks until it comes to the source of the flow;
After the treatment, leave the limb of the patient alone as long as it is healthy.
When an abscess comes in the root of the throat or in the uvula or palate, or the roots of the teeth, after having made decay and rottenness and is swollen and becomes a fistula; and you treat it as we have said in the sections, and it does not profit them; then it is necessary that you apply the cautery according to the quantity of the fistula; after the opening or perforation of the fistula, and hold your hand until the hot iron comes to the source of it, or touches the rear of the limb;
and do this once or twice, after the treatment of what we have said in cures, until it is healthy;
and if it is thus cured, it's good; and if not, then you should uncover the limb and cut out the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you cure them with medicine and it is of no use, then put the head of the patient on your healthy one; after cauterizing, the shape will come such that you put a chain over the tooth;
and put the cauterizing iron hastily inside, and hold it so that the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth;
after lifting your hand, recauterize according to your will;
then fill the patient's mouth with salty water, and make them pull it back and spit for an hour.
And in a similar way the teeth which were loose become firm, and the gums softened are restrained, and the rotting moisture is dried.
of the pain of the teeth
When toothache comes from cold, or there is cold or fever, and medical treatments are of no use, then it is necessary to perform cauterization in two ways: and cauterization with a burning instrument and cauterization with fire.
Cauterization with a burning instrument is such that you take the wick of a candle, and the tip in an iron or bronze skewer; afterwards take cotton and envelop it around the tip of a stick, and the marrow in melted wick, and put on the aching tooth quickly and hold until it is cooled;
and do it often until its virtue reaches the root of the tooth, and if you see marrow and cotton in cold melted wax, and put on the aching tooth, and put on the hot iron as long as the fire reaches the decay of the tooth.
The fire cautery is such that you should hold a iron or steel rod, and let it be thick so that the heat does not reach the patient's mouth;
After heating the cautery, so that the form appears afterwards, and put it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery has cooled down;
Do this often, for the pain will be gone the next day or the day after.
And it is necessary that the patient fill his mouth with warm bread in the impression of this cautery, and then pull out the root;
and this is the shape of the cautery:
And make a cautery of the head of the ulcer that you want, and according to what you are able;
and this is the shape of the cane:
of the scrofula When the scrophules are of phlegmatic and cold moistures, and do not obey digestion by medicines, then heat the hairy cauterized iron from which afterwards comes the form, and it has two openings for the fumes to issue from the cauterization of the other part;
and put the hot cauterized iron on the abscess once, or as it is needed, until it comes to the bottom of the abscess;
and if the abscess is small then put cauterized iron according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it in this way for three days; and put on cotton cloth moistened in broth until the wound is closed;
after the cure, anoint the limb with ointments and tents until it is healthy.
When the moistures prevail on the channels of the body, and similarly when it comes from a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be purged first by solutive medicines;
After the cauterization is done at the root of the throat, and be careful that you do not come too close to the throat, and do not put a fire closer than a small space.
After they do another cauterization at the joint of the neck at the head of the spine, and it is the cauterization that is called "clavicle" from which we get the term in front of us;
and treat the body as we have said before, until it is healthy.
When all the diseases of the lungs are from cold moistures, and the patient has no fever or cough, and it is a chronic disease, then do two cauterizations on the shoulders in the hollow places; and another cauterization between the two breasts in the chest;
and it is the cauterization that is called "clavicle" according to the form which has been mentioned before.
And if you see, make cautery by pricking all the cautery that is called "poins" where its form is thus before in the disease of the ears;
and let the poins be just to XXX, or inserted within.
After the cure, adjust the limb according to what has been said before, and let the cauteries be in three rows according to this form:
And for this reason the cautery is made lighter, because you make three at a time.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. After that, let the patients sweat on their back and on their sides; After lifting the heart that is within the diaphragm, with the fingers of your left hand;
and if the joint is dislocated within, then heat the cautery which has two nerves because that is its form:
and cauterize the heart as long as it pierces until to the costal, and there comes the figure of the cautery assembled with four cauteries;
and for this reason the cautery is made with the cautery that has three nerves, because the figure of cauterization is six cauteries;
and the nerves are according to the subtlety of a thread and it is the form of the cautery that has three nerves:
And sometimes it is joined to this one nerve because it has eight cauteries.
After put on the cautery, broken roots with seat; After making the patient rest, and not moving the limbs for a long time until they are well comforted.
And if it is dislocated above, little matter does it make, then perform cauterization on the thickness of the cauterized claw, or many cauterizations by pricking.
For the joint is closed again, and the moisture is stopped, and the patient is healed.
When in the stomach come chills and many moistures until they extract to their complexion, and are multiplied the diarrhea for them, and in manners of accustomed cures, and it does not profit them, then it is necessary that the patient be warmed on his back, and stretch out his legs and hands. Make on this one three cauterizations, one below the shoulder by the quantity of an egg, to all the claw cauterization, and two cauterizations between the two ribs as many as the figure of the cauterizations shall be at three angles, and let there be space between the one and the other so that they are not joined together when they will suppurate;
and let the cauterization be such that they grasp the two parts of the heart, and let the shape of the cauterizations be according to this form without adjustment:
And if you see a large cauterization in the stomach according to this form;
and he who will have fear of this cauterization, cauterize by pricking and marking on the stomach at the point according to the quantity that you see of the thickness; then cauterize all the area which is called "poins".
After the treatment of the wound that we have had before, as long as it is healthy.
When to the liver comes pain of cold and of moisture and of great swelling, as long as it is far from its natural complexion through the excess fluids; and the patient is cured of that which we have said in treatments, and it does not profit him, thus it is necessary that the patient be warmed on his stomach; and signs of three cauteries according to this form and this figure and this quantity on the liver, removing the hypochondries, or where the sides of the spleen come;
and it has a thickness between each cauterization of a finger; and let the cauterization be as long as the body, and do not press your hand too much on all the cauterization;
and let it be so that the mucus of the heart is burned, and let the patient's right side be on his feet;
and if he cannot, then let him be seated, and extend his legs, and lift his arms;
And if it is your intention, then cauterize these cauteries of the cuticular, if you are subtle and wise in the art, and beware that you do not burn the whole heart, for you would dry out the whole body; and that it does not come near the navel, for the blood vessels are very subtle in this place, and one sees the veins clearly.
When there is an abscess on the liver, and you want to know if it is in the flesh of the liver or in the membrane: if it is in the flesh, the patient feels pain not too severe;
and if it is in the membrane, he feels a sharp pain.
And when this treatment touches the mirrors, it requires that the patient be treated on their head;
and then indicate from below where the abscess is, and then heat the cautery which resembles a nut, whose shape is this: And cauterize the cautery until the blood vessels are dry, and come near the sphincter, until the pore is completely closed;
After the treatment according to the treatment of the injuries as long as it is healthy;
and it is not suitable that anyone uses this cauterization except those who have studied for a long time in the art of medicine, and through whose hands these diseases have been corrected many times.
Therefore, he can hardly work, and nevertheless it seems to me that it is better to leave him alone.
of cauterization of the pleura
The ancients said that one should perform cauterizations on the pleura with roots of aristolochia, and in this manner: take a root of aristolochia as long as you can find, the largest possible, and let it be dry, and let it be as thick and as long as your two fingers; and grind it into oil, and dip it in fire, and perform the cauterization between the shoulder and the neck, and perform two small cauterizations a little lower on the part that is below the beard;
And apply cauterization between the fifth rib and the sixth, declining a little backwards; and apply one cauterization in the chest, and another on the stomach, and one between the shoulders, and two on the sides of the chest opposite the cauterization which is between the shoulders;
and do not press with your hand, but make it open as in applying an ointment.
And the authorities said that no man should use fire cauterization on a similar rash, and they warm it and put it between the ribs, until it comes to that abscess; and this is without pain, as we have said concerning the abscess of the liver.
But in this work there is fear that the patient will die now, or a fistula comes which cannot be healed.
of the bladder
When you treat the disease of the tooth that we have spoken of in the divisions of treatments, and it does not profit, then there are three manners of cautery that are good.
One of the manners is that you make three or four cauteries, in a row according to the length of the tooth, according to the shape of the cautery of the flesh that we have spoken of before.
and do not press your hand on the entire cautery, and let the patient sit up on his back;
and another manner of cautery is that you heat the cautery that has two nerves, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder;
and lift the skin that is near the tooth, or where the cold of the patient comes from the left side, and let the elevation that you lift the skin according to the skin, according to the length of the body, and the cautery be according to the width of the body.
After that burn the inflamed areas until the heart is perceived from the other side, and then apply the cauterization, and thus in this way there will be four.
And if you want, then cauterize all of the cauterization to three areas.
After the cure when it has obtained purification by long tension, and this is better than the other cures mentioned before.
Cauterization is not suitable for droptics, except in the manner that is called "ascites".
When you cure according to the methods that we have spoken of in divisions, and your cure does not profit me, then it is necessary that you do four cauterizations around the navel, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the spleen, and two behind the back on the spine, and one on the right side. and let the cauterization be carefully applied near the spinal cord.
Afterwards, leave the cauterization open for a long and tense purging, and do not neglect the treatment of the disease after the cauterization; and healing will hasten, and the two intentions will come together with the aid of God.
The shape of the cauterization for the belly should be a spike which we have shown before. and that for the back should be olive-shaped, according to what has been set forth here before.
When the feet are swollen in one who has dropsy, and are full of watery cysts, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the foot between the thumb and the little finger; and lift your hand with the cauterization without turning.
And do not enter too much by depth, thus would be the outer layer of the citrine, and let the cautery be according to this form:
After that, apply on both legs two cauteries, one on each leg at the point of the cullet or knee; and let the cauteries be on the long, one below the kneecap in front and the other behind, in the middle of the leg;
and leave the cauteries on for a long time without removing them, until the wound has issued;
after the treatment of the other treatments that we have spoken of.
When a discharge from the belly comes from cold and moisture, so that the retaining and digestive virtues which are in the stomach and intestines are weakened, and cannot be cured by methods of treatments; and you see the patient suffering greatly and of strong virtue, then apply a large cauterization on the stomach according to what has been spoken of before, or the stomach cauterization, to cauterize in a circle; and 4 cauteries around the subtle navel for every subtle cauterization of the spine, and 2 cauterizations on the hips.
And if you see the moisture abundant and the patient suffering, have it cauterized on the thumb, and one cauterization on each heel, and two small cauterizations on the stomach below the navel, for the treatment is beneficial when it has good help.
of the treatment of hemorrhoids
When the hemorrhoids are at the foundation, or one or several, and are old and are of thick cold and moist humors corrupted, and are treated as we have said in sections, and it does not benefit, then make cauterizations: 3 on the spine of the back, which is all divided into small portions and a little triangle, and 1 cauterization below the navel, 2 fingers.
and if you think that his stomach is chilled, and the food does not digest, and one sees the face swollen, then one applies the large cautery on the stomach, as it was previously stated, and another on the liver, and another on the spleen with all the clamp cauteries; and let the cautery be applied for a long time. After healing, leave it so that it is healthy.
When you cut into thelul, heat the cautery which seems to relieve, and then apply it all burned on the cut thelul; and leave it so that your hand reaches the birth of the vein, where the blood flows without being cut;
do this one or two times, and if there is much of thelul, then cauterize each one as we have said; After the treatment of profitable members as long as they are healthy;
and if you cauterize with a large cauter on the ulcer, it will have more aid.
When the patient cannot bear cutting or surgical treatment, which we will discuss in its place, then comes a disease that cannot be healed except by cauterization.
When there comes a fistula, and it is inflamed and irritated by putrid matter and rotten humors, then the doctor will prove with a subtle thread, and be careful that you know the depth of the thread as much as it has.
After heating the cauter that seems to be in order, and put it in the fistula according to the quantity that the thread has entered, and renew the cauter as long as those rotten and corrupt bodies are burned, one time, or two, or three, according to the quantity of what is needed.
and beware of the nerves that are beneath, and of the large veins.
if the fistula goes to the body of the bladder and to the intestine, beware of these places, and do not make those wounds that are in the flesh, and think that it is not a perforating.
after the cure, the flesh as long as it is healthy, and if the wound is healed, and the materials are pushed back together at length, then know that the wound is entirely healthy;
and if the materials are not pushed back, know that the flesh is torn, and the bone is corrupted at the source; and thus like one of those things that we will tell about in its place.
When pain of cold comes to the kidneys, and of great swelling, and it does not take the shape of a woman, then it is necessary that you perform cauterization on the kidneys on one side and on the other with the clavicle cautery that we have spoken of before;
and if we have the cauterizations in a straight line, there will be three cauteries, and they will provide greater aid.
of the bladder When the bladder is weak and fragile from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then make a cauterization on the outer part above the bladder, where the hairs of the pubic area begin, and to the right and to the left, and let each cauterization be as long as the width of a thumb;
and make a cauterization on the back, or two if you are in need of it;
and let the cauterizations be arranged according to the previously described form.
When the liver is cold and moist, and does not allow for conception because of this, and the flowers are corrupted and their ends are delayed; and when they come, they feel great pain: then it is suitable to make three cauterizations around the navel, as we have said concerning the cauterization of the bladder, and two cauterizations on the back;
and let the cauterizations be done with a key, as we have said.
When the viscous humors descend to the box of the thigh, and for this reason it moves from its place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when one measures them together;
and the place of separation is found, then it is suitable that you cauterize the patient on the box of the thigh with a cauterization similar to a circle, and mark before the place around the box as it turns, so that the box is within the circle;
and if there are cauteries such as those with which one cauterizes the stomach.
And if these cauteries are not present, then make three cauteries of the large olive tree, and let the cauteries be as deep as all the abscesses;
and heal them until they are healthy.
of the pain of the thigh When pain comes in the thigh, and it is from cold and moisture, and the patient is cured of what we have said in the section and the cure is not effective, and the illness is ancient: then it is necessary that you purge the patient of the thick humors with foul-smelling pills, or other good similar pills. After you make a cautery;
and the manner of the cautery is in two ways: It is to know assemblage of burning medicines, and fire cauterization.
Fire cauterization is done in many ways, of which one is the following:
that you cauterize on the box of the thigh three triangular cauterizations in this form, and it makes a deep and large wound, and there is between each cauterization a space the size of an egg, and let the cauterizations be olive-shaped;
sometimes one makes a cauterization in the middle on the head of the thigh, because there are four according to this form:
And if you see that one cauterizes with a circular cauterization which we have previously spoken of in the dislocation of the thigh;
but make it in such a way that the circle encompasses the entire thigh, and all the spaces around the heart are dry.
And this is the manner in which it is done for sciatica, when the pain is in the thigh, and does not seem to reach either the hip or the leg.
And if it reaches the hip and the leg, have two cauteries made there where the patient says the pain is, and one cauterization above the knee four fingers, on the left side a little;
and let the cautery be applied with a warm cloth, and let the thickness of the cauterization be that of a leather strap;
and if the patient feels that the pain extends to two fingers from the foot or near the ankle, then cauterize there where he feels the pain three points or four at the cauterization which is called "points". And if it is necessary, have more made;
and if he knows that the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, have a cauterization made with the cloth cauterization or circular one, and take great care in all your cauteries that you do not leave the cauterization so long that you burn the nerves and the large arteries, and that you do not cause the patient more nuisance and contraction.
And I myself have seen many who had cauterization on the leg near the foot, and it let them so that the leg became entirely swollen, and the foot also, and it was pierced and corrupted to the foot. After a abdominal solution where he got death.
And if the pain is in two places together, perform cauterization in one and in the other, in this manner.
And the wise men said regarding the cauterization of the thigh, that this is the method: make an iron instrument and let it be as thick as a walnut, or a little less, and let it be hollow and let one hollow be joined to another with the space of a nut.
and let the hollows be open on two sides, and also be like nuts, and have an iron hand well made;
and it is the form:
And let it be heated until it is entirely red and gives off a sweet scent, and then apply it to the box of the patient's ankle, and turn on the healthy side.
and let the cautery be applied once the fire cautery is ready and let it be for three hours; and then make a plaster of butter, and let the wound be covered for a long time; after the treatment of the joint until it is healthy.
Albucasim says that we should use little of this cautery because of its danger, and few see those who use it;
and however these are good cauteries, which one can suffer, and where they adhere to.
The medical burning cauteries are that you make an instrument with notches in which descends the margin of the door, and let it be of copper or iron with a long edge, and in height two nuts, and between each one the quantity of the thickness of a die; and let them be open downwards and upwards, and join together according to this form:
Afterwards put on the bandage of the thigh to the patient lying on their healthy side, and press your hand much on the bandage of the thigh; afterwards put it between the two circles of the warm water which is warmed by the fire a little, and let it be for an hour or ten, and let the patient suffer from the heat and the burning of it.
For it finds mortification as from fire;
and when the mortifications have passed, raise your hand with the instrument and lift the thigh of warm water, and let it be for three hours, and put on a poultice as long as what is black from the eschar remains; and let it be for three hours that the purulence stays in the strait;
and this would be the last aid after the treatment of wounds as long as it is healthy.
And if the pain has extended to the thigh or to the leg, make an instrument that holds according to what you have done on the injured limb;
and this is the manner of warm water, and I have written it or treated about the rectification of medicine. Take alkaline substance and living lime, as much of one as of the other, and grind them together, and put them in a new pot. or it should have a small hole through which the point of a razor can enter;
or it should have a small hole through which the point of a razor can enter; and put that pot in another well-plugged pot, and put on it the alkaline substance and lime and sweet water, as much as there is of the powder when you have well sprinkled it with your hand;
and let it be so until it descends to the water and freezes or congeals, then take all that water, and throw it on hot coals and on quicklime as before.
And then it will be very sharp and will be administered in many medical treatments and in cauterizations of other limbs.
For it makes work like fire, and also other medicines that one cauterizes well the haunch thus as thesis and myrrh and lime with soap, all these things mixed together.
And Galen tells us of a cure in which a man was cured of the pain of the haunch and of the sciatic vein, and praised it highly, and said that no other cure was needed, and that he was healthy at once when this cure was made, and he bathed as he teaches hereafter.
And apply in a similar way that you press the green fresh and dry litargire, and bruise it much with a bit of grease, and put it on the thigh and on the thigh and on the leg where the pain is, and the injury;
and let it be for three hours and according to the quantity that the patient does not feel the burning anymore.
And then make him enter into a bath so that his body is warmed a little, and make him enter into bed, and the pain will go away completely and he will be healthy.
And know that one should not use cauterization of such medicines unless it is after the evacuation of the body.
And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with threads of linen, it helps much;
and the cauterization should be done in a similar way. Take the knee and the fat of old oil, and put it on the pit that is between the thumb of the foot and the other called the heel pit.
After taking dry fibers of goat's kidney, and dipping them in fire until they are charcoal, and then putting them on the wool, and leaving them there until they are stained.
and do it again thus, and do not stop doing it until you think by sensation that it comes to the bone, and that the pain is eased;
and this kind of cauterization is called "cauterization of the goat".
of the pain in the back
When pain comes to the back, either from a blow or from percussion or from too great evacuation, or from similar things of cold matter spread, none of these things is worth cauterization, except for that which comes from an infusion of cold matter.
It is necessary after this that the patient is treated with foul-smelling pills or other similar things, that they are applied to the back, where the pain is, three signed lines of inch, and in each line a cautery or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can suffer;
and let the cauteries be made according to the cautery that is called "points";
and if you see fit, make three or four cauteries at the middle clavicle according to this form:
Many times this sickness comes to little children, and the signs of the onset are that they have a constricted arm when they get up, and fear; and you will find in the upper part of the spine of the back and in the appearance that comes on the other vertebrae.
When you see this and you judge it to be cured, then cauterize it with the cautery of the vertebra according to this form. If the cautery touches each part of the spine equally.
And if you see, that the cautery around the spine pricks two or three lines, and the points are close to one another.
After the cure, anoint the limb as long as it is healthy according to what we have said, and beware that you do not apply cautery in awkwardness which is near a nerve.
of the pain of the joints
When the pain of the joints is from moistures that are spread to each member of the body, and when pain comes in the feet, which the doctors call "podagra" properly, and when it is of a cold cause and cures of medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauteries in such manner:
Make many cauteries around the joint of the foot, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped according to this form:
And if it is necessary that you prick on the face of the foot, then make a cautery at the entire area where one calls «point». And if the pains come near the knees and other joints, and this happens many times, then make a cautery on each knee three or four cauteries of each part, to all the olive-tree-like cautery.
and if you have more of a trade, if you make more, but do not hold your hand further than the length that the shinbone is long.
And if the pains descend near the knee and to the back, then administer the cautery that we have spoken of in its chapter.
And if the pains are in the hands, then make pricks around the forearm two lines;
and if a point of pain remains in the fingers, then make pricks on each joint and on the hair of the hand;
and if the pains come near the joints or near the shoulders, cauterize each part, and give good governance to the patient and apply remedies.
For if you make him have good governance and you purge phlegm, he will be healed with the help of God.
When a rupture comes into the anguish, and the intestines fall to the groin and it is newly, then it is necessary that when you cure the wound, that you do not touch the one that day; and that he uses things that loosen the belly, so that the feces come down from his belly;
after making him sit on his back between your hands, and instruct him to hold his arm as long as the intestine is being repaired, and apply them to your hands, and sign from below the rupture on the bone of the hip, and make a sign that is similar to half a circle above the body;
Then heat the cautery of what kind it is:
until it becomes white and throws away its sensibilities. Then reset the bowels to their place; and let the minister guide your hand so that they do not turn back;
and open well the thighs of the patient, and put one cushion and one servant on the thighs, and another on the back who holds the hands;
then put the cautery on the sign with all your hand, and hold it straight and hold it as long as you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, then recommend it again another time until you come to the bone; and guard subtly that the bowel does not protrude when you perform the cautery; that you do not burn it; and that by this the patients do not die, or other evils.
And know that when you do not come near to the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing.
And it is necessary that the cauterization of children be subtle according to the measure of their bones, and for large people also large according to their measure;
after three days cure the limb from the cautery of tar until the eschar is removed;
after curing other ulcers until it be healed, and let the patient lie on his back for forty days until the wound is well dried;
and it is necessary that their bandages be tightened for a long time, so that the boils do not burst when he gets up to go to chambers.
And after forty days, when he wants to get up, a well-made splint should be applied to him, and the poultice for forty other days;
and let it have good rest, so that it works little and guards against too great a repletion of drinking and eating, and of too high a temperature;
and when it makes this teaching then it is completely healthy.
And I will speak later about the treatment of cutting in its chapter.
When ruptures come in other bellies and are connected, and you see that they do not grow anymore, then have made the cautery of the cautery repeated according to its quantity, and let it be the third of the heart; after the treatment according to what we have said;
and none of the ancients have said that one should be cauterized with a cautery at three angles according to this form:
but first mark the limit of the flesh and make a line across the width above the rupture, and another below, and hold in hand the entire cautery instrument.
But the first cauteries are lighter and more moderate.
of pain residing in any member When pain comes to any member, from a fall or from a blow, and that pain holds for a long time, and the cure of medicine is not effective, then it is necessary that it be cauterized with the cautery that is called "poins", and let the cauteries be according to the length of the member and its smallness and weakness and its virtue and location of torsions and of its pain.
if it is healed from the first cautery, that's good;
if it is not healed by that name, recommend another cautery on top of the first, for such is the custom that it must be changed on the member that is closest to it, for which reason it is necessary that you do the cauteries until the patient is healed.
The mixtures are helped many times by cauterization with great assistance, and likewise the illness that comes from the corruption of phlegm and melancholy.
When you want to cauterize, beware that the illness is at its beginning, and if it is curable according to what we have said in the division, and does not descend nor stay, and you doubt that the corruption does not infect the whole disease, then make a cauterization on the head: Put one cautery on the head to the nue, and the other towards the forehead at the end of the eyebrows; and two on the two horns, and one behind on the shoulder blade;
and let it be so that the cautery reaches to the bone, and so that the crusts come out from there so that the vapors of the thick humors can come out;
and the cauterization on the mouse according to what it is in front of.
And if the mixture is spread all over; and it is manifestly necessary that you apply the cauterization of these cauterizations that we have mentioned on the head, and one cauterization on the nape of the neck, and two cauterizations on the spine of the neck, and six cauterizations on the spine of the back, and one large one on the pubic area and another below, and two on the shoulders; and two on the hips, and two on the tendons of the feet, and one on each joint of the hands and of the feet, and on the palms of the hands;
and beware of the nerves that are on the rear calf, that you not burn them;
and sometimes make a cauterization on the bone of the finger, and another on the bone of the stomach, and another on the liver.
And know that the more I do of cauterization, the more I do to help, and it brings him profit;
and know that the patient does not feel a point of pain from the cauterization as much as they feel it, because the body is already entirely corrupted.
And it is necessary that the cauterization be large and small according to the limbs and joints, according to what you will find in the manners of the cases.
After the cure, treat the limb with flour of wheaten bread and honey and other treatments until it is healthy.
When inflammation comes to any limb and is treated with medicines and oils and plasters, and it is not healed, then have cauterizations on the limb according to its size and smallness.
and let the cauterization be a little within the thickness of the skin; Then treat the joints until they are healthy.
And sometimes a cautery is applied to the hand and to the foot and to the back, at the exit of the nerve that moves the limb, and thus if it is the bone that is swollen;
and in no way should one interfere unless they are knowledgeable about the limbs and the exits of the nerves moving the body.
When the disease called "albaras" has grown, and the instruments of medicine are of no value, then cauterize with a cautery somewhat deep, according to the quantity of the thickness of the skin, until the whiteness is removed, and its color is changed;
Then treat with flour of vetches and of lentils with rose oil and leaves of plantain, and blood of colt and blood of almond, each a part; and be wrapped together, and be tied with a bandage, and be elevated to the level as long as it is healthy.
the treatment of cancer by cauterization
When cancer comes at the beginning, and you want to stop it, then cauterize with a cauterizing iron which seems a circle, all around the tumor of the cancer.
And all the wise men said that one should make a cauterization in the middle of the cancer;
and however this does not seem good to me, for I fear that it would be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have already seen it happen many times;
and a more proper thing is that it be cauterized around, with the cauterizing iron which is called "circle", as we have said in many cauterizations.
When some people have a disease called "adubelati", and it comes from the excess movement or because of the superfluous humor that it causes, or because of the weakness of the patient when he is decrepit (that is to say too old) and he has little blood, or because of the tension; and you hasten the stopping of moving: then you cauterize around many small cauteries by pricking; after that, leave it thus. For it hastens the stopping of moving.
And if you perceive the need to cauterize everything, heat the cauterizing iron according to what its form is:
And put your hand in the middle of that disease which is called "adubelati" until the cauterizing iron has penetrated the heart, and let the cauterizing be such that the patient feels relief in some manner so that the course of the corruption is alleviated.
After the treatment as long as he is perfectly healthy.
Another kind of illness is what is called "corrosive", and it is nothing other than a gangrene of a limb, because it eats away the limbs just as fire does dry wood.
If you see this illness in a person who can suffer cauterization with fire, then heat the cauterizers little and large, according to what is needed for the person or where the illness is;
After the cauterization of all parts, as long as you eradicate all the corruption, and nothing of it remains, that everything which is corrupted should be removed.
And then let it be for three days, and apply to the limbs cauterized a soothing balm with oil, until the burns from the fire are removed, and all the corruption.
After the treatment of painful hemorrhoids there is bleeding.
And if you see that after three days healthy stool does not appear, it's a sign;
and if not, then restart the cauterization on that which has remained from the corrupted limbs.
And this disease has sometimes been cured with sharp medicine instead of fire cauterization;
but nonetheless fire cauterization is of greater aid, and I have already spoken about the treatment with sharp medicine in the division: take the quantity that you have in your profession.
of the pores that come to the feet Many times it happens that to the feet through wounds is born a disease which is called "fistula" according to our intention, and is a gross faulty thing that afflicts the foot.
And the cauterization of this disease is according to two methods. It is to know the cautery of fire, and the cautery of hot water.
Cautery of fire is that you heat the cautery head as if it were a feather pen, and made of good iron to the measure that it can pierce the nail from all sides, and that it has subtle edges;
afterward put all hot on the nail, and turn your hand all around the nail until it comes to the bottom of the nail; and let it stay thus three hours until it induces a purulent discharge; then make a plaster of wild mallows bruised with vinegar, and let the plaster stay on all night, and the nail will fall out and will be disrooted from its roots.
Then treat the leg of the joint with a warm poultice as long as it is sore.
And if they are turned by various aches in the body, and often occur in the hands and feet, then you must apply cautery of hot water; and it is in a similar manner: take a chain of iron or a needle, or a thorn from a vine, and put it on the nail and the flesh, that is to remove the warts; and put the chain on so that it penetrates all around, then you put a little warm water, and hold your hand firmly, and press your hand in turning so that the edge of the chain comes to the root of the nail, and then find the hot water penetrating just to the root;
and let the patient suffer a little the burning of the hot water for an hour; Then let it be, and it will tear out all its roots entirely.
Do this afterward, as long as you scratch all those that are on the body, then cure the ointments which cause the flesh to swell.
When some people shiver from cold or from nerves, or from quartan fever or other, it is fitting that you do four cauterizations or four on the spine of the back, one cauterization between each vertebra. and one cauterization at the foot, and one on the stomach for an olive cauterization;
it will leave off the shivering, and it will hasten the health from the cold illness.
Sometimes appear on the bodies of the sick, boils or pus-filled pustules, which come from corrupted thick materials.
If it happens first that they appear to make a cautery on each head of the pustule: a subtle cautery of the paste of myrtle, from which the point is taken to be seized by fire, or of the root of aristolochia long, or of the lentick cautery.
And sometimes the cautery is done at the beginning when it appears, in this manner, and they cannot grow again beforehand, but are broken up the superfluities from which they come, and are healthy;
but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
Many times there are great outflows of blood from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes to the surface, or at the incision of the abscess, or at the cautery of the limb, and similar things; and it is a very grievous thing to dislocate.
And however when it happens to anyone, if you hasten to put your second finger on the wound of the vein, and hold it very firmly until the blood is stilled beneath your finger, and so that no more comes out;
then apply to the fire the olive cauteries, many small and large ones as long as they are well reddened;
then take I, either large or small according to the wound and the limb in which the artery is torn, and put the cautery on that vein where you hold with your finger, and hold the cautery as long as the blood is restrained.
And if it should flow again when you lift your finger from the vein, and the cautery is insufficient, then quickly take another of the cauteries that are by the fire.
And do not stop doing one thing after another until the blood is stanched;
and beware that you do not injure the nerve that is nearby, and that another evil does not come upon the patient;
and be aware that when blood flows from the artery, one cannot very well stop it, especially when the artery is large, unless it is by one of the four methods that we have mentioned: or by cauterization, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by a strong tightening of a thread, or by medicines applied which have the power to stanch blood; and should be bound and tightened firmly.
For one will not profit from the binding of tight ligation of cloths or placing hot things on, or other similar things, if it does not help a little.
And if it happens to someone and he does not have a doctor or medicine present, then he should put his own index finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and press firmly until it is stopped above the wound and above the vein; and do not move the finger, but rather keep it moist with cold water often so that it is very cold until the blood is congealed and thickened and stopped;
and make inquiries beforehand about what he needs for cauterizations and for medicines.
We have said in the first chapter about every disease for which it is necessary to use fire cauterization, or burning medicine, and the organs and the causes and the symptoms and the forms of the cauterizations;
and I have placed that chapter from the head to the feet, and I will proceed in this chapter by the same method because it is easier to find what one looks for.
And thus I entrust to you, it is necessary, dear son, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the previous ones about cauteries, and for this reason it requires greater caution.
For in the work of this chapter, there are often evacuations of blood when opening a vein, and incisions on abscesses, and treatments of wounds, and extractions of arrowheads, and cuttings into stone, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many deaths occur.
And I advise you that you do not undertake foolishness. For many kinds of people come to be cured. if there come those who are so accustomed to their illness that they die lightly because of the force of their disease, and the greatness of their evil. and of these one should have fear.
And of these it is given to whom its meaning is told: Wait, I am a leper"; and the disease is contemptible.
It is not necessary that you consent to those who come to you with this condition, but put more caution in your honor than in your desire, and do not open foolishly but wisely that which you are certain of, and that which you can have taken and received.
and make use of prognosis and indication in the treatment of your patients to whom health may be restored;
and this will help you to acquire a good reputation, and glory, and a lasting memory.
Dearest son, may our Lord grant you good understanding and righteousness, and if you wish to aspire to the holy inspiration from His hand, amen.
I have ordained this chapter by dividing it into sections, according to what it is before the chapter on cauterizations, which I have divided for you from head to feet, because you will find it easier to find what you need.
It is known that this illness comes very often to infants at birth, and when the womb holds too tightly the head of the infant;
and sometimes it happens for a hidden reason that one is not aware of.
And I have never seen this illness except in infants, and most of those that I have seen hasten death; and for this reason it seems to me that it is better for me to leave the work in some treatments.
And I saw an infant whose head was full of anguish, and the head became so swollen each day that it could not be supported;
and let the moisture flow out as it was dying, and this moisture is gathered from under the bone on the spleen, between the heart and the bone;
and the works are such that if the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscesses are small, then you make in the head a wide incision;
and let it be as long as two nuts, until the moisture runs;
and see to it the form of a spatula or spoon;
If the moisture is more thick and the abscess is larger, then make two incisions in the manner of a cross, according to this form;
And if the moisture is under the bone, and the signs that you see the sutures of the head open on each side, and the water flows out when you press it with your hand inside, and this does not seem to be an answer; if it happens that you make three incisions on the head in this manner:
And after the incision, extract the moisture entirely from it. After that, bind the wounds with bandages and powders, and put on wine and oil, and leave it so until the fifth day;
then undo it, and treat the wound with dressings and with ointments, and let the head be strained, and give to eat to the patient dry food without much moisture until the limb is comforted and healed.
And another method of incision is that you examine the size of the abscess and the gathering of the pus;
for sometimes it is in front; sometimes behind; sometimes on the right; and sometimes on the left.
Cut then the place where the abscess opens, and the filling of the needle, and do it according to what you have the power to do;
and beware that you do not cut the artery; and let flow a little blood, so that the patient does not die from lack of blood and evacuation of moisture.
When there is a certain disease called "catarrh" in the eyes or in the chest, and the disease is chronic, and the treatment with medicine is of no benefit, then the last resort is cauterization with what one cuts the two arteries.
It is necessary then, when you cut the veins, that the patient makes his head fall back; after he rubs the place with a coarse cloth until the arteries appear, then the patient tightens his neck against the whole cloth; Then look where the vein beats, and the limbs of one and the other are after the ears, and a little are raised;
Then mark the limbs from the middle, then cut one and the other with a sharp spatula on both sides, as long as the vein extends to the bone, and that is done by the width of the head.
And if you see, push the spatula below the artery and cut upwards, cutting also as the two veins across.
And when the vein is cut, then the blood jumps out continuously upwards.
And if the artery does not appear on feeling, then it is necessary that you measure the quantity of the thickness of three fingers, then mark from the middle and make it go to the bone;
and what is necessary to put blood out if it is one sixth, and by chance a little more or less, according to what the patient can suffer, and the replenishment of the artery;
then examine the wound: if it remains on the pointed bone of the hip, if the disease that causes abscesses does not come, then strain the wound and bind it, and treat it with ointment until it is healed.
of migraine When ancient migraine comes, and sharp catarrh, because of the moistures of tears and the heats in the temples and old forsakenness and similar things, and it is treated with various methods of cures of medicine and all that does not profit it, then we cauterize the arteries of the temples and their cauterization, as we have related.
And the manner of their extraction is that the patient should shave the hairs from his temples, and attend to the artery which opens in the temple, for it opens well by its beating, and is poorly replaced in some men who are too cold;
and if it is put back, then remove the patient's neck from certain bandages, then rub the limb with a coarse cloth, and wrap the limb in a warm, damp dressing until the artery appears clearly; then take the spatula of which is the shape: then scratch the skin lightly until you come to the artery, then draw it up with the pincers, and separate it well from the tendons that are attached to each part;
and if the artery is delicate, then turn it at the point of the needle, then cut it from that part according to the quantity of the two blood vessels. For if it is not cut, then the blood does not flow at all.
And let the blood flow from the six hundred, up to three;
and if the artery is large, then it is necessary that you tie it with two threads of strong silk thread, which can withstand the pressure before the wound, and withstand the flow of blood;
Then remove the excess which is between the two lips in that same hour, and then, if you see, if the cauterization of the cautery is next to the bone as long as the head is removed;
and it's a work for the doctor, if the patient has no fever and he is of a warm temperament. For cauterizations are helped in ending the illnesses: because it is of greater aid to the illnesses.
Where it is necessary for the extraction of the arteries that one fills the body with old cotton and puts it on well-made tents;
and when one unwinds them, let them be cured with dry medicines that cause flesh to grow, and with tents, until they are healthy;
and without cutting the artery as long as you have work to do, if you are in a hurry to cure by cauterization, or you fill the body with vitriol and squeeze with your hand so that the blood is congealed; and if you have not that present, then put your finger on the place so long as the blood is congealed, and raise the limb from cold water as soon as the blood stops, and hold it steady as is necessary;
And there should be between the two cuts a thumb of thickness, and then when you have signed to put the two limbs together, and you put the iron burning on until it comes near the bone, and cut the vein in two places; and be separated between the two parts for it is not suitable to be joined by this cautery in every respect;
and it is the form of the cauterization:
and that which is more painful and less gentle in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein of this cautery cutting on two sides, but the cutting be well spaced to withstand longer their heat. For when the extremities are too thin, they hold less heat.
of tears When the tears of the eyes are descending from the veins that are on the outer skin of the head, and it does not benefit from any medical treatment that one makes, and you see the face of the patient become inflamed, and feel on the forehead a numbness as if from shivering; and if the eyes are tender and moist so that the hair of the papers is stained, and the papers are scorched, and burned by the heat of the tears, then there is need for this treatment. And the ancients called it "confused cure", and it is that you make for the patient who has this disease the hairs that he has on the forehead, then make three equal incisions on the forehead according to the length of the forehead;
And the ancients called it "confused cure", and it is that you make for the patient who has this disease the hairs that he has on the forehead, then make three equal incisions on the forehead according to the length of the forehead; and let one of the incisions be thus, two fingers deep in the forehead going downwards to the nail, and the other two on either side of the papers, and beware of the incision of the arteries that are on either side of the papers;
and stretch out your hand from the continuation of the two jawbones, and let each wound be the quantity of three fingers across the joints;
and prepare a piece of sponge and bind many rags around it to absorb the blood, then cut the spatula sharp from two parts where there is the shape:
of the incision that is above the temple just to the second incision; and scrape out all the core that is between the two fissures to the entire surface which is on the bone, then make another cut from the middle incision just to the other second, and then extract this spatula. if you cut in the first fissure the instrument that is called "cultellaire", and it is very sharp on one side, and on the other side is soft, not cutting, and this is its shape:
And put the cauterized part cutting towards the flesh near the heart, and let the cauterized part soften towards the bone, and let it thicken until it reaches the middle fissure.
And cut off the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes as long as the incision is continuous up to what opens from the heart, and then make another cut in the middle fissure up to the other side;
and then extract equally from the blood, and press the limb for the blood taken;
then put in each fissure a tent of old cotton, and put on draped moistened with wine and oil and vinegar, and guard that abscesses do not come;
and on the third day untie the linen, and apply a great plaster of hot water, then the treatment of unction with basilicon oil, and other treatments that one cures wounds, until it is healed.
When in any corner there is an acute and customary cataract, and you see the eyes thin and small, and the sight weakened, and the pupils burned; and the hair falls out, and the head is deeply painful, and the patient is in agony; then it is known by these accidents that these matters and this catharr do not come from many veins, and the doctor knows what the cure is, if it exists.
And it is that you command the patient to shave his forehead, then make a great incision in the forehead, and another of two fingers in width. And let the incision be from the left temple to the right temple, and it shall be just to the bone; and dislodge your hand from the nerves of the temples that move to the brain;
and when the bone is exposed, suck out all the blood with a sponge, and then swab between the two lips of the wound and put in a lot of cotton, and bandages of linen; then apply warm dressings moistened with wine and oil, and guard against a hot abscess;
when it is inflamed, it is necessary that you rub the bone as long as the flesh begins to grow, then treat it with caustic things, which cause flesh to grow.
In a similar manner: take two parts of flower of centaury, and four parts of celandine, and make a plaster; and administer it to these wounds to cause flesh to grow throughout.
of the stopping of the ears
All that falls into the ears is one of four things: Oats, or beast, or stone of mine or similar things as iron. or seeds, like jasper, beans, peas; or flowing things such as aqua and urine and similar things.
When there is a stone in the ear or another kind of thing that does not belong to the ear, nor grows in the ear, then put the ear in the sun.
If you see the stone, apply a poultice of violet oil or oil of cypress, then attempt extraction; and make him sneeze with a concoction, and stop up his nostrils when the sneezing comes, and put pieces of cloth or wool in the ear; and press the ear downward.
Many times a discharge comes out through this treatment;
and if it does not come out by itself, then one must perform a subtle extraction with careful pinchings, from which this is the method:
If it comes out by itself through the pinchings, that's good;
if not, then one must perform an extraction with a subtle hook of small doubled thread;
and if it does not come out through that, then make a thread of silk and push the head of the thread through the hole of the ear strongly, and stuff that which is around the thread with wax so that the veins cannot enter with the thread; then pull it out strongly, for many times it comes out as we have said;
and if it does not come out in that manner, then take glue of this kind and take the arteries, and put some instrument which has a point for doing that, and put a little cotton around; Then press the flesh against the stone or whatever it is, and pull strongly.
And if it does not come out from all these things that we have said, then hasten to cut the ear as well as the abscess is hot and swollen, and spasms;
and the manner of the cutting is that you first let blood from the patient's head, and extract blood according to the measure of its virtue, then have the patient sit between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small cut in the root of the ear at the fat or dependent flesh; and let the cut be as wide as a reed, until you reach the stone, then extract the bone according to your power, and suck it hastily with your mouth;
and the treatment until he is healthy.
And if it's a grain that is embedded and has swollen, then administer extraction;
and if it cannot exit, then apply the spatula needle subtly according to this form: and administer an incision of that grain.
But do not do it when you think that the grain is moistened by the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces;
then extract it with subtle pinchers and a sucker, as we have said, so that the extraction is alleviated.
In the case then that there is a discharge in the ear, it is necessary for the patient to use a remedy of condiments first, and fill the ear with old cotton. And let it rest on the same ear where the discharge is. If blood comes out because of that, it's good.
If this is not so, then take many stones according to the length of your hand and fingers and toes, and heat them a little by fire; and put them in the patient's ear or through his ears, and rub on the soles of his feet on the other side, and make friction with another foot on the foot that is by the ear; and do not stop rubbing foot against foot until the fever has entirely gone, and thus the fever will be entirely gone;
and if you see, then take a reed, and thrust one end into the ear, and the other end is pressed against fire until the hottest part of the reed is burned;
then do another piece of the reeds in the same way until the fever is entirely gone, as we have said before.
In the extraction of a beast, if it is small in body, such as a flea and similar things, treat it as we have said in the section;
but if it is of large size so that one can feel it, then administer the extraction of splinters; and it is the lightest thing to remove what is in the ear.
In the removal of worms from the ears, when you perform the cure as we have said in the section and treatise on distillations, and the cure is not beneficial, then it is necessary to examine the ear in sunlight: if there are no visible worms, then treat them as subtle splinters, and if they are not visible, take the chain from which this form is made:
And let it be narrow at the top and wide at the bottom. And insert the thinnest end into the ear according to the quantity of the suffering of the patient, then suck firmly on the chain; do this often until all the worms come out.
And if they do not obey to come out, then stuff cotton into the cavity as I have said in the stone;
and if they do not come out readily as we have said, then administer distillations that the old ones have experienced in the treatment of worms, and you will find them or the treatment of distillations;
and if you administer your oils and medicines in the ear with all this equipment, according to its form as you see: And be it of silver or of brass, make strainers for the small openings, and above them put sieves to administer drops;
and to press inside the distillation the instrument of brass made for this purpose, and if you see the discharge and envelop it with cotton around the pointed end; then put your oil or your juice, and that which you see of your medicines in the cavity, and let the cane be in the ear;
Then thrust your finger inside the nostril of the entire coty, and press your hand temporarily as long as the oil is distilled or removed from the ear; and let the patient feel inside, and let the distillations be warmed by the fire, just as one distills in the ear; and beware that it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be so good.
of the stoppage of the ears
No child is born who does not have a passage in their ears;
and this same thing happens to men through stoppage of a wound, or of a flesh born inside the ear, and these stoppings come sometimes deep into the ear, so that one cannot see it;
and sometimes it happens that the passage is blocked, and one sees it very well.
That which comes from the depths, if one cannot see it, is of grievous sanitation in many conditions, and in this one sees that you must put the patient's ear to the sun; and look within: if you see the opilation apparent, if the work has all this spatula of which is its form:
And let it be sharp and cutting at the front and back entirely flat, so that it does not touch the ear;
if the opilation is of flesh near or on the ear, if you hold it with subtle pinces, and cut it lightly, until that flesh is all removed.
And if the opilation is deep in the ear, take a subtle rasp lightly and heat it a little by the fire, then put it on the ear.
If you suspect an obstruction where the patient feels pain in the ear, perforate lightly, and be careful not to injure the nerves of the ear;
then put in the ear a tent made from the width of the perforation, and the stopper in Egyptian application. Do this on no day until the wound is healed, or take a tent and stopper made from rose water, and powder with burnt vitriol;
and if you see the ear inflamed, it is necessary that you pull out the tent and put in another moistened one made from wax which is made of rose oil and wax, until the inflammation is reduced; then treat him until he is healthy.
And if discharge of blood comes, dip a sponge in cold water, and put it on the ear, and use other treatments that reduce the discharge of blood which are found in the treatises on distillations.
It is useful for the eyes when they come in papers of the eyes when they are moist and dry, it is necessary that you extend them with tongs and pincers, and the head of a spatula of its roots; then put on the limb vitriol ointment.
And without removing it, if the cauterization of a subtle lenticular cauterizer is good, and the cauterizer after the incision is worth more;
and many times repair, when anything remains from their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, then are burned those roots and do not regrow again.
of the gravel Many times come in papers of the eyes things that seem gravel in shape and hardness, and for this reason is this disease called "gravel", and it is a gathering of thick moisture in the paper of above and below; The works are such:
The works are such: it is obvious that the swelling decreases on one side and the other, and it is an easy thing to know;
make a poultice of dough then lightly scrape off the roughness from each part, then take it with pinchers and cut it.
if you cannot cut it without piercing a little of the skin, do not grievously harm the patient;
and if the fissure is large, then assemble it with a suture, and treat it until it is healed;
and if it is small, do not apply any pressure, for the organs will restore it at once and join with flesh.
And if the swelling descends inside the ear towards the upper part, then turn the skin, and stretch the swelling with pinchers, and cut and press it from one side and the other;
and if the plaster is removed by cutting, it does not cause any harm;
and when the stone is cut, if you lift the eyelid of the salty eye, and treat the place that is full of stones until the patient is healthy.
of the fat of the eyes Exinach is a fat that is formed in the corners of the eyelids, and this happens more to children than to old people, and it causes them much trouble with their eyes, and they get catarrh in the morning, and cannot look at the light of the sun because tears hasten to their eyes;
and because of this they often lie on their faces, and sleep on them, and their eyelids become moist under their eyebrows, which the discharge and appearance of the exinach that appears in the eye have covered. And when you press the limb with your fingers and feel the hernia between them.
And the manner of the work is that the patient puts their head in your hands;
and then take a linen cloth, and prepare a bandage in the manner of a circle according to the quantity that contains the hernia on each part, then put it on them; and press with your fingers on one side and the other, so that the hernia is gathered together within the circle;
then make in the middle of the moisture a incision with a sharp scalpel, one finger wide, and not wider than the wound one makes on the vein;
and make the skin deep enough that you come to the hernia; and in many cases the hernia comes out of the incision, in the shape of a piece of white fatty tissue.
Remove then a piece of torn cloth from your fingers at the end, and turn your hand to the right and to the left as far as it is separated;
and beware that you do not put in the fissure, that you do not approach the whole spatula to the eye, that you do not touch it.
And if the suture does not appear at the beginning of the fissure, then increase a little the fissure lightly until it appears;
then remove it as we have said, then moisten cloths in vinegar and in water, and put on the wound, and bind with bandages.
And if it is one of those men who break the seal and put on to corrupt that moisture which has remained.
Then treat him until he is healthy.
And if a hot abscess comes to the wound, then cure it with soothing plasters until it is healthy.
The hairs of the papers When in the papers hairs grow joined with other than their nature, and are inflamed, if they harm the eyes, and bring forth manners of sickness such as customary tears and softening of the papers and albuge, so that it is a cause of destruction of the eyes;
and the treatment is according to four methods: by fire cauterization together with heat, or by sharp medicine according to that which is said in the chapter of cauterization, and it is done either by incision and stitching or by burns, according to what I will say.
It is necessary that you put the head of the sick person on your right shoulder, then turn the paper of the eye to your left hand;
If it is converted, it is good; if not, then insert a needle to the entire thread beneath; and let it be that the margin of the parchment where the hairs grow among these hairs, and pull the thread to the top across all the parchment, and turn it to the scraper;
then make on the part under the parchment, under the hairs joined, to all the spatula scraping, from the large scissor to the small;
then extract the thread, and put under the parchment a small piece of cotton and of cloth, then draw on the parchment a figure of ink, such as the shape of a witness, and however it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity that you see elevated the parchment which is divided into pieces.
And if a part of the trade where one cuts a large quantity of parchment according to that which the parchment is softened;
then make on all the spatula along the two lines that you have drawn, and begin with the large scissor to the small; and let it be one of the fissures near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then put the onion in one of the two angles of the heart, then scratch everything;
then assemble the two lips with a stitch of a needle to all the subtle thread of wool, and suck the blood, and make dry the superfluity of threads on the two eyebrows with any glutinous things, if you want to do this;
and if not, then I have no cure, then leave the stitch and the threads until three or four days;
then cure the wound without stitching of dry and constricting things, for the skin relives at the suddenness of the wound and the assembling of it, but the stitch is bad (as the ancients said), and it is work without fear; and if in another manner:
and if in another manner: and it is that you show the sheet of a figure which is as the liver of the spleen, as we have described, to three ounces of powder according to the form which is here:
then cut that which overcomes the small equal forces according to the form which is here:
And if you do not have the power to hold the clamps, and the thing is not equal, take a needle or thread, and put it in the middle of the figure; and put another thread through the large arm, and the second thread through the small one, and join between your two hands the threads equally;
then lift your hand equally, and lift all the skin upon which you have signed, as we have described, then join the two lips of the wound by stitching, and cure it until it is healed;
and if an abscess comes to a cutting, thus one calms the patient with similar soothing ointments;
and sometimes it happens that the hair of the nipple are converted:
if it is necessary that you use what we have said about the incision;
but the stitching on one and the other is more artificial.
The treatment of pains is according to this form: and it is that you turn the nipple and the skin within according to what I have said, and then make two pains by art, and two subtle threads as long as the nipple and the width of the spatula is; and cut at the two heads of the two parts where you hold the threads;
then assemble one and the other subtly on what protrudes from the nipple of the eye, and pull the two pains of the two parts forcibly; and let it be so for some days, and the skin that is constricted will die and putrefy and rot, until it falls off by itself.
If it delays, if the scab forms a strong layer, then let the scab form until it is healthy;
and when the wound has been sucked, and if the skin is lifted, and no longer will the hairs prick;
and it is the shape of the two canthi that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of length and width;
the work is such that you take a fine needle, and put in it a thread of soft and fine silk; then assemble the heads and tie one and the other finely, and let the length of the threads be a palm of length;
then arrange in the flesh another fine thread of silk quickly, and tie the head of the two threads;
Then put the patient's head in your hands;
and let it be beneath the sun so that your work may be declared, for this is a subtle and minor work, then stick the needle to the entire lock at the root of the hair adjacent to it, and make it pierce the skin hastily as long as you draw it out from above the natural hair;
then pull out the hair up to the lock, and stick into the lock that hair, if there is one or two or three or several;
then pull out your hand so that the hairs come out entirely from the lock in the skin with the natural hair.
And if the lock is treated and the hairs do not come out with it, then pull the lock downward with all the thread that you had prepared, until the lock comes out from the skin and you see it through the vision of the eye;
Then if you treat the wound and the thread, and close the eye and let it close for two or three days, until the hair adheres to its place and the flesh grows over it;
and if the hairs are small, then accompany the small hair with the natural long hair of the eyebrows, and let it be joined with that which you left, until it is lengthened and then lift it.
from the corruption of the eye When this disease called "alexati" or corruption comes into the eye, it is in two manners:
one is natural, and the other unnatural.
And it comes from a sudden blow, or from a cut, or from cauterization, and from similar things.
And the manner of the work in it is that you split the suture, and separate the lips of it, and put inside tendons of linen, and lift them until they are healed;
and it is not necessary that you use in the treatment of those things that dry and restrict. For if you do that, the illness returns worse than the first one;
but to apply things that soften, such as fenugreek; and the roots of a plant or tree and seeds of flax be cooked, and anointments of dyachylon melted in some oil, and it wrapped in a bandage, and the treatment of this.
And the treasures of your treatment are that you take care that it not become sour according to the form it had before;
and these works that we have said are not outside of remedies for this illness, that it does not return according to the form it had before.
This disease which is disordered is truly called "axacrati", and is natural and accidental.
The accidental comes from a wound and from a fissure and from cauterization and from similar things;
and the way of the work in this case is that you take a needle, in which there is a double thread, and the stitch in the flesh, and you make it pierce from the left arm to the right, so that the threads come out at the two ends of the flesh;
then the flesh is sewn over the top of the entire needle, and it is cut with a spatula wide. And if the shape of the papier returns according to what is needed, it is good;
if not, then take a rasp and put it in the fissure, and turn the papier, and make two fissures or cut within the papier;
and let the head of the two fractures of the two angles of the incision that you have cut, and make one angle so that when they are assembled, the figure is as the figure of a letter which has no "I griesche
then sew up that flesh, according to the quantity that its edges are adapted, with that which follows the parchment, then join the two separated parts, and sew them with a thread of linen.
then treat it with what we have said about softening medicines, and with bandages, until it is healed.
And if the sickness comes from a fracture or from a surgical incision or from a cauterization, then you should make a flat incision beneath the hairs of the parchment, and according to what is written before; then separate between the two lips of a bandage, as I have said;
then separate between the two lips of a bandage, as I have said; and one must perform the work according to the form of the illness, for it is very diverse in form, and the wise masters prepare a device for all that they can do to make the shape return to its natural form;
and the same patient, according to what work and instrument is needed in various conditions.
When this sudden pain has come to men in such a manner that the bladder is seized with the white of the eye, and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then you must put the point of a razor under the bladder, and lift it up;
and you stretch it with pincers, until you cut what is adhering to the subtle spatula, which should not be too sharp nor too cutting, so that the patient cannot suffer that the too sharp spatula does not injure the eye;
and let your incision be such that you scratch the assembled one lightly, so that the skin regrows according to its natural form;
and it heals the entire assembly, and sometimes forms in the oily bitter sauce, and the sweet water of the liver;
then put between the skin and the oil a thread of flax, and put on the oil wool moistened in abundance of egg; and after the third day, apply sweet liver and hot things until it is healed.
It is known that the unguent is in two manners: one is nervous and similar to a hard skin, and another which is not nervous, but is similar to a white moist congelation, which when one touches it with iron and cuts the flesh with pincers, it cannot be felt;
and one and the other symptom increases towards the large artery, and grows little by little until it covers all the vein and all the light and the movement of the eye.
And the manner of the incision is that the patient puts his head in a position, then covers his eyes; and raises the skin with one hand, then takes the needle to the pinches of small doubling, and stretches it to the underside; then takes a needle, and puts the hair of a horse, or of a cow, or of an ox, and a strong thread; and doubles the point of the needle a little and puts it in the nail, and pierces it with all the needle, and ties the nail with a thread and stretches it to the underside, and scrapes all the hair the cost of the nail which follows the prune and the thread to the hair just to the head, then cuts the remaining part in the root of the artery with all the spatula subtle and small forces, and lets the natural flesh or artery, so that by the incision does not come the body of the arteries accustomedly;
and sometimes the nail adheres to the tendon solely, and to the thread, as we have said; then one scrapes all the spatulum gently from where this is the shape:
And take care that the spatula does not touch the thin flesh and tear it, and that the needle is not perforated;
and after the incision, put in the eye a little of powdered salve, and made from litharge, and let it stay there until the next day; then one cures that which is necessary as long as he is sick.
And if the nail is not numb, and you cannot push the needle, and the nails cannot enter, often this type of nail is cured with medicines;
and grows thus as I have described in the division, and if you see it covered, or the eye of the patient is closed, and take the spatula lightly a little sharp according to this shape: And rub the onion gently upwards, and if you see that it diminishes somewhat and the reason presses upon it, then distill from your mouth into the hollow cylinder made of litargire and red collier and broiet, and stop up the oil until the next day;
If nothing is contrary in the oil, as with a hot abscess, then anoint it, and first cure the hot abscess until it is healthy, then resume the work as before, until it is healthy.
then resume the other work according to this same method, as long as it is all bone.
And if the appearance of the flesh of the arm causes great harm in the oil due to a serious wound, then suck on the wound, and cut off a part but not all, so that no pus comes from the wounds;
Then distill in the red oil collirium which is made from litharge.
It is in the eyes of some men that red flesh grows, and covers the plum and presses on the papers and turns to the defect, and resembles a rose of baluster;
and the work of it is that the patient puts his head in a warm place, then opens the eyes, and takes out all that flesh with sharp scalpels, and supports it with force;
then cut the first flesh, and continue cutting to the root until the end, and beware that you do not spill the oil on the work;
and let the incision of the spatula be as we have said in the incision of the ingle and the small forces that one cuts with the Sebile bone, as the form shows after this chapter where it is demonstrated;
and when the incision is completed and all the flesh is removed, then apply the oil of distilled broom or you distill red collirium and similar corrosive medicines, and put on the wound cotton with vinegar of rose, so that it is cauterized by hot aposteme;
and if it remains nothing, and the blood cold overcomes, and you doubt hot aposteme, then leave the oil and treat the aposteme with things that appease the hot aposteme;
then return to your work as long as it is healthy, and thus do where the flesh is adjusted in the oil by this similarity.
But nevertheless it is necessary that you lift the treatment of each weak oil from the natural way; and from the accidental way, in work of iron;
and do not put your hand in any of these works until you see that this member is suffering from the work.
There are red veins that are hidden under the eye, and take away its function and weaken the eye entirely.
It is necessary first that you examine the eye, in which the vein is, if it is outside, and not another disease of the eye besides the vein; then take the vein in a suitable manner:
instruct the patient to put his head in your lap, then press those veins all along the shoulder according to your wisdom, and let the shoulders be subtle and double according to this form:
And let there be two shoulders of equal size on the body according to this form:
then press the vein with force subtly, and let the blood come out hour after hour, until you see the veins of the eye move again;
and beware that you do not block the eyes at the points of the spatulas, and perform this work at midday before the sun, and be very careful in your work so that you do not touch the veins except those.
and when you have done this, then distill into the eye a green and red collirium to corrupt what remains of the cataract.
And if you do not have the power to collect all that in that hour, then make a plaster on the eye with things that ease the pain of the eyes, and let it be for some hours until the pain is eased and the abscess is relieved by heat, then resume according to this method which is described before, until it is healed.
and these are the forms of the fractures:
The physician calls them "arissati" fistulas:
when you treat them with cauterization and hot burning medicine according to what I previously said, and it is not healed, then a wick is put in the wound where it should drain, and pull out all the moisture that is there, until the bone is exposed.
And when the bone is exposed, and you see the corruption and blackness, then remove all the instrument of which this form is made;
and it is called " rough head", and let the iron be made sharp to a pointed end, and let it be pointed like a file as it is in the present form:
And put on the bone of the corrupted flesh, then turn it between your two hands, and press your hand a little until you feel that the corruption has been removed;
and do this sometimes, then restore the place with medicines that draw out.
if the places are swollen, and there is a tumor, and the body of the bowel is swollen, and it remains thus for 40 days, and it does not suppurate and is not abscessed, and no bad accident comes, know that he is healthy;
if it is not so, then there is another trick for bringing the fistula to the pierced hole of the naval according to this method: and it is that you discover the bone a second time with iron, and with sharp medicines, and when it is discovered, then take the iron according to this method, and let the head of the iron be at three angles, and let the handle be tapered up to the head as you see here:
then put it on the bone of the arm, and withdraw your hand from the elbow a little, then turn all the iron until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it by that which comes in if he puts his hand on his naval;
and then restore the limb with dry medicines, as I have taught you, and when the flesh becomes numb and hardens the limbs, thus it goes to the matter at the kidney; it is a lighter thing for the patient.
When the eyes are open and the pain is everywhere, and it does not come from disturbing the kidney, nor emaciation, then it is necessary that you read to the patient;
then apply the ointment, then put leeches or apply heat to cause suction, then apply on the eye a plaster made of acacia and aloe and incense and sarcocolla, and then extract the eye, and fill it with bandages and dressings;
and the manner of the dressings is that you take dressings soft enough, and fold each one in four, and then put one on top of the other according to the quantity that the eye needs;
Then strain by means of a hard bandage above, and reapply the ventoses to suck without piercing.
Then apply the ventoses and let the oil be strained for a day and night, and if the ulcers become soft, then you must strain them a lot;
Then apply the ointment after the day and night, and if you see the oil repairing, it's good;
If not; Then reapply the plaster and the dressings and the ointment and the ventoses until he is healthy.
of rupture of a torn vein When ruptures come in the torn vein, then it opens, and comes out of the fibers like a grain of resin, and is horrible to see;
Then if you want to close the wound, the work is such that you put a needle in the root of the affected part just above the skin, then put another needle where it has the double thread of the part of the armier; and make it pierce, and leave the first needle according to the disposition;
then cut the thread of double wire and tie a part of the vein around, and constrain it well, then extract the needle and put on the moist woolen cloth in abundance of vinegar;
and let it be until the thread adheres with the vein, then treat the wound with comforting things until the wound is healed;
and often the wound is constrained by the vein enclosing a part of a circle of cloth, until it is healed.
And if the eye has great appearance, thus it is pierced at the subtle spatulum which comes from the depth of the wound, and the moist albugine is scraped and the eye is lowered, and it enters within as much as;
then extract it until it is healed.
This illness called "alcunnati" is not outside the cavity that is assembled in the eye, resembling a descending vein, and it is not a vein;
and the manner of the appearance of the work is that you make the patient sit upright and straight, then take the head between your hands on both sides, and move it as much as you see the cavity coming out above to your eyes; then let it be fixed, and not descending, and let the light be disordered, and the patient sees things as he usually does;
and if it does not descend below, know that it is a vein, and if the descension of the cavity is not prepared as we have said.
make the patient sit between your hands, then take the subtle spatula and make it go on the cornial web one drop by the continuation of the conjunctiva with the cornial web and the cornea, as much as the cavity is;
and when it is dislocated, if it drips into the warm oil or honey mixture to halfway, or warm poultice is applied and halfway, then let it be treated with another treatment until it is healthy.
of the warmth of the oil We have seen the similarities of the warm things in the division, and that which is necessary to pierce; if one operates according to health.
It is necessary that you make the patient sit between your crossed hands, away from the light of the sun, and apply to him the healthy oil and bind it very tightly;
then put the cloth with the oil on your left hand if his eyes are on the left, or on your right hand if his eyes are on the right;
then take in your right hand, if his eyes are on the left, the instrument which is called "almagda", or in your left hand, if his eyes are on the right;
Then put the point of the instrument within the crown by the thickness of a reed in that bladder of the eye to the lower part of the lesser arm, then push the instrument which is called «almagda» gently, and turn your hand as long as it pierces into the bladder of the eye, and feel that almagda comes to the empty thing;
and it is necessary that the measurement of the path of almagda be at the depth of the measurement of the space which is from the prunelle just to the end of the blackness; and it is the crown of the eye;
if you see the bone in that paper through the clarity of the cornial web, and then put the instrument just to where the vein is, then press one path after another.
if the vein descends now, thus the patient sees before him and the instrument in his eye.
After a short rest, and if the pain returns through the second path, put the staff with the instrument, and when it is stuck and does not move, extract it gently turning your hand little by little;
and then put on the pain a bit of gum seed, and apply to that eye from within. Then put by virtue on the stopped-up eye a wet linen cloth in rose oil and in abundance of egg, and anoint it with healthy oil.
We, and those who are of our kind, put on the common people a broth with an abundance of egg.
And if the extract cannot enter the eye due to its thickness, because there are some men who have very hard eyes, then it is necessary that you take the instrument called "alberit", whose form is this:
And then pierce the conjunctive moderately, and do not go too deep, but make the subtle incision, then apply the poultice, as we have said;
and at the completion of the work prepare for the patient a comfortable bed, where he can sleep on his back in a dark place;
and let him avoid all movements, and take light foods, and not move his head to the right or left, and let him be laid according to his condition until the third day;
then untie him in the same dark house, and test his sight, and make him see certain things, and then put him back to bed until the seventh day;
and it is not necessary that you do this during the work of the cure or after the incision now, but it is necessary that you alleviate this, because the pain rises quickly.
Abscesses of the hand come, that you untie the oil before the seventh hour, and take care of those who have an abscess.
and when it is appeased, untie the vein and put on his face a golden plate to cover any hour, and let him be at that time in the dark house.
And then go out of the little house little by little, and change into his clothes;
and know that no disciples should interfere with this case. And one came to us who was from the Arabic region, who told us that in their country they make a plaster called almagra, which draws out the water, but nonetheless I have never seen any of it in our land, nor have I ever read about it in books of the ancients; and by chance it is a new thing.
And these are the similarities of the forms of almagra, because those who do not recognize them will see.
and are of Arabian origin properly: And they are the head of the subtlety in this same subject, and the third angle is acute.
Sometimes there are born or produced in the nose various holes, because of which there are some that appear as scorpions with many feet;
and if it has such or if it has a hole with a black color of soot, and if it has a hole of brown color. In this case then of these holes which is brown, and not blackened, it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands against the sun;
In this case then of these holes which is brown, and not blackened, it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands against the sun; and open its nostrils, and pour the onion on those holes, and rub the three fingers; Then consider that you must sustain the sharp subtle spatula on one side, as long as you know that the instrument is entirely bony.
And if anything remains that you cannot cover, then open it to all the subtle and lightweight instruments, so that nothing remains; and let it be without being overwhelmed, or if an abscess forms, then drain it as is necessary;
and if it is malignant abscesses, then hasten and cauterize the wound as much as the blood needs to be stanched and all the flesh eaten away, then apply egg whites or vinegar and sharp wine. If the wound does not open, and pus comes just to the palate, know that it is healthy;
and if pus does not come through as is necessary, know that there is a new flesh in the bone above, for which the instruments do not need to be sharpened;
Then it is necessary that you put a thread of flax, somewhat thick, and let it be known by us, and have between each knot a space of one finger or less; and put the patient's head down to the thread in his nose so he can feel it, and pull it in drawing out as long as it comes through the nose into the mouth;
and many times this is shown to the child at school, and it's an easy thing for one who wants to do it;
then hold the end which comes through the nose in one hand, and the other end which comes through the mouth in the other hand, and pull one after the other being careful as we are with the thread.
Do this until you know that the knots have corrupted that flesh, then pull out the threads, suck the blood, and moisten the thread with Egyptian ointment, and put it back in the nose as before;
Make this for three days or more, as long as the ulcers consume all that remains of flesh;
and then put on a plaster of pounded roots for some days until it is healthy, and if there is need for dry medications, then use them;
and this is the form of the instrument to purge the head, through which one distills the oils and the medications;
And let it be of silver or of copper, similar to a covered lamp, like a chain, and the conductor thus;
and if you see fit, make a closed chain, and let the instruments be flat to purge the head;
and have a handle at the top to hold it when one warms up the oil or some liquid.
of the flesh on the nose
Many times a disease occurs on the head near the nose which is called "telul", and grows and becomes large, so that it is a visible thing to look at;
and for this reason it is necessary that you cut at the beginning, and remove all dead tissue, then apply the cauterization or the burning medicine;
and let it be covered until it becomes large, if it is hard, of dark color, with little sensation;
if you do not touch it with iron, for that is an incised abscess, because when one cuts into it, great evil comes to the patient;
and if the abscess is of soft touch, not of dark color, and you see that it can all be covered, then warn the patient and cut with caution, and treat the wound with drying and constricting things.
Be aware that when a solution of continuity occurs in one of these cartilaginous operations, it profits little, except for some men.
It is necessary then when it happens to anyone, if one examines whether the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then adjusts the two lips of a wound to a suture, then cures it until it is healed;
and if the lips are separated from one side to another, then it is necessary that you cauterize all the parts of the wound until they heal, then assemble the two lips in a suture, and strain it, and powder with powdered blood of dragon, and burnt incense; and put on the powders a piece of plaster of gum or other plaster holding strongly, and let it be until it adheres by itself, then cure with oil until it is healed;
The manner of the suture is that you assemble the wound: or with needles, as we have said in the suture of the belly; or by thread, as I have made you know.
of the abscesses of the lips
In some men there are dense hard abscesses on the lips resembling seeds of vines, and smaller and larger;
then it is necessary that you pierce the lips, and make an incision on each knot, and take them with forceps and cut in each part;
then apply to the wound after the incision a broth of vitriol, until the blood is stanched;
and then anoint with oil of iris, and treat the wound with dry things until it is healed.
Many times there is born on the gums a fleshy growth, which the old call "albulus";
if it is necessary that you remove it with pincers, and cut at its root, and let the gum or the blood flow;
Then put on the limb a broth made with vitriol, or other powders which are astringent and drying.
and if the wound reopens after the incision, and often happens, if the opening is a second time, and it must be cauterized: if it does not reopen after the cauterization;
Sometimes they gather at the head of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, and are rough and bitter wounds; and sometimes the tooth is black and yellow and worm-eaten, until the corruption reaches the gum, and the tooth is stinking;
if it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands, and his head be in your lap, and take the teeth or the ulcers firmly, until nothing remains; and thus make from the blackness and the greenness, and the yellowness and the other stains, as long as they are moist;
and if one removes that which is in the first layer, it is good; if not, then proceed with the second layer and the third, until you have resolved everything;
and know that the tooth has a need for various forms of instruments to scrape, according to what the work requires, because the roots that one scrapes from the teeth have other forms than those that one scrapes between the teeth; and let these forms and others be prepared with you.
It is necessary when you treat the tooth of its pain that you delay as long as you can, for one should not do it hastily; for it is a very high substance, so thus one has no excuse for hurrying.
Therefore when the patient is constrained by the pain of the trait, it is necessary that you are certain of the tooth that is aching. Many times the pain deceives the patient, and they think it is in the healthy tooth, and makes the bad tooth ache; and yet the pain does not depart from that, as long as the bad tooth is extracted, for we have already seen it happen to these teeth;
and when you are well certain of the tooth that is aching, it is necessary that you scrub around the tooth on all sides with strong spatula to guard the gum on all parts;
then rub your fingers or the subtle instruments at the first spot and spot, until it is well cleaned, then I fix the instruments well; and let the head of the patient be in your teeth between your knees, and hold it well so that it does not move.
After extracting the tooth properly without breaking it, and if it does not come out by itself, then take one of these instruments and insert it gently into each part, and move it as you have done previously.
And if the tooth is pierced and fragile, then it is necessary that you fill it with cloths, or where the perforations are. and if you extract it subtly with pincers, so that it does not break while extracting;
and it is necessary to be very careful in working around the gum to avoid dislodging the tooth.
And it is good to warn that you do not break it, and leave a part behind, and cause the patient greater pain from the root's wickedness than from the first.
And beware that you do not act like the foolish barber, who through their haste and hardness sometimes break the instrument, and do not heed what we have told.
But sometimes they come from the effect of that great disease through the roots that remain, or from the cartilage that it breaks, as we have often seen;
and when the tooth is pulled, then wash the place with wine or vinegar and soap;
and if a flow of blood comes from it, which often happens, then fill the place with burnt vitriol;
and if that is not sufficient, then cauterize it;
The shapes of the instruments, which first stop the tooth, should be long and pointed and thick handles, so they do not bend when you pull the tooth;
and these are the forms: And should be of thick metal so that they do not bend when pulling, and should be made of good iron, and should have teeth to hold firmly;
of the root of the teeth When the root remains in the gum, it is necessary that you put on the spot a moist cotton in butter for one or two hours, until the gums are softened, then remove the tooth-aches which are called "algefri", from which the head seems to be ill;
and let them be made dense like a file and this is their shape:
And if the roots do not want to come out with all these tooth-aches, it is necessary that you discover the flesh totally around the root, and put the instrument which is called "althali", that is to say a pelican, of which this is the shape:
And let it be strong and large so that it does not break anything, and if the root jumps by itself, it is good;
if it does not, then you will aid yourself with all the instruments, of which the shapes come here after:
And if one aids oneself with this instrument which has two handles, because of its shape: and other instruments that are in front in the root of the teeth, and of this instrument which resembles large pincers, because of its shape:
And let these instruments be strong so that they cannot break, and know that many tooth-instruments are; and also other instruments, which are not mentioned;
and the wise masters find by themselves their instrument, according to what their work and the disease shows them, for there are some diseases where the ancient teachers did not teach the use of an instrument because of the diversity of ills and it breaks a part of the body or the other bones, or it corrupts, if they seek the instruments that they need, which I have told you, and aid with gestures, because of its shape:
And let it be thick and well-held to hold the bone, so it does not break, but can hold it and remove.
and then restore the limb with suitable medicines for that, and if there is decay in the bone, and it is small, then take all this instrument:
When the appearing tooth does not correspond to the natural body, and its shape is ugly, and likewise in women with shriveled breasts, then you must know if the teeth are born after the tooth, and it is not in the right place, and one cannot soothe or file it:
then remove the bone and if it is stuck with the tooth, take this instrument which has this shape, and resembles a small beak, and let it be of sharp iron pointed at the end:
And cut a little and a little with the forceps for the hardness of the tooth, and so that you do not move the others, and if it appears that one can file it, then take the file of a certain file as is its shape:
and it is as if the thread of the joint makes the needles;
and in the joint of the tooth, little by little, it comes back lightly, so that it does not move until it heals;
then the smoothness at the end of any roughness, and if the teeth are too sharp and they bite the tongue, it is necessary to file the roughness until it is even, so that it does not bite the tongue nor corrupt the speech.
When the front tooth aches, either from percussion or from cold, and the patient cannot press on it because it hurts, and you apply curative medicines to constrict, and that is of no value;
if it is necessary to constrain with a thread of gold, because the silver threads turn green and rot, but the gold does not move;
and let the thread be moderate, neither too thick nor too thin, according to the quantity of the space between the teeth;
and if you want to thread the teeth, take the thread and pass it double between the two healthy teeth, then put the thread between the rotten teeth, if there is one or several, until you come cleverly just to the other side of the healthy tooth; then reapply the covering just to the part where you started, and withdraw your hand subtly and cleverly, so that it does not move at all;
and let your ligature be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Then cut the ends of the thread to one width, and assemble them, and push them between the healthy tooth, and put it in so that it does not bite the tongue;
And then let it be constricted as much as it can remain, and if it comes undone, or the threads are broken, then constrain it with another thread;
if it remains and serves in this way all its tension, and this is the form of the teeth and the shape of the arrangement of the upper teeth and lower teeth, as you see:
And when a tooth falls out, then reset it in its place, immediately, as we have said;
and do not interfere with it, for it is not wise and painful, and sometimes one makes the shape of a tooth from cow bone, and puts it in the place where the defect is, and constrains it as we have said, and it remains and serves for a long time.
Sometimes there are ligatures that come from under the tongue or palate, which one is born with; from an accidental deep wound;
and the work is such that you open the mouth of the patient, and hold their head in your hand, and lift their tongue;
then cut the nerves of the tongue, as long as it is dislocated from its support, and if there is hardness or swelling, and it is due to a sudden wound, then cut the ligament and cut from the length that which binds;
and beware that the incision is not too deep, because of the artery that is beneath;
and when you have done this, raise the limb of a warm and dry cloth, or a cold one, then put under the tongue a piece of linen;
and tie the patient's every night, so that their limbs cannot move.
And if a flow of blood comes, then put on the limb a bandage of vitriol; and if it is not seen, then apply the cautery to the cautery of Lentigo, which is good for that. then treat with another treatment until he is healthy,
and if you see the flesh of a bad color or black or hard, so that the patient does not feel it, do not touch it at all, for it is cancer;
and if it declines to a flux, and there is moisture, then he will vomit the phlegm, and make a subtle spatula, and deliver it from one side and the other; and if it is not seen in your work, then put on a warm broth of vitriol as long as it is constricted, then return to your work as long as you treat everything thoroughly;
then raise the limb from clay and from stool, and treat with other treatments until he is healthy.
of the abscesses of the throat Certain times there come within the throat mouthfuls which are called "godath", and we properly call them the II manders, and when you treat them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healthy, take heed:
if it is a hard abscess of small size and of dark color, do not touch it with iron.
And if it is red and its root is thick, do not touch it with iron, also because of the discharge of blood; but let it be until it becomes ripe, and then you will cut it, where it would break apart by itself;
and if it is of white color and rounded, and its root is subtle, then prepare the instrument for cutting, but first check if the abscess is warm and is at rest.
Then make the patient sit in front of the sun, and his hands in your hand, and open his mouth and press the tongue down with all the instrument, so that this is its form;
and let it be of silver or subtle brass as with surgical knives:
When you press the tongue with all this instrument, and you see the abscess, if you take the onion and the fig in the hand, and pull it far up more than you can;
and pull anything from the tonsils with it, then cut it with the instrument, so that this is its form, which seems like a strong force; and all the way the head is curved, and one part to another, and are very sharp, and is made of iron or of steel;
And if you do not have this instrument at hand, then cut the tonsils with scissors, so that this is its form: And let it be cut from one side, and named from the other.
and when you have cut one of the mandibles, cut the other in the same manner, and after the incision gargle the patient with warm water, and water and sitz bath, and if there is discharge of blood, gargle the patient, or decoctions of cooked pomgranates, or fumigations of myrrh, and similar things, until the wound is stanched; then anoint the cure as long as it is healthy;
and sometimes there grow in the throat other abscesses besides the two mandibles, then cut them thus as the two mandibles equally.
And I treated a woman for an abscess that had grown inside her throat, to be sure the abscess of small size;
and it had completely closed her throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the passage that was blocked, and she could not eat or drink, and would have been dead if she had stayed like that for one or two days.
And the abscesses were so high that they had put out two wounds through the two openings of the nostrils.
I delayed then so long, and fixed in one of the shoulders, then pulled out the arrow, and with it a large portion of bone;
then I reset the other part through the other opening of the nose, and I opened her mouth and I pressed on her tongue;
after I fixed the shoulder in these abscesses, and I cut away a part of it, and from it came out only a little blood; and thus the passage of the throat was unclogged for the woman, and she began now to drink water and then wine, and I did not cease to cut away at that abscess for a long time;
and the abscesses reopen often, and fill the place that I had emptied, as long as it swells very large;
then I strangled it and cauterized it within the throat: unless it stays without growing;
and may I be separated from these parts, and may I not be but what God made after me.
of the egg
When humor descends to the egg, and it is inflamed and it is long, then it is called "perpendicular";
and if it is irregularly thick and round, then it is called "egg".
When it is purified as we have said in the division, and the purification does not profit me, and you see that the painful abscesses are alleviated, and it is subtle, then it is necessary that you cut it;
and that which is rounded and assembled is not too long; and it is bloody or of a dark reddish color or black, then you should avoid the incision of it. For there is great danger to the patient.
It is necessary therefore, when you see it, according to the manner that I have said, of its whiteness and length, that you make the patient sit in front of the sun, and press the tongue with the instrument which we made mention of previously; then insert the needle into the hole, and draw it back, and cut with one of the two instruments that I mentioned in the incision of the two mandibles.
And it is necessary that you do not cut except for the superfluity which is beyond the natural limit;
for if you cut too much, you will harm the voice and the speech;
and after the incision, make use of what we have said about the treatment of the two arms, and treat it until it is healthy.
And if the patient has pain in the navel, then you must use a needle for the cauterization of the painful area.
And the manner of the cautery is a sharp point. And it is that the patient puts his head in your lap, and then you press the tongue with the instrument that we have mentioned in the chapter on cautery, and constrict it with a living needle, so that it is not too thick nor too clear; and fill the cavity of this instrument, according to its shape:
And have near the head a cloth where medicine is put, like the contents of a spoon, and put the instrument with all the medicine on the wound;
and the patient should sit on their side, so that the saliva and the mucus running from their mouth of the medicine inside, so that it does not descend to the throat, and the abscess;
then hold your hand on all the medicine and press it onto the abscess, for a quarter of an hour, until you see it become numb and the irritations of the medicine are alleviated;
and if you see it, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, and moisten the cotton in the medicine, and put the instrument with all the cotton on the skin above, until the cotton adheres to the abscess;
and do this often, until the cauterization is complete, then let it dry, and apply a plaster afterwards for 3 or 5 days.
And if you have need to repeat the cauterization of the medicine, then repeat it, and after the cauterization spread cotton around the abscess, in butter, and cleanse that which is around the medicine;
and let it be treated with cold water, and let it be cured of gargling as long as it is healthy.
This treatment is safer than the incision, nor is it like the cautery;
if it is treated with fumigation in this manner, take calament and hyssop and origanum and rue and chamomile and arvnne and similar herbs, and assemble them all or some of them in a pot, and put it to boil;
and the pot should be well plugged with strong clay, and in the middle of the pot there should be an instrument made in this manner: And let it be of silver or of copper, and let one of the ends be placed in the mouth of the patient so that the vapors rise to the eye through the reed, until the eye is numbed;
After the recovery often happens, as long as the abscess is dry, and beware that you do not cause this at the beginning of the treatment of the hot abscess, for many things happen; and do not apply heat except at the decline of the hot abscess.
And if a suitable instrument is not available, then take a cane and put inside the top a tuft of wool, so that the mouth of the patient does not have too much heat; for the tuft of wool does not let the hot vapors harm the mouth, and it is a good remedy together with salt.
Many times it happens at the throat or spine or fishbone, or some other thing;
so it is necessary that you pull out what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument, so that you can see the thing;
and that which does not appear and is thrown back into the throat, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit so that the food is cut in the stomach; by chance if the thing passes through the vomiting;
or the patient swallowed a piece of sponge, or a piece of navy, or a root of lettuce, or a crumb of dry bread; and tie to the sponge a thread, and then swallow it; and when it comes to the level of the liver, if it sticks, and then pull it out with force;
and if it does not come out from what we have said, take the instrument of a plum in this form:
And let the instruments be curved at the head so that it can more easily enter the throat, and have the head raised high; and beware that you do not touch the diaphragm, lest all of it comes, nor do you perforate the inside of the bone;
and it is good that the patient should expel the mucus, because it will be better for them or the thing will be easier; if it falls downward, or it pulls equally throughout the entire instrument, as long as it is outside;
of the blood of the throat
Each time the blood is treated with medicine, as I have said in the section, by the treatment of remedies; and when this does not profit at all, then look in the throat of the patient to the sun, then press the tongue with the instrument that I have told you;
And if you see the blood, if it pulls to the smallest finger, or to the subtle tendons that are worth this;
And if that is not effective, take a heated iron, and insert it into the patient's throat, then apply the iron to the tonsils, and do this often. And if the patient has a high fever every day.
then take a full draught of cold water, and open the mouth, and let it run down the throat, and move it with the hand often; and if the blood vessels feel the cold, then spit.
And if it does not spit as we have said, then fumigate the patient with assafoetida, through the instrument that I mentioned in the fumigation of the urine;
do this many times, for it will discharge without delay.
And the manner of the fumigation is that you take a pot where there are hot coals, and it be covered with a perforated cloth in the middle, and through this hole be the head of the instrument;
Then give fumigation, and the patient puts the head of the cane in his mouth, and closes the mouth, so that the smoke does not go out, but comes just to the wound;
and the wound will heal now, and if it does not heal, then resume the fumigation many times;
and let the patient fast, and abstain from salty and foul things, and not drink any water;
and then it will be useful for the fever to be expelled through this treatment.
And the shape of the instrument with which one treats the wound, is, when one can see it, similar to curved tongs by means of which one enters into the throat; and has resemblance to a hawk's beak, and has roughness of a file, so that what it takes, it cannot release;
Many kinds of abscesses are, according to what memory recalls hereafter in this book, and they differ in perforation and in cutting;
and it is in two ways of which one is in its own likeness, and that which it holds moisture.
And the second way is for the limbs where they are on the body.
for the abscesses of the head are different from those of the foundation, and the abscesses of the flesh are different from those that come in the joints, and each has its own judgment in the work.
And if an abscess one should not pierce, as long as the bone is measured according to its completion;
and if there are such that it is necessary to pierce when they are swollen, and do not measure according to their completion, like abscesses which are near the joints.
For when abscesses come from the joints, and one lets them be for as long as they are enclosed within, by chance if the ligaments and nerves of the joint are corrupted, which is the cause of contraction in that limb.
Or when the abscess is within the main limb, and you delay the perforation until it becomes ripe, then it will harm the main limb;
or if it is in the foundation, one should pierce it as soon as it is ripe;
and it is necessary that you pierce the abscess after complete digestion, unless it is the one that is in the foundation, so that it does not become putrid deep within, and be enlarged inside, and a fistula develops; and cannot heal in a short time.
And it is necessary that you know the time for perforation of the abscess which is ripe according to completion, and this is when the pain is eased, and the departure of the fever, and the lessening of the pain and of the redness, and the decrease of the swelling and of the anguish of the head of the abscess, and other signs;
and it is necessary that you make a seat for the perforation or more dependent on the abscess, and where it opens wounds;
and let the perforation be of the length of the body, and if the abscess is in the hands or feet, or in joints and veins and arteries, and in all equal places where there is no point of plethora. In those that are full, according to whichever member.
And when the abscess is in the carnal part, it is of use to let the perforation as long as it is confirmed in complete digestion, as we have said.
For if you make a hole before that, the body will be fed by its own venom, and it will be full of much filth. and they ulcerate the lips and the depths of it internally.
And if on any abscess that are pierced according to the width of the body, according to what the limbs need.
And it is necessary that you put small plasters on small abscesses, small perforations; and on large abscesses, large perforations, and many cuts according to the appearance of the size of the abscess;
and if in such abscesses where it is necessary to shave the head, and cauterize; when it has become jaundiced like the liver, and is numb, then it is necessary to do as one does for buboes:
and if of such ones that are cut into three angles, and if of such ones where one cauterizes like the spleen, as abscesses of the entrails;
and if of such ones where one makes a round incision, and other incisions and similar cauterizations.
Those who have no head to the abscess, like a superficial abscess, it is necessary that you pierce the skin plainly;
and it is necessary when the abscesses are large, and they collect much pus, and you will pierce, but do not drain the entire pus at once, rather drain a part of it; then stop up the abscess with a poultice until the next day, then drain some other thing of its own kind; do this many times, a little at a time, until all the pus has come out;
especially if the patient is of weak virtue, or a pregnant woman, or small children, or old and decrepit men. For the blood vessels are sometimes torn with the issue of the pus, so that by accident the patient dies, and you do not perceive it.
Finish this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced your abscess, if the wound is small, and look to see if the wound of the abscess is small; and if it's a flat incision, then apply bandages of linen or cotton threads; and if it's a large abscess, and there are many openings, then it is necessary that you put a bandage on each one so that they touch one against the other;
and if you have cut into the abscess a part of the skin, and you have shaved around it, then it is necessary that you fill it with old cotton or with linen wrappings without moisture, and bind it tightly for three days;
then anoint it, and treat it with oil until it is healed.
And if there are evacuations of blood in your work, then apply cold and watery water, and wet the cloth, and put it on the affected area many times.
And if the hemorrhage of blood persists, then apply governance and treatment, and the powders that I mentioned in this book, and if it is in the time of winter, and the limbs or abscesses are very nervous, then it is suitable to put on tents and moist dressings with wine and hot oil;
and if it is in summer, and the limbs are fleshy, then it is suitable to put on moist dressings with water and oil, or wine and cold oil, until the third day, as we have said;
and then unwrap the abscess and the dressing and the treatment, as it is suitable, until it is healthy.
And this is suitable to know universally in treatments of abscesses:
that I have said how one should proceed before the treatment of abscesses, and see it in this chapter.
Or there are small abscesses coming from the head, and they are manners of us that are in tiles, just like the joker of a dice, and many have similar appearances.
There is some fat and such things where there is moisture, just like in poules;
and if there are such things that are hard and stony to cut, and there is no point of doubt that the artery is not made contrary.
And the work of the cut is that you will test all the instrument which is called "incising", from which the shape comes after, whatever thing it contains.
For if it contains moisture, then it will be done by those from the length.
And when the moisture is evacuated, then one scrapes without leaving anything the skin which contains that moisture, for it returns immediately when one leaves nothing;
Then plunge cotton into Egyptian ointment, if it is present; if not, in the vein and in the wax, and apply to the wound, and leave until the next day; and cauterize those who have remained with nightly discharge.
And then replace the cotton, as before, on the second day, and the third, until you know well that no discharge remains;
then treat the wound with ointment suitable for it, until it is healed.
And if there are abscesses that hold in fat, then cut around it in this manner, from the length; and cut your lancets, and scrape all around, and put all your treatment to draw out the pus where it lies;
and if the artery has made a constriction, then do what I have told you after;
And do the same for the abscess if it is stone-like, and to cut and to cure as I have told you.
And cut into the stone-like abscess and the moist one, if it is lighter, for they are of little blood. And if in some of these abscesses or head where there is no moisture, and of these abscesses that I treated on the head of an old woman;
and found the abscess as hard as a rough, harsh and white stone, and could not break it; and if one had struck it with iron, one would have made a wound as from a stone.
In other abscesses coming on the head, that is those which come on the heads of children and at the roots of the ears, the opening should be so always dependent on the bowel, because of the proximity to issue the mouth;
and the treatment if as it suits.
Many times there are abscesses on the neck, and below the shoulders, and in the corners, and sometimes they come to other parts of the body, and are many, and are stuck together one with another.
And each scrofula is properly within its own area, as the nut and the abscess of the head, as we have said; and there are many similarities among these scrofulas.
and there are many similarities among these scrofulas. There are some that contain moisture, and some which are malignant that do not want to obey health.
in that one then you see of good disposition in the body, and is similar to the color of the body, and moves from each part and does not numb the shoulders nor the arm nor the artery nor the vein, and is not deep;
If it happens that you cut through the skin, and strip away each part, and the two lips of the wound are like a razor's edge, you are in this profession, as we have said concerning abscesses of the head;
and you touch a little and a little, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve or the vein, and it is not suitable for the spatula to be cutting, lest the hands tremble, and do not go too far, so that you do not cut what you should not.
And if you cut the vein or the artery, and that does not stop the bleeding, then put on the wound vitriol ointment, or some powders that staunch blood, and bind the wound; and let it be until the abscesses are relieved, and the wound is softened, and begins to decay.
And when the blood is stanched, it returns to your work, until you complete it;
then look at your hand to see if there remain small scrophulas, and cut and mend them.
And if there is a large vein in the root of the scrophula, it is not advisable that you cut that scrophula at its root, but rather tie it with a strong double thread, and let it drop by itself, without harm;
then fill the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, then the cure.
And if you cut out the entire scrophula, it is advisable that you bring together the two lips of the wound, and sew them now, so that there is no remaining excess because of the size of the scrophula. it is advisable that you understand to cut at the root of it, and pull out strongly, and sew as we have said.
it is advisable that you understand to cut at the root of it, and pull out strongly, and sew as we have said. Those scrophules that hold a suppurating flux, pierce it where it appears most open;
and pierce it as was said beforehand, in dependency, then I will apply tents with ligatures and similar things, so that it corrupts that which remains of the corruption; and when the wound is well cleaned, then apply the treatment of ligature greasing with charcoal, until it becomes healthy.
The old ones spoke and talked about the cutting of the throat; but I never saw in our land anyone who did it, and it is the writing of their word.
For those who have a fracture of the ankle, it is necessary that the fissure of the throat which is called "epiglottis" be examined; and one should not make aid by that, because all the veins and the tumor of the disease are in those who have an abscess hot in the mouth, or in the throat or in both arms.
When the disease is in the channel of the throat, it is necessary to operate on the epiglottis to prevent the loss that comes from strangulation.
It is necessary, then, when we want to cut the epiglottis, that we make a small incision of three or four circles, or through the quantity of the incision of the surface, between the two circles, or by the quantity of the incision of the membrane, not in the cartilage.
and those places are suitable for the section of the epiglottis where there is no point of cartilage, and the vessels are long with it.
And if the master is fearful, it is necessary that he stretches the skin of the throat to its full length, then cuts the tissue as far as it comes to the gullet. and guard against the blood vessels, if you see any thing, and then cut the surface, as we have said;
and it is demonstrated by the cut of the vein of the kidney that the blood jumps through the limb which is broken, and by the deficiency of the voice;
and let the wound be covered with a dressing.
And when the hour has passed for which one doubts the strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound of the heart, and sew them entirely without touching the cartilage;
then administer medicines that make flesh grow, until it is healthy.
Do not give this treatment as long as the throat is completely obstructed, and the patient is judged to be at death's door, and the defect is in the spleen. Then cut through the epiglottis for that which the patient cannot swallow, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is guarded from death;
and therefore the old ones command to leave the wound open until the evil of the disease has passed, and it passes in three days or in four, and then they command to cauterize the wound and treat it, until it is cured;
and I will tell you what I have seen. I saw that a young woman took the knife, and stuck it in her throat, and cut part of the tendons from the forearm;
and I was called by the healer, and found her as good as dead.
I discovered the wound, and found the blood that had flowed from it, and saw that she had not cut a vein or a pipe except for the throat, and the veins had burst outside through the wound.
I hurried, and sewed the wound, and treated her until she was healthy;
and it happens at the lady's fury that she was hoarse of voice, and returned afterwards to her condition;
for two days that in the cutting of the epiglottis there is no pain.
This abscess is called "throat hernia", and it is a big abscess in the color of a jaundice, and it is very common in women;
and it occurs in two manners: natural, and accidental;
or natural does not have a clear origin.
And the accidental is in two manners, one of which is similar to fatty tumors, and the other manner is similar to an abscess that comes from a vein artery; and it does not cause pain, and it is not necessary to make fire cauters except in that which is small, and prove and examine the entire intestine: If you treat it thus with a greased cloth, and do not apply to any vein, if you cauterize, as one cauterizes the nails, and touch everything with its wrapping, if there is not a point in it; and press well everywhere, and treat it as it requires, until it is perfectly healthy.
Many kinds of nails are, about which I will speak all the similarities;
and therefore it is necessary that I say the entire difference that exists between a nut and an abscess.
I say that an abscess is heat and fever holding, as long as the ebullitions have not passed, and are accompanied by decay; then the fever and the heat subside.
With a nut there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains ichor, which is its own special humor, and is according to the color of the body, and grows like a cyst, and becomes large;
and they are according to II similarities, or hot, or moist, and many colors are as I have said in the division.
It is necessary, when you come to the treatment of the wound, that you examine and inquire first about all the instrument which is called "entromissoire", according to what its form will be or chapter that follows.
And the manner of inquiring about the abscesses of the wounds is that you take the most moist part that you find in the abscess, and turn your fingers little by little, as long as you know that the instrument has pierced the core, then it is according to the size of the abscess;
then extract the entromissoire, and take heed in that which the blood escapes.
If moisture runs short, which color it has, thus do as I have said regarding other abscesses;
and after the intermuscular area comes moisture, be aware that it is fatty, then make an incision in the form of a cross, and take the pincers, and lightly scrape each part and observe the skin where you think you should draw it with the needle;
and if you cannot draw it with a thread, then draw it by pieces so that nothing remains.
For if anything remains, it comes back to us many times;
and if a little remains, and the blood does not stop, then fill the wound with some sharp corrosive powders, and hold the wound, and apply hot apostumes to calm it, and treat it with other treatments until it is healthy;
and if the wound is large, then sew the two lips of the wound, and treat it with those things that promote scarring.
and if the veins are beating in a contrary or other manner hasten and apply the vitriol ointment to the limb, and let it stay two or three days, until the wound suppurates, and the evacuation of blood occurs; then return to the copper vessel that which has been left from the new.
See here the forms of the entromisaire instruments, and they are of three kinds: large and medium and small;
and there are three kinds which are called "albarets", and one which is called "breb", and they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small, for investigating the abscesses of fistulas;
and they are also like the needles with which one cuts the splinters, and they are of citrin or iron, or silver, and those that are tawny are worth more, and are more tested for probing the cavities of fistula;
and they are of three manners: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the wounds.
The forms of the ulcers are of many similarities, as you see here:
and if there are ulcers that have two concavities of three kinds also;
and if there are ulcers that have three concavities, and they are also of three kinds;
and if there are ulcers that have two concavities, and ulcers with only one concavity, and they are of three kinds;
and all this is necessary in their body.
The head of these, which one makes, are cutting, and of such that do not cut more than from one side, from which one scrapes the knots, because one does not touch the vein nor the nerve;
and of these internal abscesses are the ulcers responding to treatment, so that the patient does not perceive the opening of the abscesses;
and they are of three kinds: large, small, and medium, as you see;
and one does not make use of more force than in the flesh of a nut, such as thighs, and arms, and shoulders, and limbs, and similar places;
and sometimes one makes another small instrument, resembling the scraper of a fistula, according to this form, with which one scrapes blood: and one puts it sometimes at the place that bleeds from cutting of veins, and arteries, and sometimes they break according to this large form:
Sometimes the shoulders of some men become inflated when they begin to be corrupt, so that they seem like a woman's shoulders;
and let them rest and become inflamed, and whoever wants to cure them, if it is necessary to follow this form of the following line, up to the end. then scrape off the fat, and fill the wound with medicinal gum arabic, then bring together the two lips of the wound to suture, and the treatment until it is healed;
and if the breast hangs low, and is swollen due to its size like it happens in women, if there are two costal prominences above, through two similar fissures; because one holds the other at the end of one and the other, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line .b. to the line .g.; then scrape the skin that is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and apply what we have said about suturing and powders, and what is necessary for the treatment, until it is healed;
And if it is not healed, or the incision is not entirely made, because the patient does not want to rest, or due to the decrement of blood, then you must fill the wound with moist cotton in a corrosive ointment. And let it be until it reaches the mucus and the fat, then treat it until it is healed.
These abscesses that occur under the armpits are kinds of hard tumors or knots, and in which there is contained moisture.
Those therefore that contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from line B to line G: And when the whole boil that is in the abscess is emptied, then fill the wound with old cotton, and let it be until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and treat with pleasant ointment as much as is needed until it is healed.
And if the abscesses are similar to scrophula, they make them as we have said in cases of scrophula, and if the wound is deep, apply cautery as we have said before.
When the artery is ruptured, and the skin that is above it becomes swollen, then often come abscesses, and similarly it happens to the swollen vein and abscess;
and if one knows that it is because of the artery, then the abscesses are long and deep; and when you feel it with your fingers, feel for the strangeness;
and when it is because of the vein, then the remedy appears clearly;
and it is foolish to cut this abscess, and likewise when it is beneath the shoulder and arm and near the neck and in many other places, and it is very serious. It is necessary then to avoid the treatment of iron, and he who is in charge must avoid it also, and in the one who has an arterial hemorrhage caused by a blow from above the skin for a long time;
then make an incision at the groin of the wounded, and carefully separate the artery from the tendons, until it is exposed;
then push a needle through the wound, and have it pierced to the other side, and constrict the artery with a double thread in two places, according to what I have taught you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples;
then touch the limb that is between the two threads of an intermediary, as long as the blood flows from it, and let the abscess be opened;
then bring together the edges of the wound that gape, until the thread holds; then cure the joints having reached this point, as long as it is healthy;
and if the abscess is the size of a vein, then you must hold in your hand what you can from the abscess to all the skin, then push the needle under the skin that you hold in your hand, and make it pierce, and have a double thread, so that you pull it from the other side; then sew up the abscess, as I have told you, or tie one of the two parts with two threads around the head of the thread;
and if you doubt that the thread will not come loose, then rethread another needle with all the thread under all the abscess to the incision of the first needle, and pull the threads in four places;
then cut the abscess as long as the superfluity goes out, then cut the superfluous part of the skin and leave what is tied;
Then put on a dressing of warm wine and oil, then apply treatments of bandages and bindings until it is healthy.
As abscesses come into the artery and in the vein, abscesses come to the kidneys when they are injured, or from too great exertion, and similar things.
And this often happens in the joints and in the fingers and in all the limbs where there are joints, and it is a grievous abscess, and its color seems like the color of the body, and is in many cases without pain;
and when one extracts it forcibly, the patient feels pain, and it is not in the depth of the body, but rather near the heart;
and it moves well in all directions, and does not go either forward or backward, nor up nor down, and that which is in the joints does not need to be cut with iron: By chance it comes to contraction; and those who are at the head or at the forehead, make the skin spatulate.
and those who are at the head or at the forehead, make the skin spatulate. If the abscesses are small, if you hold them with tweezers, and cut at their root;
and if it is large, if you hold it with forceps, and scrub it, then you wash and bind the wound to the suture, and cure it until it is healthy.
Sometimes it happens in the belly and not in any other part of the body, and it is an illness which is called "fungus" due to its resemblance to mushrooms, and its root is subtle, and its head is thick;
and it has small and very large ones;
and I saw a man who had two in his belly which looked more like mushrooms than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and had thin roots, and were slightly split, and they corrupted continually with moisture.
I cleaned and found in one eighteen ounces in weight, and in the other six ounces, and the work of cutting if it is that you examine the patient's moisture, and the color of the joint is white and moist and of subtle root; if he applies the spatula to the large wound, and in his presence is the cauterization by fire.
if he applies the spatula to the large wound, and in his presence is the cauterization by fire. For in the cutting comes often too much flowing of blood, and if it does not stop itself, then you should hurry to cauterize;
and if you see the patient is faint and fearful of the incision with iron, take a well-made thread, and tie the joint as we have said, and let it be for two days;
and then restrain it, and do not cease to tighten the thread of the splint as long as it covers the joint, and holds it without effort;
and if the roots are thick, then fear not to cut through the middle for the belly, but you can well cauterize half of it, then the cautery so that it does not grow back;
then cure the wound, and beware that you do not cut the tendon which is of fixed color and of little sensation and of slow regeneration.
For this is an enlarged abscess, and I will come to the treatment of cancer later.
when the navel is ruptured If the appearance of the navel comes from a cauterized wound or a crack in the skin, and it is on the belly and in some of the navels, as it happens in other ruptures, or of blood that flows from veins or arteries according to what is before, or of windiness;
and if it is through the rupture of the skin and the exit of the navel, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body, and is a light thing without pain, and open to various discharge. And if it is due to the issue of the intestine, then it is even more serious, and when one presses on his sides if they bulge, and then return, and by chance if it closes, and greatly increases the pain of the bath and through strong labor.
And if it is due to moisture, it's a light matter, and it opens well when you press on it with your hand, not constraining anything;
and if it is due to blood, then it opens through these signs of a large and hard abscess, and is fixed according to a quantity; and if it is due to flatulence, then it is enough to touch, and the work is such that you consider its appearance by the blood of the artery, or of the vein, or flatulence.
and if it is due to flatulence, then it is enough to touch, and the work is such that you consider its appearance by the blood of the artery, or of the vein, or flatulence. It is necessary that you leave the treatment. For there is doubt and fear, as I have said to you in the chapter on abscesses, for the artery and for the vein.
And if the appearance is in the intestine or the navel, then it is necessary that you instruct the patient to stretch his belt, and be entirely straight, then sign from the bottom all around the navel; then instruct him to sit comfortably between your hands, then go around the place that you have signed with all the spatula, then stretch half of the abscess upwards with all the large uncle; then bind him around with a strong thread, or with a cord of strong chain firmly, and be the one who holds the bound limb;
then open half of the abscess stretched on the limb, and thrust your right index finger, and touch the intestine; if you find it taken by the limb, then untie it, and thrust the intestine to the bottom of the belly;
and if you find the bowel, take it to the ankle, and cut away the excess.
and if the artery or vein makes a counterincision, then go gently within, next return to your work and take two needles, and push two threads, and put the two needles within what you have made in the shape that you make perforate;
then strain the abscess in four places under the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and let the limb alone until it forms a scab, and separate the dead flesh by itself; or cut it when it has become thin and formed a scab, then treat what needs treatment, and drain the abscess as we have said;
or cut it when it has become thin and formed a scab, then treat what needs treatment, and drain the abscess as we have said; and strain the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the limb for what it needs, and bind the limb.
Two sores We have spoken in the division of the similarities of sores, and how one should operate with medicines, and how one should choose the treatment with iron;
and let us say that the sore is born in the marrow, and there is great caution in the treatment, and the ancients said that when a sore is in the blood or where one can raise it like a sore which is in the limbs, and in the thigh, and in similar places, and it must be completely removed when it is at the beginning;
nor did any of them heal in my presence.
And the treatments, when it is in the blood or where one can remove it, as we have said, is that you should purge the patient of black bile;
Then make him sweat if he has shown retention, then prepare the patient's body for the operation;
then cut his tumors or cancer, and shave him completely, and strip the bone of everything on all sides leaving nothing behind;
and let the blood flow freely, and squeeze the body well with your hand or with something, and if the flow of blood is against the incision of the artery or vein, cauterize it as long as the blood is stagnant; then heal him with another healing until he is healthy.
of dropsy We have already said in the division the symptoms of dropsy, and in what manner the gathering of the fluid is made, and the signs of each symptom, and the treatment that is done with medications, and that which is treated with iron:
and one must not touch iron to these two similarities: it is to know, tympanites and yposarche, for it is mortal things;
then when you apply medicine to this similarity of dropsy which is called "broken" of medicines, and the cure does not benefit, if consider that the patient is weak, or if they have another disease besides dropsy, such as a tumor and a solution of stomach and similar things; if one does not touch it with iron, for it gives doubt;
and if you see the patient with strong virtue, and they have no other disease except dropsy alone, and they are neither too young nor too old, then you should thus proceed: raise the patient upright on your hands, and let the attendants press the stomach inwards curving the needle to the lowest part of the chest, then take the spinal instrument spiny according to this form: And let there be a cutting of two parts. to the point, and the intestine should not be so entered that it can come just to the intestines when one puts in the needle, and it cannot be stopped;
then look if the dropsy is turned towards the intestines: if it is necessary that you split into the belly three fingers deep just above the navel; and if the dropsy is from the illness of the liver, let the incision be on the left side of the belly three fingers;
and if it is from the spleen, let it be on the right, and it is not necessary that the patient put on the incision that the superfluities do not run to that weak place;
then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and the belly, and raise your hand to all the spatula between the skin and the inner layer as in scraping according to the quantity of a nail or an inch;
Then pierce the skin as far as the spatula will reach to the empty space, and it is the place of the needle, then pull the thread, and I throw this instrument from which this form is made: And it resembles a thin chain of silver, and is made from fine iron or brass, and has on the lower part two small perforations; and on one side, three perforations; and two on another side, and one on another;
and the head is cut like a quill, and it is the shape of the incision that the scribes sharpen the quill:
at its tip is the needle, so when the thread comes to the needle, it descends now onto the instrument;
guide it then to the middle or the third part, for if you guide more than is necessary at that time, by chance the patient may die from the resolution of his arm's spirit, or he becomes pale, or he approaches death;
but in emptying according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to that which the dispositions of the virtue of the disease signify, and its pulses;
then draw the instrument and hold the needle, and it is held now by the cord that stops up the perforation which is on the surface, of which I have spoken, that you pierce according to this manner;
then introduce the instrument on the other side, if you see the patient suffering thus, and draw from the needle a small quantity;
make it on either side, and guard yourself from touching as long as there remains only a little of the needle.
And if you doubt regarding the patient, and you leave much of the needle, if the treatment of the tomb or abscess is hot, and by very sweating or bath and in the sun, and if it tinges with a black color; and the treatment of drier medicines as long as it is healthy, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of the needle, as I have said before.
Sometimes children are born who do not have an opening in the penis, or the opening is small, or it is not in its place.
If it happens that he has to pierce through the entire diaphragm with a very subtle instrument according to this form:
then put in the hole a fine tube of lead, and tie it with thread, for three or four days, and when he wants to urinate, let the hole be opened, and let him urinate, and then put it back;
and by accident it happens that there is no stop, because the urine that comes out does not allow it to be closed.
Those with small wounds, it is a medicine of pennyroyal clay, as we have said, which will widen them.
Those who do not have the wound in their body are crippled, because none can urinate who have the wound at the head of the penis, for they cannot urinate before they lift their penis up high; and they cannot have an erection because the material cannot come to the marrow, and it is a very bad disease.
And the manner of the work is that the patients sit on their back, put their hands under the head of the penis and the thighs like the width of a penny, so that the wound gapes in the middle, as it ought to be;
and beware of the effusion of blood that comes many times, and if it happens, stop the flow of what flows blood, and treat the wound until it is healed.
The blisters of the penis Many times a cyst appears on the penis, and it is an appearance of painful flesh;
and it has both malignant and non-malignant types;
if necessary, you should take them with a subtle onion, and cut and cleanse all of them, then apply cotton moistened in Egyptian ointment; then treat with ointment of diafoin until it is healed.
And if the cyst on the penis is malignant, of foul color and putrid, then you should apply a cauterizing agent.
When you have cut it, and the cyst is on the penis, and has one part inside the skin and one part outside, then you should remove the cyst that is inside first; and when it is removed, then treat the outside.
For when you treat them together, if the head of the rod is not secured so it is not perceived, and blackness and corruption come in the rod and in the body.
If it is necessary to remove all that is black and corrupted, then apply on the plaster made of honey and flour which is made from the crust of green raisins and figs, then treat with other treatments until it is healthy.
And if a flow of blood comes from the ulcer, then apply the lunar cauterization according to this method:
The cauterizations help in two conditions together: that is to say, for the flow of blood, and for the corruption;
and if the head of the rod is corrupted and withdrawn, then it is necessary that you put or conduct on the rod a chain of lead, and urinate the patient amidst;
and when the skin is pulled up to the head of the penis in those who have not been circumcised, or it has been due to a wound or an abscess, then you must scrape it with a sharp instrument, until the veins are loosened and the head of the penis is freed from all sides;
and if it is a grievous thing to divide this, then you must scrape it with the spatula of some iron at the head of the penis and of the skin;
then separate them gently between the two, and put a subtle cloth of linen moistened with cold water, so that it does not adhere to the flesh.
Circumcision is not a separation of continuity like other wounds; in every way when we do this work of our will, and especially with children, it is necessary that we do the best work, and the lightest for their health.
I say that the ancients did not mention the circumcision of their children, for they did not use it in their law, and we have no more than what we have acquired through experimentation.
For I have seen the greatest part of the masters and surgeons who performed circumcision near my home, with force, and to everyone it was a novelty;
If the heart was affected because it has two titles, and by chance if one takes from above and remains below. When copper is recovered, and the pain is double, and in the purification that is given from there it is not assured the point of the member;
and in the purification of the nail by chance the iron is sharpened, and the work is run, and many times it happens that they have no need for purification and I have seen it.
From the purification that is done with force to everyone, I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut just as well from above as from below.
For when you press your hand, if you cut it evenly throughout all the tissue; but that the thread should be well pulled inside the skin;
and let the method of the first work be that you make the child think, if it understands, that you do not make it think to tie the thread inside the stick so tightly, and then you make it come out in all the ways that you can;
then you make it stand straight between your hands, and you press the fractures between your hands or under your feet where the child cannot see them, nor any of the instruments;
then you put your hand on the stick and blow into the wound, and pull it upwards as long as the head of the stick is inside; then you clean it well of the pus that has accumulated, then tie the limb securely with a double thread, then tie it under one knot to another knot;
then you clean it well of the pus that has accumulated, then tie the limb securely with a double thread, then tie it under one knot to another knot; and pull it with the two fingers by the second finger on the thumb and the index finger, and between the two tendons, then lift the heart of the hand upwards slowly and draw the head of the rod; then let the blood flow little by little, for it is the remedy; and put powder on it and on the powder a plaster made from a mixture of egg whites cooked tempered with water rose, jammed with rose oil good and fresh, and let it be until the next day, and treat with another treatment as long as he is unhealthy.
The form of the dressing for the wound healing is this:
the two sides be even and be cutting, and the sides be as large as the same width;
the defect of the healing is when the heart of it falls to the incision;
Then it is necessary that you stretch it to your finger, so that the limbs make an abscess;
and cut it evenly, and if you cannot hold it with your finger, tie it with bandages, and then cut it.
And if it lasts for three days, and the swollen area beneath the bladder is inflamed, let it be until the abscess that is to be drained is ripe, and the crust is lightly scratched;
if you cut it as you can move, and guard against the area of the bladder, this will not harm him much.
Heal then the wound of things that are burnt with powder, which we have said to treat with powders, and if one cuts beyond measure, and it goes to the sinews, it will not harm;
Heal then, as we have said, until it is healed.
Retention of urine
The retention of urine is due to obstruction of the stone, or of congealed blood, or of the bowel, or of dead flesh, or similar things that we have mentioned in the division;
and if the urine is not discharged, and you see that the retention is due to the stone which is in the neck or collar of the bladder, then it is necessary that the patient be bent over on his knees; and his feet should be placed on a support and his belly should be stretched from the back to the upper part of the back, and the patient should restrain his arm as much as he can; and then the neck of the bladder is constricted by the pressure of the stone from above, for which reason the urine is discharged;
and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then it is necessary that you administer an extraction with all the instrument called "syringe", of which this is the form:
and let it be of subtle refined silver, like the down of a bird; and let the length be a palm and a half, and let it be subtle at the head.
And the method of the emission of urine is that you take a double thread, and tie at the head a small ball of wool or cotton, and put the head of the thread inside the syringe;
and cut the excess of the wool and shape it just to the head of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and with egg white, and make the patient sit on a seat, and rub the bladder and the rod with moistened oil of olive and of rose and of sweet almond;
then gently put the syringe in the rod, until it comes to the root of the rod, then bend the rod upwards towards the buttocks;
Then push the syringe up to the bladder, and let the patient feel it approaching the empty space, and this is not done according to this order unless because what conducts it there goes awry;
Then insert the thread into all of the wool little by little, and the urine follows the wool, then extract it outside, and make the urine flow;
and continue with the syringe until the bladder is emptied, and the patient is relieved.
When crusts or blood come into the bladder, or decay is assembled, and you see distillations of sharp things and medicines, thus make all the instrument which is called "clyster", and this is its form:
It is closed, and has three openings: On one side, and on the other, as you see;
and the limbs are shaved by which the medicine is cut so that it strikes the stick well without addition, if one can then pull out the moisture, and strike when necessary;
and when you see that your medicines are in the bladder, put the head of the cauterizer into the moisture, and pull to the pulling one that is inside;
if you pull the moisture with the cauterizer, and then strongly strike the pulling one inside; if the moisture enters inside, and comes to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it;
and this is the form of the subtle syringe with which one injects into the bladder:
And it is of silver or gold, and the head is higher;
and touches to the brain where the ligaments are;
then take a sheep's bladder and put the moisture that you want to use to clean the bladder, then tie it between the two breasts forming a double thread of wool, and heat this moisture on the fire;
then put the end of the cleanser in the rod, then stretch your hand on the bladder to extract all the moisture completely, until the patient feels that this moisture has gone into the bladder;
and if you don't have a bladder, then take a piece of parchment, and make a circle with it, and pierce it all around; then put a strong thread through these holes, then join the circle as one joins a bowl, and put inside what you want of oil and moisture and water, and tie it with the instrument;
and do as you have done with the bladder, to press with your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
of the stone
We have already spoken in the division of the ways of stones, and extraction together with medicines;
and have said the difference between the stone in the kidney and in the loins, and all the symptoms, and in which stone one should open with a cut; and in the bladder, and in the rod;
and I will tell you openly and briefly.
I say that the stone which is formed in the bladder often occurs more frequently in children, and it's a sign that the water of the bladder escapes similarly to water in its subtlety;
and it openly hurts, and scratches the patient's rod, and it pinches many times, and then becomes numb; and at the bottom of these wounds the foundations
and the healing of children is light until they are 4 years old, and it is very grievous in the elderly, and it is like the middle age, for those who are between youth and old age;
and the treatment is lighter for those who have a large stone, than for those who have a small one.
And when we come to the treatment, it is necessary first to cleanse the patient with a purgative, to expel all the filth that is in the intestines. For it sometimes hinders one from passing the stone.
Then take the patient by the feet, and bend and move to the bottom, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and sometimes comes out from the high place;
then make him sit between your hands prepared, and his hands be below his thighs, so that the bladder is entirely declined downwards;
then touch the wound from the inside;
if you feel it in the spinal column, hasten now to cut into the stone.
And if it does not gush out on touching everywhere, anoint your right index finger with oil from the left hand, if the patient is an old man, or your right middle finger, if the patient is a young adult; and put it in its foundation, and touch the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, if it leads to the neck of the bladder;
then press on with your finger, and put it in the depth where you see fit to cut.
And instruct the assistant to press the bladder with his hand, and command him to stretch out with his right hand the intestines upwards, and with his left hand hold the skin which is beneath the intestines in the area where the incision is made;
Then he wraps the spatula with a bandage, for that is its form: And make between what is between the intestines and the fundament, not in the middle but on the left side of the navel;
and let it be straight on the stone, and its two ends be either at the navel or fundament, and let the width of the strap be such that it is wide outside, and narrow within, according to the quantity of the stone, not too large;
by chance the press so that its end which is at the fundament, it goes up without effort;
and know that there is a piece of stone where it has edges and margins: thus it is prepared to exit;
and if the piece which is under, resembles a pebble, and is round, of which the discharge is light.
In the area where there are angles and margins, make the incision larger;
and if it does not heal, then you must drain through the bandages which are as tight as a lime on the head, to squeeze the stone so that it does not burst; or you apply underneath the subtle curved instrument to the head;
and if you cannot introduce it thus, then enlarge the hole a little, and if the blood does not come out, then squeeze with the glass tube;
and if there is more than one stone, then put the largest first in the neck of the bladder, then cut above, then pull downward, and the smaller ones afterward if there are several;
And if it is very large, then you must operate, and make a larger wound. For these things happen to the patient: Where it dies, or the urine comes repeatedly through the leg because the kidneys cannot filter;
but you exert yourself to pull, or to tear apart the tendons, until you pull it by pieces;
and when you have completed your work, then fill the wound with incense and balm and dragon's blood, and strain it, and apply on top a moistened cloth in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to appease the hot abscess; then raise the patient up onto his neck, and do not untie the bandage until the third day.
And when you untie it, anoint the limb well with oil and water, then treat it with ointment of galbanum and ointment of basil, until it is healed.
And if abscesses and ulcers come in the wound and corroisons of blood in the bladder, and urine is retained by this means, which is retained in such a way that without exit with the urine: Then put your finger in the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will corrode the bladder, and rot it;
Then elevate the wound from water and from pus, and help it in all the ways that you know, until it is healthy;
and it is necessary that all the treatments you administer to him, you tie the two thighs together, and apply the medicines on the wound.
And if his skin is small, and it is conducted by the penis, and stuck in, and the urine cannot exit; If the treatment of what I say thus, that you often cut it, is excused from cutting because of this treatment. I have already proved it thus.
Take the iron instrument in this form and let it be with three angled points fixed in one piece:
Then take the thread and tie it around the edge of the stone, so that it cannot come back into the bladder;
then push the instrument into the edge gently, until it reaches the stone; and turn the instrument with your hand in the stone little by little, until you can pierce the stone from the other side;
if urine comes out, then press your hand on the part that remains of the stone which is inside the edge. If it is thus broken, and the stone comes out with the urine, and the patient is cured;
and if you cannot do it for any reason that prevents it, then tie the thread under the stone and the other above, then make the edge approach the stone between the two threads, then pull it out, and untie the thread, and clean the congealed blood which is in the wound; and heal them as long as they are sick.
of the gallstones of women
It rarely happens that a stone forms in women, and if it does happen, then the treatment is grievous, and is forbidden for three things:
one is that by chance the woman is a virgin;
and the second is that one cannot find a woman who is well-informed and knows how to hide her flaws, especially when she is chaste.
And the third manner is that by chance one cannot find a woman who is well-informed in this art of hands;
and the fourth manner is that the stone of the woman is deeper than the stone of the man, because it requires a deeper and larger incision, and there is great danger in it. And it is necessary to have a well-informed and skilled midwife, and to take the one who has a good touch, and if you do not find one, then seek out a chaste and subtle midwife;
and it presents a woman well-versed in the life of women, or a woman who knows a part of the art, and instructs her to do what you instruct regarding the treatment of the stone; and consider very carefully if the woman is a virgin:
and consider very carefully if the woman is a virgin: then you must put your finger or foundation and seek the stone;
and if she finds it, if the stone constricts beneath her finger, and instructs her to put her finger or with the patient, and seeks and presses her left hand on the belly firmly.
If she finds it, then it is necessary that she moves it gently from the entrance of the belly down, as far as it comes to the root of the thigh;
then cut into the stone at the root of the thigh against the middle of the womb, where it is moved and appears, and feel the stone in that area; and does not move his finger from the stone or the anvil, and let the first toe be cut;
and does not move his finger from the stone or the anvil, and let the first toe be cut; then put the heat in the cut, if you feel the stone with a growing wound so that the stone can be expelled, and know that there are many kinds of stones:
it is to know, small and large and rough and smooth, long and round, and those that have corners.
if you know the similarities to understand the discharge.
And if the blood is lacking, then put on the limb a warm broth, and hold for an hour until the blood is stanched;
then return to your work, until the stone is expelled, and have instruments that I have told you about in the extraction of the stone suitable for you to help with your task;
and if the blood is lacking, and it is from the artery that is cut, then put powder on the limb and bind with bandages and with splints, and do not recommence this, and leave the stone and do not try to pull it, lest by accident the patient might die; After the wound has healed.
And when the heat of the blood is relieved, and the limbs are strengthened, it returns to its work, as long as the stone is not broken.
Rumor aqueous is nothing other than an accumulation of moisture or whiteness that is outside the heart of the intestines, which contains the egg;
and it is called "syfac", and sometimes it is properly in the web of the egg, if one thinks that this is another egg; and it is the skin of the intestine between the white syfac that we have spoken of;
and this does not happen often. And the generation of this humor is from weakness that comes to the intestines, and spreads that material.
And sometimes it comes from a blow to the intestines, and this moisture has many colors: or it is yellowish in color declining to jaundice, or it is without redness, or black, or pale watery, and this happens more;
and these are the signs to recognize this condition, for if it is white like we have said, then the abscesses are ready, not very long like the shape of an egg, and the skin does not appear, for there is moisture all around.
And if there is moisture in the actual tissue, then the abscesses are ready with part of the egg, and therefore one thinks that it is another egg;
and if the moisture is between the skin of the intestines and the white tissue, then it smells bad;
then when you want to know the color of the moisture, examine thoroughly all the interior quarters, from which the form is thus before. According to what comes after the intermission, judge what is inside.
And when we treat them with iron, it is necessary that the patient be healthy according to his power and the replenishment of his body;
then put him on his back, on something a little high, and put many cloths under him;
then sit on his left side, and instruct the minister to sit on the right, and extend the rod to one of the two ribs near the navel;
then take the left spatula, and cut the skin of the groin in the middle of the thigh up to near the navel, and let the incision be straight, dividing the skin of the groin right up to the white skin, and scrape subtly according to his power;
then pierce the thin skin of water at one large opening, and extract all the water, and then put your nails, and stretch the skin upwards;
and do not touch the area of the intestines, but only the surface; cut all or in pieces the membrane surrounding it subtly, that if you do not cut it well wisely, the fever will return;
and if the humor rises to the top of the work, then reset it in its place when you have completed the work of the surface;
then assemble the two lips of the intestine's membrane to a suture, then treat it as with other wounds, until it is healed.
And if you find the humor corrupted by another disease, then it is necessary to ligate the vessels that are suspended, in fear of the effusion of blood;
then cut the intestine with all its suspensions, and extract the humor, and treat it as we have said.
And if the shoulder is assembled in two parts together, know that these are two roots; if you cut the other part just as you did the first equally, then suck out the blood, and put on the wound a wet linen cloth with rose oil;
if you cut the other part just as you did the first equally, then suck out the blood, and put on the wound a wet linen cloth with rose oil; and put on another wet linen cloth in wine and oil, and put on the two hips, and put double blankets, and tie it up with all the linen that is according to this form:
Then take two blankets, and fill them with linen pads according to this likeness and let them be assembled by sewing on the throat of the arms, and one of the hands hold it at the base up to the back, and the other at the part of the groin;
and the other two ends on the shoulders, and let it be all assembled the restraint in the loop of the arm;
and sometimes this medicine of cauterization is applied to the iron in the fire, and it is that you should take the subtle cauterizing tool, and cut the skin of the intestines, and be heated as we have said, so that the white crust that contains the pus is uncovered;
if you take the cauterizer in this form, and pierce that crust as with needles, and scratch it with this subtle hot cauterizer:
And cut in all the ways that you can, until you scrape everything;
and beware that the fever does not touch the eye;
and know that this work is more salvage; and beware of the flowing of blood, and doctors who are ignorant of the works of surgery;
and if nothing makes you contravened, or hot abscess or flowing of blood or other thing, then cure that which makes you contravened, according to what has been said before.
And if the patient is fearful, and does not want to undergo this treatment due to its horror, then suggest a perforation, as I tell you, and it is that when you are well assured by the signs that we have mentioned that the cure is at hand, then make the patient sit on a raised seat; Then pierce the abscess in the lower part of the entire spatula, and make the perforation as long as the body allows;
and let the wound be wide, so that all the pus can flow out;
then put cotton on the wound, and bind it, and let the remaining pus flow out, then treat it until the wound is healed;
and if the white cloth does not allow the pus to exit from the mouth of the wound, then it is necessary that you push a probe or instrument through which one treats the pus of dropsy, whose shape is described before;
and enlarge the wound a little, and know that the edge returns, and is assembled after six months or within a year, and when it is assembled as before, then the patient will recover their days.
Know that in the cutting of this branch there is fear in many ways, for which it seems to me that moving it is worth more than leaving it.
and I will tell you the work and the symptoms of the abscess.
I say then that many abscesses come to the body, and likewise to the intestines; and it is in many cases.
It is to know by the overflow of bitter and sharp humor, which is spread to the intestines, or from a blow;
and the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body; and does not find a point of pain, and it is a grievous abscess;
and by chance is an abscess that is rough and rock-like, and of a putrid color, and sometimes comes from a swelling of the artery, or from inflammation of a vein.
When it is from a swelling of the artery, it is recognized by the feeling of a warm abscess, when you press on it with your fingers; and it does not matter that you touch it.
That which is made from inflammation of a vein is recognized by its appearance to the touch of the fingers, and one can well perform the cutting on this likeness, and on the other similar things; and it is that you cut the skin of the intestines, then the vein is on high, and the fat tissue appears white, and delivers the suspension from all parts of the vein.
If the vein is already swollen with these new wounds, then it is necessary that you treat the vein, and cut it.
and if it is near the surface, or in that which is within the vessels, then it is necessary that you deliver the entire tendon, and cut it thoroughly.
And if the birth of the wound is in the rear of the body, then it is necessary that you cut it entirely, and extract the vein, as we have said.
And when your tasks are completed, then apply the plaster of wool and oil to the wound, and treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
This is an abscess enclosed in a covering resembling a tumor, with the softening of the entrails, and the patient complains grievously when he walks;
and the treatment of this disease is as well known to be fearful as it was before, and nonetheless we will tell you the work of it, according to what the ancients did.
It is necessary that you make the patient sit on a seat or a bed, then tie the suspender of the thighs below to your fingers, all the vessels that are near to the privy parts, and pull the master arteries, and stretch them firmly;
then cut with the spatula knife broadly through the skin straight across the vessels, as long as they are uncovered, and then scrape each part, as we have said in the extraction of the arteries that are in the temples;
then stick a needle where it has a double thread, and tie it to the first place or where the vein has come, and tie it again at the other end; Then cut the cupping glasses straight, according to the length of the body, and remove the corrupted humors;
Then treat the wound like the others or where a bow is inserted, so that no vessel ruptures which would nourish one of the intestines;
For from this comes no evil, and if all the vessels come to an end, then it is necessary to drag the intestines out through all the vessels; so that the eyes do not lose their nourishment due to the incision of the vessels, and wither and cannot be helped.
The coming of this flux is by the section that comes from the spleen, or the extension to the belly in the part of the loins, because the intestine descends from that rupture to one of the intestines;
and this curvature is of the hip, or of the extension of it, and come these two manners from many causes:
or from a blow, or from a jump, or from a fall, or from the lifting of heavy loads, and from similar things;
and the symptoms when it is an extension of the hip, are that they come gradually and slowly, over a long period of time, and do not come suddenly; and the abscesses are even up to the depth, because the hip presses on the intestine.
And the symptoms are when it is a dislocation of the hip, that it causes sudden severe pain to appear, and there are various abscesses showing beneath the skin, and it is because of the issue with the intestine and the body at the joint of the hip.
And sometimes the intestines slip with the intestine, and are retained there, and cause great pain to suffer for the patient, especially when it is pressed.
And in these iron treatments there is fear, because it makes them want to urinate.
And the manner of the work is that you instruct the patient to push the intestine back into its place within the wound, if it can be returned. then let it be supported on his neck, between your hands, and lift the hips;
then stretch the skin upwards, and cut all the skin of the intestines along the length; then put within the liver of the waist, twelve inches according to that which you have in your craft for opening the wound, and let it be such that the abscess can issue out.
then scrape the surface that is beneath the skin of the intestines, until the white surface appears uncovered on all sides;
then put your two index fingers in that which guides the intestine, in that which is between the white surface that is beneath the skin of the navel, and between the second surface, and separate that which is behind the navel, and between the second surface;
and then move to the right hand inside the heart of the intestines, and let the white skin be high on your left hand, and lift the use to all the skin towards the waist; and instruct the minister that he stretch the use upwards, and untie what is tied behind the binding;
and ask your fingers if there is a point of the intestine enveloped or white skin hardened, and if you find any thing, then push it to the bottom of the belly;
then take a needle where there is a thick thread made of threads, and push it into the back part of the skin, which is after the skin of the intestines; after the waist, then cut the heads that appear with threads, as long as there are four threads; then assemble them one on top of the other in the manner of a cross, and tie the skin with a strong thread of two parts; Then envelop the heads of the veins, and bind them firmly in two places, so that none of the vessels that nourish them can enter into them, lest the abscess that is there may grow. and put the third string according to the first string long two fingers from that one, and after these two strings leave two spaces which is two fingers from the heart of the body the size of a finger; and after all the other according to the roundness that the swelling makes;
then cut in the part that is near the skin of the body, as far as the blood and the bone, as we have said before;
then put a moist bandage in oil, and apply it to the wounds, and I will apply the string that we have mentioned. And sometimes the white skin that we have mentioned is cauterized after the incision, due to fear of excessive blood flow. For this happens often, and let the urine flow as long as it can by itself;
and if it delays in coming out, then apply warm aromatics, and put on what we have said, until it flows;
then heal the wound with another treatment, until it is perfectly healthy.
of a fleshy hernia
In this condition I never saw anyone who dared to perform the treatment with iron.
And the old ones said that it is made like the branch which is next to the bladder, in such a way that you tie the vessels, after the cut above the testicles lightly with a thread;
then cut in the middle, and treat the abscess of what has burst, until the vessels heal;
and heal it as we have said, until it is healthy.
Sometimes a dislocation occurs in the joints, as we have said, and it opens the limbs;
and does not touch the intestines at all, to the liver, and if it touches them, it's a little, and repairs all hours;
and in any case if it stays too long in this spot, the wound or catarh grows, until the intestine touches;
and this happens due to the extension of the catarh which is in the joints, as we have said, because it is stretched, then softened and swollen are the limbs and opened;
and the cure is by cauterization, as we previously said;
and sometimes it is cured with iron in this manner: and it is that the patient puts his back between your hands, then cut the limb of the dislocated joint swollen with a large quantity of three fingers;
and then extract the abscess that is beneath the skin which becomes apparent, then take the razor and place it on the apparent abscess;
and press to the depth of the belly, then cut the two apparent abscesses on the head of the razor, and cut one and the other;
then extract the head of the razor, and do not touch any part of the abscess nor extend the use to another thing, as I have made you know in the treatment of the ulceration of the intestines; then heal it by the treatment of wounds.
then heal it by the treatment of wounds. And when you touch the threads, if it is infected and treat the wound, until it is healed.
The abscess is constricted, and has no appearance in the routing, and the cauterizations are gentle on this spot, and closer to health.
of the softening of the skin of the intestines
Many times is softened the skin of the intestines in some men, because the guts that are inside are softened, and it is bad to see;
and it is necessary, when one wants to cure it, to make the patient lie on his back, and to cut the skin that is softened on the natural skin;
then bring the two lips together to a seam, and if you see, first cut away the excess of the softened skin to three or four stitches firmly;
then cut between the stitches, and cure it like the other wounds, until it be healed, and tighten the thread.
of punishment
Punishments are forbidden in our law, and therefore it pleases me that I do not speak of them in this book;
and there are not necessary forces except by two means:
where one is that the physician responds in writing when asked, and writes the treatment;
and the other, because we often have need of the assistance of certain beasts to aid us, such as goats and rams and cats and other beasts.
I say then that chastisement is made in two ways: either by traction, or by incision.
In the one that we do by traction, we make the beast sit in warm water, as long as the bowel is softened and hanging; then take them with your hand, until they are put back and you do not feel them anymore.
Of the treatment of the cut: it is necessary that you hold the beast, and press the skin of the intestines with your left hand, then tie it above, and cut above each hoof with a blow, when you have well scarified them;
and let none of the thick skin and the subtle skin which is on the vessels;
and this manner of punishment is worse than that which is done by traction, because with traction there remains by chance some thing from the gut, for which the beast desires luxury;
then heal the wound until it is healthy.
of hermaphrodites
Hermaphrodite is a being in two manners, male and female: one is that between the two hips open as well as the figure of the nature of a woman, where it has hair, and sometimes the urine comes out.
And the other manner is in women, and has on the genital area like a penis and two hips.
And the treatment of the man and the woman is that you cut the joined flesh all together, and treat it as other wounds;
In the second manner, of men whose urine jumps through the skin of their intestines, if there is no point of cure.
Tenderness is a sore adjusted on the natural part, as it is too shameful to see; and some women have it so large as a hand, and this is the cure.
It is necessary that you take the excess of the tenderness in your hand or with shears, and cut it lightly;
and do not go too deep, lest an effusion of blood does not come, then one cure does not hinder another cure as long as it is healthy;
and there is another sore that grows at the mouth of the marrow, and the filling, and by chance breaks out, and it looks like a cow's, and for this reason the old ones call it "cow disease". If it is necessary to cut it, as we have said the tenderness, and the treatment until it is healthy.
Erratic it is when the nature of the woman is not perceived, or the passage is small; and it is natural by birth, or accidental by disease that has come to her;
and it is natural by birth, or accidental by disease that has come to her; or it is by charming adjusted, or of the spleen subtle or sharp, and it is made deep in the liver, or in the sides, or below, or wherever it may be;
and prevents conception, and childbearing, and by chance causes the flow to have;
and the knowledge of this thing is through the examination of the urine.
If the swelling appears to be near the thigh or in the back.
If it is of the spleen subtle and sharp, and it is near the liver, then hasten, and bend the knee:
Put your two thumbs together, and the woman should be on her back, spreading her legs;
then press the two fingers firmly, until the subtle skin surface becomes round, and is above the swelling;
then take the vein, and the mole in oil, and put it on the body, and give the woman a house remedy each day, so that she cannot suffer.
And if the skin is hard and thick, then it is necessary to cut it with a spatula similar to a knife blade.
If the swelling is of fleshy tissue, then suck on the abscess and cut it;
and have the blood-stanching medicines, such as hematite, dragon's blood, incense, mixed with rose water;
then apply a bandage of wide cloth, so that the wound cannot suffer;
and thus let it be for a long time, and put a bandage of dry flax.
then let him be cured by other treatments until he is healthy.
And when in the marrow comes a new flesh, if it covers according to this manner, then it is not an ulcerous abscess. For the ulcerated abscess that is in the marrow, one should not touch it with iron.
of hemorrhoids Hemorrhoids are overtures of veins which without hardening habitually, and when hemorrhoids are old they become thelul;
and we have already said in the division the similarities of them, and the signs, and I will say here those which receive a cure.
I say that hemorrhoids and thelul, when they are deep in the marrow, and do not appear to feeling, if it is not the cure by iron.
Those who are at the mouth of the abscess, one can feel, are those that one can cure.
It is necessary then that you put the woman in a cold house, then stop the discharge of her menses, and cut it off at its roots, then powder on medicines that restrain blood, such as birthwort and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things;
then let her feet soak in the bath for an hour, then put her in a cold water;
and if a discharge of blood comes, make her sit in a decoction of sumach and the bark of pomegranate trees and gall and similar things, and then take flour of barley, and mix it with honey and vinegar, and make a plaster to put on her back.
And if it dries, it is good. If that is not so, then have cauterized the ventoses on the back and the same for the breast;
then take the wool, and anoint it with juice of plantain or with juice of aglentier mixed with old wine, and cauterize the body.
And when the abscess has burst, then treat the body with ointment as long as it is sore;
and that which is called "albathir" is red, and resembles the rough head, if it is necessary to scrape as I have said the tumor; and then treat it until it is healthy.
Many kinds of abscesses come in the marrow, such as cancer and cold abscess and herpes and eczemas and fistulas and hemorrhoids and hot abscess, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in the division.
It is necessary then to describe in this treatise the hot abscess that comes in the marrow, which is not among the abscesses that fall into a mass.
and if you want to know the work of iron, look at the abscess when it begins to come, and full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red you can see it. Then do not hurry to pierce, but make me wait until the pain is eased;
and then make the patient sit on a seat, and let him have two small seats or where he can lean, and support himself on his back and bring his feet together as far apart from the thigh;
and let his thighs be spread, and put his arms under his knees, and tie them well with a tight band;
then suck the abscess towards the right side, and introduce the instrument through which one sucks the marrow, from which afterwards comes the pus;
and it is necessary that when you want to administer this instrument, that you first insert the rod to know the depth of the marrow, so that what enters from the instrument does not come more deeply than it should, and that it does not harm the patient; and if the instruments are larger, then it is necessary to cover the depth of the marrow with cloths, so that the instruments do not harm them;
and it is necessary that he places the point of the instrument upwards, and that he holds the instrument.
And when the abscesses open, and one makes an incision with a soft hand, then it is necessary to cover the head with a spatula or a plaster.
and when the wound is empty, then it is necessary that you put in the wound moist dressings with rose oil, or with green dry oil;
and put the tent or dressing of strong fabric at the bottom of the wound, and put over the wound and on the bandage a clean moist cloth in water or evil humors that are cooked;
then the treatment after 2 days of application having come to that point, as long as it is healthy;
and sometimes raise the dressing and the wound with a cluster of water and honey, and then with water or roots of lily and aristolochia that are cooked; then return to the application.
And if the wound has grown back onto the dressing, then it is necessary that you beware of iron cauterization, but rather treat it as we have said in this section.
of swelling It is suitable first to teach the midwife that she recognize the natural signs of the swelling, and the symptoms are when you see the woman press down below, and desire to smell the air:
then the sinews of the infant hasten to come out; and then one knows that these infant movements are according to natural design, and the issue is under its head, and the second with it;
and when you see these signs, then you must gently press his belly, so that the intestines protrude out;
for when it descends upon its head, the secondine goes with it, and the mass of its superfluities is purged by good purification;
and that which comes otherwise does not come naturally.
For it comes sometimes upon its feet, and comes out of the body or the head, and the hands, or it comes upon its belly, or penis, and is turned by accident over its neck, and by other bad postures;
so it is necessary for the healer to be wise and subtle in these things, and beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the postures as one ought to help with them.
If the infant comes out naturally onto its head, and the woman gives birth grievously, and the strength of the womb is weak, then make her sit on a saddle, or the women hold her;
and let its natural oil or rennet be cooked, and then put the bath between its two legs the little spatula of which this is the form: and cut the second skin, and cut to one nail as much as the moisture that is in the corpse fingers;
and press the woman's belly until the infant descends, and if it does not descend, then it is necessary to clysterize the woman with massage of rennet with oil of cypress;
then make her press and rub with condition, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: now the infant will come out.
And if the two hands are dislocated, then you must reset them lightly, a little at a time; and if they cannot enter, then put the woman on a seat, and raise her feet up high; then remove the seat from the ground, and hold the woman, so she does not fall during the removal;
and if the hands cannot enter, and the infant is dead, then cut the hands at the joint that is situated here before, and extract the infant, and reset in the same way.
of the issue of the infant on its feet When the infant comes onto its feet, then it is necessary to throw upwards; and then turn it little by little, until it is straight;
then take one of the feet and stretch it little by little.
When the skin is healthy, if it is ordered to be pressed, and it is stretched from its natural condition; If health is lacking, God will provide.
And if it is not lacking as we have said, then turn it little by little, until it is according to the natural shape. For then it is lighter.
And if it does not come as we have said, then take the muscle of the wing, and oil of cedar, and melted gum, and crush all in a mortar; and apply this mixture to the woman's nature inside and outside this treatment, then have her sit in hot water until the hips are sweating;
and when she is moistened from below, have her wear a girdle of myrrh, and put it below, and leave it for an hour; Then make her sit on a seat, then make her stretch out and constrain her mouth and her nose, and press her belly lightly, for the infant is coming out now.
from the issue of the infant upon its knees When the infant comes in this manner, thus one puts the basin of its hands little by little; then it should be laid on its neck, and its feet hanging down, and it should be placed on the bed; and one folds its hands little by little, and then presses its hands on the belly, and lifts the cushions from beneath, until it is prepared below; and if the infant does not come out, one takes its feet and moves them forcefully, then moves the belly upward, then one pushes the hands; and brings the infant little by little; and instruct the woman to grasp herself as much as the infant comes out.
from the exit of the child who comes out with one hand while It is necessary to bring back the hand: if you cannot bring it back, then make the woman get up and walk;
if she cannot walk, then make her sit on the bed, and separate her legs forcibly;
then anoint the muscle that I have described;
and if she does not deliver, then make her sit on a seat, and prepare to bring back the hand; and turn the child according to its natural position, and make her exert herself, and instruct her to grasp herself as much as the infant comes out forcefully.
of the issue of the child on its neck, and having expanded its hands, and its face turned towards its mother's back. It is necessary that the barber holds his hand, then turns it little by little, and lifts the eye lightly;
and when it is even, put on the natural muscle of the thigh and heel, as we have said, then instruct her to move it little by little;
and when you have done this, make her sit on the seat, and instruct her to take it; and make her stretch. in the same manner for the second toe
in the same manner for the second toe When it comes to this manner for the second toe, cut the second toe from one nail, until the mucus is emptied;
and if it swells up on its face and on its neck, cut it from the swelling, so it is not retained, and move the swellings;
then put the child inside, as long as you have placed it as it is necessary, and instruct the woman to take it at least once:
from the issue of the twins It is known that twins are born many times, and sometimes three or four are born; and this is not a strange thing, and it happens rarely. Two are a strange thing, and do not live, with few names;
Two are a strange thing, and do not live, with few names; I know that they are multiple, and are divided by the spleen which divides them, which is tied to the navel;
and sometimes they come out naturally like one entire piece, as we have said.
And if they come out with difficulty, then the treatment is as we have said, and let the subtle bath, and make all that it does gently; and do this as it is worth for health. Of many children
Sometimes they are formed in the womb I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or many up to XV, and all are perfectly formed in the shape of a child by the measurement of the wise glorious sage, and it is necessary that the wise woman knows all this, for by chance similar things happen; thus do according to what is needed.
of the dead child
When you treat the woman of the dead or stillborn child, as I have said in the section, and it does not come out, and you are forced to perform a manual operation; it is necessary that you know if the woman is of sound virtue, and has no accident or fear of death;
it is necessary that the woman be leaning on her back, and her thighs be bent downwards, and her legs be lifted;
and let the nurse place the tie of two parts, where it is tied to the bed so that it is not treated for the dislocation of the child;
then rub the mouth of the marrow with oil made from nutmeg and fenugreek and flaxseed, then anoint the patient's hands with these oils and these rubbings;
then gently push into the marrow, then choose the place where it pushes the ankles that are suitable for this, and take care that the sinews are prepared so that they come down from the head;
if it fixes the ankles in his eyes or in his neck or in his mouth or in his palate or under the beard or in the jaw or near the ribs, and if the dislocation is downward towards the feet, then fix or prick there and the tender ribs;
and it is necessary that he pulls the elbow to his right hand, and puts the curve between the two fingers of the left hand, and bends all his hand slightly, and inserts the elbow into any of these places that we have mentioned, until it comes to the empty space;
then insert against the other elbow, or the third in your craft, so that the extractions are equal;
and then stretch equally by moving from one side to the other, for muscles to exit, and let the elbows be held by muscles, as this is the shape:
And if one part remains, then anoint the joint with oil from his fingers, and bend it towards that part, and pull the other part;
and if there remains a point, then put this elbow or higher place, and do that until all of it comes out.
And if one hand comes in front of the other, and it cannot be brought back due to constriction, then you must wrap it in a bandage, until it becomes whole; then put the cup on the joint of the sole or the heel, and thus you must do on the other hand, and on the two feet.
And if the head of the infant is large and it is constricted in the birth, or it has the head assembled with the shoulders, then you must put the spine between your two hands, and make the head and extract the shoulder; or you round it with the instrument called "almidach", from which the shape comes with the instruments or chapter that follows this one;
and thus same make the infants with large head naturally;
and then pull the bones to the tendons, and if the head is sound and it constricts with force, it should be split, until the moisture that is in the foot issues out;
and if it cannot exit, then cut it by pieces at the mouth that you can;
and if it is inflamed in the belly or below the ribs, then it is necessary that you pierce it as long as the humors flow.
And if the inflammation is on his feet, then the attraction is light, and the remedies applied to the mouth of the abscess are light.
And if it is constricted in the belly or in the chest, then it is necessary that you extract it with a cloth wrapped around the hand; and bind the belly or the chest, as long as the humors which are there flow;
and if the other member is swollen, and the skin remains, then put his hand in the depth of the abscess, and pull it right up to the mouth of the abscess; then boil one or two onions, and rub them on the area;
and if the mouth of the abscess is constricted by hot aposteme that has come to it, then it does not need to be lanced, but instead treated with moist and greasy things; and apply plasters, and put on soft, moistening and soothing applications.
And if the navel is on his side, and you can make it even, then treat it with what we have said for a living child;
and let no hair remain, then rub it on in pieces, and leave nothing of the second layer.
And when you have done this, treat it with what we have said for hot abscesses that come in the flesh;
and if discharge of blood comes, then apply a restrictive dressing, and treat with other cures.
And I saw a woman whose belly had an infant that had died, then she conceived another on top of that, and the other died. After a long time, there came to him an abscess in the navel, and it swelled so much that it burst open, and began to suppurate greatly.
I was called to the cure, and I thought for a long time, and I could not suture the wound.
I put on a plaster of strong attraction, and from it came out a bone, and after some days another one. I marveled greatly, because that which has a belly has no bones in it.
I thought that they were the bones of a dead child.
I searched the wound, and extracted many bones, until the woman was in a better state; and I watched over the woman for a long time, and she coughed up at times a little bone from her body;
and I have not recounted this chapter before because of that, when the masters find a strange thing, they know how to put aid.
Then comes the shape of the presser, where one puts the pounds;
and to two turnings at the two heads of the two tendons. In any case, the horns should be more subtle than the restricter, and should be made of ebony or boxwood;
and the mouth of the fist should be two fingers wide, and the margin of the trees should be two, and in length a palm and a half; and between the two limbs there should be two adjustements of this same fist, which should be fixed on one and on the other, a half palm in length or a little more;
and this adjustment is thrust into the mouth of the hammer for opening when one turns the two horns.
Another form, in its likeness more subtle and lighter, should be made of wood of ebony or boxwood, according to the likeness of the tongs. and it has two arms, two adjustments, as you see, one palm in length, and two fingers in width;
and when you see to open the device with all the instrument, make the woman sit on the bed, the feet hanging and the legs spread, then thrust the two adjustments joined together in the device, and hold the head of the instrument between her thighs; then open your hand with all the instrument, as you have made the tongs equally, according to the quantity that you want to open the mouth of the device, until the ball makes what she wants.
These instruments are all elevated, and are multiplied according to their similarities; and when the surgeon has them prepared, then they are more ready for the work, and higher in price to men according to their quantity.
Do not despise the instrument that you do not have prepared, for their necessities are not excusable.
When the secondine is retained in the infant, then you must instruct the patient to retain her breath, and then make her spit out the mucus, and hold her hands at the mouth and nose; and if she coughs through that, it is good.
If not, then take the pot, and make a poultice or plaster, and put in it herbs that can open the mouth of the throat, such as calamen, rue, anise, chamomile, cassialigne, and centory; All these herbs, or some of them, are cooked or placed in water over the fire;
then put a cane or stick through the hole of the pot, and the other end in the mouth of the mare, and pull until the vapors come out from inside the mare;
then make it spew, as we have said. If the second intestine is injured.
And if it remains after this treatment, and is not purified, instruct the woman to soak her left hand in oil of sesame or in mastication of althea, and then put it in the nature, and massage the intestine; and when she has found it, if she takes it and stretches it little by little straightly, so that the intestine does not tear at the extraction;
but first move it lightly to the right and to the left, and then pull it; If it comes and becomes disordered.
And if the mouth of the stomach is constricted, we have spoken of the treatment of purging, and of the fumigation of herbs;
and if it is not any of all that which we have said, beware that you do not falsify the treatment;
but it is suitable that what is at the mouth of the stomach, you should apply to the hip of the woman, then anoint her with a fourfold ointment; if the abscess bursts and breaks, and a fever comes;
but nevertheless, when it bursts if there comes bad smell to the stomach and to the head, and bothers the patient. If then suitable fumigations are applied to this:
some of the ancients have experienced fumigation of cresson and dried figs.
The shape of the instrument by which one purges the woman of the retention of the flowers and of the secundine is this:
And it is to be seen similar to a chain, and put the thin head in the nature, and the large feet on the fire;
and let the purging be on the coals, and the string until it is exhausted, and recommence another.
Many children are born who do not have the foundation pierced, yet the upper part is stopped up with subtle sap: so it is necessary to the nurse that she pierce that upper part with her finger, and not pierce the thin membrane of the spine, and guard the ligament so that she does not touch it;
then put on the moist wool in wine and in oil, then the treatment of anointing until it is healed.
And if you doubt that it will not reset, then put or thrust a cane of plaster, and leave it there for several days, and let the swelling subside before going into chambers.
And sometimes there comes sudden swellings from a wound or an abscess; if it is necessary to treat that swelling suddenly: it should be treated, as we have said regarding the plaster cast.
Fistulas that come from the bottom are an affliction, and worse than those that come from the bottom of the bowel, or in the space between the two parts, either to one fistula or several;
and when that affliction is ancient, it operates, and increases moisture with white or subtle bowel discharge, and sometimes these fistulas are persistent;
and they are known by this, that there is vomiting or flatulence when the patient makes evacuation, and by chance in jumping or sudden movement.
And if there are fistulas that reach to the bladder, and to the middle of the penis; and they extend to the joint of the thigh, and to the top of the hip.
And then one knows if the fistula passes into the fundament, and does not pass through: and it is that you apply your right index finger to the fundament, and insert a thin needle of bronze or iron into the fistula when there is no twisting.
And if it has twisting, then you insert a thread of thin flax, or a horse hair, until you feel the thread or the hair at your finger;
and if you do not feel it, and it does not come through by evacuation or flatulence or by vomiting, as we have said: Let it be that she does not perceive anything; if you hasten to cure.
And when the fistula is next to the bladder or next to the passage of urine, if it hurts the urine, and cannot be soothed by medicine.
If it is pierced next to the joint of the thigh, then the tendon comes near the bone; if there is no twisting and the invention of pain within, then it is that it has thus swelling, and not worth medicine nor soothing by application;
and in these fistulas next to, there is no cure except for work, and vanity of foolish surgeons who get involved.
In one that is not next to and is not ancient, there is hope of health through iron, as I have experienced, and it is that the patient puts between your hands on their back;
and he lifts his legs up to his thighs, and has his thighs inclined towards his stomach; then he pulls out a tenderness of the groin, or of the loin if there is a twisting, until you know where the tenderness comes from.
If the patient feels it in their gut, then you should put your second finger in, and then feel that the tenderness has been penetrated;
and if it is discovered where you feel between your fingers the liver or the flesh, then know that it is perforated; if one does not work on it, then it cannot be healed.
One can indeed heal some people well with it, but it happens rarely;
and the aid that one gives, if it is the cauterization subtle according to the width of the fistula, as it was previously stated; and thrust all hot into the fistula, as long as it comes from beneath the foundation; and do this two or three times, until you know that these fatty tissues are burned, which resemble a feather of a bird;
and then treat with wet tents in butter, until that fatty tissue is strengthened, then treat with a greasy ointment, and cauterizing and soldering.
If it is thus healed, it is good.
This thing, nothing else can be healed;
and if it has a tent between, and does not perforate just to the finger which is at the foundation, and between your finger and the tent a thick covering of flesh or of skin, and you see the fistula in this which shows the covering of the gut; if you cut at the beginning of the fistula, and thrust beforehand before the tent, and then cauterize afterwards, until it comes to the head of the tent; and the tendon will be freed, and will fall;
then I will show you those fallen and worn-out tissues that seem like a fragment of bone, and nothing remains.
And if the blood comes to an end, and cuts between you and the work, then cauterize it with fire or with a medical instrument.
For the fire cauterization assembles two bony things: it is to know, the joining of these fallen tissues, and the stoppage of blood and the drying of the moisture;
then treat the moist tendons with a poultice or in broken pieces, as long as the limbs give a sign, and force out the fallen tissues from the body;
then treat the wound of the dislocated joints with a dressing of hard material, and these are the dried medicines.
For when it is restored, then it is healthy and does not relapse.
And if a fistula comes near the bottom of the foundation, and it is separated from the body, then one must apply a poultice to the bottom or foundation, and inquire about that.
If you feel the tension, and between two is the web or the skin or flesh, or it is ready to pierce, if there is not a way of relief and hope, by the administration of one of the three methods:
or you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut near the bottom, or if you can put tents and cure as before;
and do not go too deep in the bottom, so that you do not cut the tendons that hold the foundation, and let the evacuations proceed according to natural intention; then cure it, as we have said;
then cure it, as we have said; by chance it will be healed, or you remove that covering and cleanse it after it has been cut from the bottom, either with a tent or with another suitable instrument; then anoint the wounded area with the fat that is in the wound, as much as you can; then study how to restore the wound, and to stop the fistula in the part against the foundation:
then study how to restore the wound, and to stop the fistula in the part against the foundation: if it is a lighter thing for the patient.
And some wounds are fistulas in this manner: and it is when you push the tent into the fistula, and it is or touches the bottom beneath the skin from above, if a thread takes hold at the head in this form: And I push the twisted thread into II, and push the tent with all the thread into the fistula until it is at the head.
If it passes through the margin of the bottom from within, then pull out the thread from that which has passed, so that you push your needle at the bottom;
and pull the head of the thread, and bring the two ends together, and hold one to the other, and let it go for a day or two;
and restrain it several times, until the thread cuts through the flesh that is between them, and separates them;
then treat the wound until it is cleaned and healed.
If the fistula does not penetrate, then make it penetrate in all the ways that you can, if the elbow is not too deeply affected. For it is not suitable to make an opening through the joint if it is too deep, and then treat it, as we have said, until it is healed.
The shape of the spinous spongy bone from which one makes the fistula is very sharp on one side and cutting; and on the other side not, because one does not cut what one should not cut, as you see here:
Morbidities are of two kinds: or they are within the foundation, like a grain of resin, and there are small and large ones, and sometimes with blood, and there is one or several, and they are at the bottom of the foundation and at the head of the foundation;
but those that are on the outside have little moisture, and sometimes with a bit of yellowish citrine or a bit of blood, and they have the color of the body;
and the treatment for those who have them within the foundation, is that you instruct the patient to squeeze himself to urinate in chambers, until the foundations issue forth, and the threads appear; if you hasten, and hold it with forceps, or you hold it on your nail, then cut it at its roots;
and if the ulcer cannot hold with its own moisture, then take it with a cloth, or a swab, or a piece of chamel cloth. and pull them apart with the hands, then cut them, and sprinkle above some hot powders that are suitable for cauterization; or you will cauterize them as it is said in the chapter on cauterization, then treat them with other treatments until they are healthy;
and if the foundations cannot be evacuated, then give the patient a harsh and bitter suppository to wash out what is in the foundation, so that it can come out openly; when the sickness has taken hold, and its roots are deep in the foundation, then the treatment is difficult;
when the sickness has taken hold, and its roots are deep in the foundation, then the treatment is difficult; and it is that you should take them with your nail or tongs, and cut them, then treat them as we have said, until they are healthy, and fear not the incision by iron. If it happens that you must treat the burn according to this method:
If it happens that you must treat the burn according to this method: Take the thread and twist it, and put it on a needle, and then pass the thread through and make the needle pierce from the other side, and turn the two parts of the thread around the needle, and let them be of equal length;
and pull the thread firmly, then knot the thread, and withdraw the needle, and do thus for all the others, and leave one to stop the excessive flow of blood;
then put on the bottom a moistened cloth dipped in oil or in cerate, and apply it to the bottom, and instruct the patient that he should rest;
and then let it be until it adheres, and when they will have adhered, then treat with oil and other treatments, until he is healed.
Dryness of the feet or foundation Many times there is dryness of the feet in the intestine, and by constraint of nature, and when the illness is old and medicine is not of value. It is necessary that you rest at the point of a spit or on one nail the dryness above, which does not let it be moist. then cure it as long as it is swollen as it is necessary;
and if it cannot be swollen, then begin the rubbing again stronger than before, until it bleeds much, and is dry; then cure it as long as it is bleeding.
of a tremor Furuncle is a small faulty appearance in the body, and goes much deep within;
and sometimes it pierces the flesh, and one feels it as if dead from a tremor, and it comes into the whole body, and more to the hands than other parts.
And the treatment is that you take a vein from a wing of a goose, or a wing of a strong culture, and put that vein on the forehead, so that the circles surround the forehead entirely; then turn your hand around the vein so that you bind everything around the forehead, and put it in the background, and clear the forehead of its roots.
And if you see, make this from a vein of copper or iron in the same form, and let it be subtle beneath and drawn above; Nor pierce, for it will cause pain, and cause pressure.
And if you see, then cauterize the forehead, as it is described in the chapter on cauterization.
Sometimes they make a cluster of silver or gold, or of melted copper or wire mesh;
and sometimes they make some of these instruments small and large, according to what they are used for. These then are used in the treatment of children and those who are weak and suffering, and are small.
These then are used in the treatment of children and those who are weak and suffering, and are small. The shape of the small and large cluster is spread wide, where the belly is tied in this manner:
and it has a separation where the belly is tied, as you see, and the flesh is pierced within;
and it has on one of its sides two perforations, and on the other one;
and the belly or bag is made with medicines of a beast's bladder or of parchment, and is pierced all around with many small perforations, and has between each perforation one thread of space, then sews into these perforations a strong thread of twisted cord in X shape or twisted around, and assembles the belly like a sieve; and when the medicine is inside, then apply a bandage in front with a strong thread, then give an enema;
and this is the shape of a circle:
And let the medicine be neither too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the enema with oil or with egg yolk, or a similar thing, then insert it gently; then press the minister's hands together, as long as it is all seen, then remove the enema, and lift the patient's legs to their chest, and if the medicine wants to come out, hold back as long as he can; and if he sleeps a night through, it is even greater aid.
And if you give an enema for a disease of bowel decay, and the medicine hastens to come out, then repeat it until he is healthy.
And if the morbid matter is in the foundation, or in the abscess, it should be as subtle as for a child;
and this is the form of the subtle cluster where the skin is tight:
We have already spoken in the section on the treatment of wounds;
now we will tell you about the treatments with hands and medicine, according to completion.
I say that wounds are diverse according to what they are made of, and according to the limbs or wounds that are affected, and of what they are made.
The things by which wounds are made are the throwing of stones, and the cutting of swords and knives, or of lances or clubs or arrows, or similar things;
or that are made according to the limbs of the body, such as a wound that strikes on the neck, or on the head, or the foot, or the belly, or the liver, and similar members;
and I will tell you the treatment of each wound, and begin with simple head wounds, for the memory will come in its chapter.
I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, take care if it's an injury of stone or similar things, and the skin is entirely broken and the wound is large, and you suspect slightly an abscess of heat: if the wound is so much worse from the head injury that if it comes with a little blood from the wound, and the blood is on the contrary side of the injured part;
and forbid the patient excess of wine and of coarse meats.
And if he does not want to bleed, his food should be diminished, and he should not drink wine, nor eat any meat;
and put on the wound, if abscesses or ulcers come, cotton moistened in rose oil or in tightening wine;
and if there is no hot abscess, then put on the wound, if it is fresh with all its blood, and it has not been moved by air, powder, which I will discuss a little later;
and if the blood has been moved, then put on some ointments, as long as it is healthy.
And if the wound is large like that of a sword and similar, and the lips cannot be assembled by themselves with tape, then assemble them by stitching, as I will describe for wounds of the belly, concerning stitching.
If the wound is uncovered to the bone, and it is narrow, and does not hold except for a little, then cover it; After the cure of the wound with medicine, and restoring the flesh on the skin, instruct the patient to eat coarse foods, such as toasted and roasted meat, like pork, and similar things.
And if you find decayed skin, and it does not adhere to the bone, then cut away all the decayed part, and apply force, then treat the wound.
and if an artery is in the wound or vein, without cutting, and it cannot be staunched with medicine, seek out the artery, and if you find it dislocated, then tie it with a thread. and if this does not help, then cauterize it.
And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light: and it is that you put in this powder which dries just as the arsenic treats the wound.
And the method of the powder is thus: Take a part of incense; blood of dragon two parts; living salts three parts, and powder subtly, and apply to the wound, and extract warmly, until it is well joined and united with all its blood;
and then bind it well, and leave it unbound, so it does not swell; for one should not remove the medicine until it is healed.
And sometimes one makes this with salts alone, when one does not have incense or blood of dragon, but that the arsenic has not moved the wound.
And if the arsenic has moved the wound, mix it in this way, then do not put any of this powder;
but put on some digestive ointments, or poultices of barley flour made with water and honey, until it is entirely healed; Then heal other healings as long as he is healthy.
And if a bone breaks with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with subtle pinces.
and I will tell you later about the fractures of the head.
of the wound of the neck
If a wound comes to the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between it and that of the head, but if the nerves of the neck or the artery is cut.
If it's the nerves, do not attempt any other treatment, and do not apply anything constricting, for it harms the nerves and causes them to retract. and do not put anything cold on the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold, and their connection is with the brain, which is the highest member.
But let the medicine be soothing, as if warm water is poured into sweet oil, and mixed with rose oil, and warm water is poured also into sweet oil, and other stones of mines according to this manner, and moistenings are applied.
And if the wound is large, then sew it with bandages, then treat it until it is healed.
And if the wounds are deep and it is hairy and full of pus, then prick or pierce lower down;
and if the artery is cut, and a flow of blood comes, then dissect, and ligate, and cauterize, it is the work of;
and if the vein of the throat is cut, or the artery, and the conduits are blocked, through which the food goes, then sew the artery to the rope of the throat, and do not touch the throat but reset it according to its natural shape; and then hold it in place, and let it rest for some days, then treat it with bandages until it is healed;
and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, thus the cartilage; and if it has broken bones, thus the fractured parts you will treat, and that which you cannot treat, leave until the wound suppurates, and is cleansed and freed of its discharge;
and if the wound is fresh, then powder on the powder that I have spoken of. And if there is bone in the wound and it has a fistula, then treat it as I have said in its chapter.
If it is a blow of a lance or of a knife, and the wound is deep, then consider from the wound what symptoms the patient has: Know then that the wound is mortal;
and if it is not deep, and it is fresh with all its blood, do not put powder on it in the first hour, nor bind it with the blood that remains deep, and returns to the heart, and kills the patient; but I put on an attractive ointment, and bind it twice a day;
and if you do not have ointment, put in the wound much cotton to suck out the moisture, and make the patient sleep on the wound three days, or four, or more; if there does not come a spasm, or trembling of the heart, nor strangulation of the limbs; and when you see the bones in their proper place, know then that the wound is healed. Heal then the teeth and other healings, as long as they are sound;
and if she cannot heal, and open, then know that it is a fistula;
if the treatment is as one ought. And if the wound is an incision of a sword or a knife, and it is simple, or in the thigh or on the back, then the treatment of that which is in front; if it is large, with stitching;
and if it is small, with powder, and if it is pressed into the bone, and in a mass of fragments, thus cauterize the wound, and apply dressings if they are disjointed; and if they are not disjointed, then let the wound suppurate, which will alleviate the extraction;
and for other wounds of other limbs, the judgment is as we have said.
of rupture of the belly
The ruptures of the belly are great and soft and small;
from the large wound often comes out the intestine, or the nerves of the intestines, due to which is the intrusion of the guts;
and the stitching is more troublesome, and often worse than the small wound that of the large one, because one puts back into place the intestines with more care, lest they be put back in a state of disorder;
because the intestine swells as soon as it feels the cold, if they are put back with more care, and for this reason the inner wound is worse, because one puts back the intestine to its place before the others;
And it is known that the rupture of the belly is in four manners:
the two common stitches have a place in the stitching of the belly, and the stitching of the other wounds of the body and the other proper stitches are common to the other wounds;
and all of them are more prone to the injury of the belly, and I will tell and declare each one.
I say that when the wound is small, and any part of the intestine comes out, and it's a grievous thing to put back, it is done by one of the two methods: or because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is weakened by the cold.
And when it is chilled, warm it in this manner: dampen a sponge or the belly with warm water moderately, or you heat in warm water and decoction of cypress and thyme, and rub the intestine as long as the weakness is removed;
and sometimes do these constraining wines, and it's wonderful that they relieve by disinflaming.
And when you see the intestine departing, if it is mixed with water or oil and the wounds are poorly healed, for by this the entrance is alleviated a little of the thing;
and if it cannot enter, then make a little wound at the instrument from which one takes the hemorrhoids;
and the first treatment is to change the cut, that we should not cut without great necessity or need;
and these are the instruments for cutting:
if it cuts within the body and does not cut outside, and see the shape: And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestine jumps out, then put it back in its natural place according to its proper form, if you have the power to do so, for this is of great value.
When the wound is large, and it is in the lower part near the belly, then it is necessary that you make the patient lie on their back, and put their legs higher than their head; and if it is in the part below the belly, then put the head and the chest higher than the parts below, and also if the rupture of the belly is in one of the two parts then adjust it so that the injured part is higher than the other;
and thus it is necessary to administer what I say in large and minor wounds.
For small wounds put that which is prepared on you, then take it between your hands and apply the ointment that you have made to all the rupture with your hand, and bring together the lips;
and this is the common manner of stitches, and it is that you take a needle or several, according to the quantity of the width of the wound, then leave at the head of the wound the thread of two fingers, and attach a needle where it has a strong thread; and pierce the two sides of the leather with the two sides of the suture, which is beneath the inner leather, until you make it pierce from that part, and bring together the two ends of the suture to the four ends assembled;
Then strain through a double thread within the needle of two parts, then assemble the two edges of the wound together, and then let the suture tighten, and fix another needle.
Then thread the second thread as you did the first needle, and do not stop doing this according to your skill with needles, until the entire wound is restrained.
and let the needles be moderate, between fine and coarse, for fine needles take all the flesh, and those that are too coarse cannot enter well: for this reason it is fitting that they be moderate;
and it is not fitting to put the needles too far from the flesh and through the skin, so they do not take and open the wound before the suture;
and then cut the heads of the needles, so they do not bother the patient while sleeping, and put tents or dressings on the heads of the needles to hold them in place, and leave them until the wound is healed;
and this manner of treatment is more suitable for small wounds, for it only requires a needle or two.
The second treatment is common, and it is that you should assemble the two parts of the skin and the two parts of the fascia together with a needle or that it has one strong middle thread;
and when you have pierced these pieces all four together, then return the needle to the part where you began, in the manner that one sews clothes;
and put a space between each stitch the thickness of a little finger;
This stitching is suitable for a man, and I sewed a wound that a man had in his belly, which was injured by a blow, and the wound was more than a palm in width, and it gushed out intestines as much as two palms, and the wound was in the middle of the belly.
I retrieved the intestine after it had been outside for 23 hours, and the wound was sewn up to the 15th day, and I treated it, and it became healthy.
And the doctors had judged that he would die, and this was a miracle;
and I did not treat him with ointment, because I was in a place where none could be found, nor any medicine; and I applied cotton to the wound more than twice a day, and washed it with warm water until he was healthy.
Now I will tell you the two proper methods of suturing:
take the needle, and pass it through the part from the outside to the inside;
when it has pierced the skin from straight to straight, then leave the head of the thread at the suture or where you inserted the needle, and make it pierce another part of the flesh from inside to outside;
and the understanding of this suture is that you sew as well as the felt maker makes the felts, and that you leave once the seam of one side, and take it up from the other, until the suture is entirely completed.
The second manner of suturing, which the Gauls call their own, is thus: as some do, who assemble the two parts together naturally, and apply one edge of the seam to the other edge, in a similar way:
Fix a needle or head of the thread to the middle of the flesh, and make it pierce that same flesh, and leave the two edges of the seam. Then turn the needle, and make it pierce from the upper part just to the inner skin, at the two edges of the seam;
Then make it pierce one and the other from the upper part just to the inner skin, at the two edges of the thread that are on the other stitched side;
and it is the worst manner of fracture and the most common.
Galen says that if this symptom is shown, and no other is indicated, then one should cauterize the belly with two needles, where there is thread in each;
and one must push one needle from one side, and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew together torn things;
and it is known that when the rupture is in the middle of the belly, then the stitching is more grievous than in other places of the belly.
The judgment of the wound is such as the judgment of other wounds:
and it is that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, and the artery has moved, then put back the intestine, and the gut;
then apply the powder of birthwort, and if the artery has moved, put on some ointment that is suitable, until the wound heals; and pull the thread, and let the vein be sucked, and the mucus; then treat the wound as with the others, until it is healed;
and if you have no medicine, apply on top, just as one begins to apply goose grease, cotton wool, and rub it in twice a day until it is healed;
For you have no need for other medicine in many treatments when the wounds are simple;
and if you doubt that the wound will not become connected to the main members, then it is necessary that you soften the leg with oil of tempered warmth, or with rose oil, and apply it between the ankles, and detach from the armpits;
and if there is pain or swelling in the belly, and it often happens, then they are given a cluster of black wine, and similarly if the swelling reaches the intestine;
and it pierces within, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
The intestine which is called "jeune" cannot heal when it is wounded, and this is because of the abundance of veins that are there, and the delicacy of the entire body, and the proximity of its nature to the kidneys.
And if the suture is healthy from the wound, then it is put back together like the intestine, while it is fresh;
and if it is old and becomes turned towards black or blue, then you must take away the black part, so that the evacuation of blood does not come, for there are veins and arteries;
then cut what is between the ligament, and put the two bones hanging from the part below the wound until the end to alleviate the extraction when the suture is made, and the wound is closed.
Of the treatment of the swelling
When the intestine is wounded, and the wound is small, it can be restored in some men, because I have seen that a man was wounded or pierced in the belly with a lance;
and the wound was on the right of the stomach, and it became inflamed and developed into a fistula, and thus stopped the digestion and the flatulence;
I applied a remedy according to what I could, and did not cease to treat subtly until he was healthy, and his limbs were sound.
And when I saw him sound, I doubted that the sickness was not bad in his belly; and he had no pain, but remained in better disposition, and eating and drinking;
and some experimenters said that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it must be bound in a certain manner: Take the frenum with large teeth, then assemble the lips of the wound, and when the frenum has covered the mouth, put it between the two lips, so that it constricts its mouth upon;
and then cut the head, and this holds so that it cannot come undone, then put another frenum afterwards in the same manner as before, until the wound is all closed up; and cut the wound.
This head sticks in the intestine, and brings no harm to the patient, and one can tie the intestine with a subtle thread that is cut from the intestine of a beast, in this manner:
Take the head of this thread of intestine that is very clean, and then tie to the head of this thread the thread of flax subtle twisted, then put the thread in the needle, and sew the intestine, and put it back into the gut;
and this manner of treatment of fevers is not outside of the path of confidence and hope;
and if the wound is great and large, especially when it is in one of the intestinal gravel, if there is no ingen or health, then comes subtlety.
of a fistula or whichever it may be Be aware that every wound or abscess, when it suppurates, is called universally "fistula", and especially when it is hollow and has a cavity.
And a fistula is according to the true notion a false and hard and white node, where one does not feel pain, and is as hollow as the bone of a bird;
and sometimes in a clear and hollow place, and other times in a thick one; sometimes little, and other times enough;
and I have spoken about it in the division of wounds, that every wound that is not healed, and it has no cartilage, this is not except by one of the VIII causes: it is to know, through the smallness of the wound or the body; or because of its malice; or because it has hard cartilage within and on the lips, which does not allow cartilage to grow; or it has too much bone; or the limbs are rotten, and the material is of bad quality; or the medicine is not good in the treatment; or because the corruption is a kind of pestilence; or because the property in the region has slow digestion, and slow healing, and is weakened by nature; or it has veins or bones:
and I have already shown all these causes, and the symptoms, and the treatments of medicines in the division.
It is suitable that I make you know the treatment of fistula which is made by work of hands.
Know that fistula has occurred in all members of the body; for there are fistulas that come to the large veins, and to the arteries, and to the kidneys, or to the diaphragm, or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to some of the ribs, or to the spine of the back, or to any joint of the hands or feet; and if it happens that it comes to the property of the principal member, and similar things.
And all the fistulas that are of this kind are of grievous affliction, and there is no lack of labor, and ignorance;
and if it has any fistula that does not come near the place I have spoken of, and you have confidence in the cure, and you consider it, take a probe of iron or steel, if the fistula is straight, if it seeks;
and if the fistula is twisted, seek it with a subtle probe of lead, because the leads bend easily around the twist;
and if the fistula has multiple openings and you cannot well search it with probes, then cleanse it through one of the openings, for the mucus flows from one opening to another, and purifies;
then feel it gently with your finger, to see if there is bone or nerve, and if it is excavated in the depth, and ask the patient well about the pain they feel when you press with your hand, and the place where they feel it;
and when you truly know the place where it is, and if it is far from a joint, or a nerve, or an artery, or a vein, or in any of the places that I have told you, then cut according to what I have told you, and remove the faulty and corrupted flesh that is within;
and then the cure as long as it is healthy, and if the fistula is well perforated straight through, then you must cut deeply as much as you can, then put moist tents with sharp medicine, and push them just to the head of the fistula, until the medicine corrodes the superfluous flesh that remains at the bottom;
and then I put oil on healthy skin, as long as it is healthy;
and if it is not healthy by that, then cauterize as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, then cut it.
If a vein or sinew does not hinder or harm the principal members, as we have said;
and if the bone is uncovered, and there is corruption and blackness, then remove it as long as the corruption is entirely removed, then treat the things that are gangrenous until it is healthy;
and if it is not healthy, and an abscess bursts as before, know that you are not near a cure:
if it becomes uncovered and seek as long as you are at the bottom, and remove all the corruption, then restore the limb;
and if it is thus healthy, that's good. If this is not so, know that the corruption is too deep, that you cannot reach it; if there is no other remedy than to let nature take its course;
and if there is a small corrupted bone, and you can draw it out with forceps, use an instrument suitable for this purpose, and if there are many bones, draw them out one by one, do not leave any behind;
and if moisture makes it contrary, and there is no error or fear, then cauterize and moisten and heat, and release the bones.
And if you cannot remove them in one hour, then put on the wound a warm poultice, and let it stay until the limbs are rotten around the bones, and then they will be easier to extract the bones;
and if it's a large bone, such as the thigh or leg, then raise only the rotten part until the blackness is all bony, then restore the wound;
and if there is a large part of the corruption, and it comes just to the marrow of the bone; then it is necessary to cut and scoop out all the way to the corrupted part, and then treat it until it is clean;
and I will tell you of a fistula that happened to a man in his leg, so that you may take example and aid in your work.
He was a young man around thirty years old, who had a pain in his leg from a cause that came from inside the body, so that the humors came to the leg, and it became inflamed with a large abscess, and there was no need to open it.
but the doctors in their foolishness opened it so much that the abscess burst open, and a lot of humors flowed out, and it became a fistula, and many openings came that discharged both bowel and body moisture;
and many doctors treated the cure for two years, and there was no wise man in the art of hands, so that I was called, and I saw his leg and the medicines with which he was being treated, and what flowed out through the openings from his body; and the body of the young man became red, and had a yellowish color.
I touched a tendon in one of these perforations, and then searched all the perforations, and found that one vein came against the other from all parts of the leg.
I then hastened, and cut into one of the perforations as long as I discovered a part of the bone, and found it corrupted and pierced, and the corruption came just to the bone within;
I cleaned that which appeared to me of the corrupted bone, and believed that there was no other corruption, except for that which I had removed;
and began to treat the wound with soothing medicines for a long time, and could not suture;
and then began again, and discovered the bone as before, and found the corruption continued in the bone, and cleaned it, and then removed it, and prepared to suture the wound; but I did not touch the inner part of the bone with my hand, and I pulled it back with all its mass, then I restored it with medicines; and it was healed and repaired quickly, and no longer needed to interrupt the work because of the weakness of the patient, who could not suffer, and because of the fear of death that I had for him. For by the evacuation of blood often, but it was entirely healed, and a hard crust formed on the bone, and was of good disposition and had no nuisance nor discomfort from all of it, neither to eat nor to come.
And if a bone is broken in any part of the body, then it should be treated in this manner: take the bandage, and hold the head of the bone that is dislocated, and instruct him to stretch it upwards; and put another bandage on the thigh thicker than the first one, and tie it above the bone that is outside the hip, and stretch the skin, so that you draw the corrupt flesh to the lower part, and discover the flesh on the limb where you see the sore, so that the sore does not touch the flesh;
and put a piece of cloth or a pad behind the bone to support the corrupt flesh;
and it is necessary to show as much as one can see and feel the corruption, and sometimes even more.
And if the bone is corrupted and does not appear, and the corruption is in the middle or in one part, then uncover the entire flesh;
then put a cloth behind, and then show from one part to the other the corruption, and let the surgeon be guided by the length of the corruption, as we have said;
and if the corruption is in the joint, then cut out the corrupted joint, and be the bone or it contains from the other part;
and if the corruption is in the connection of the two joints, then do not cut except for the part that is gangrenous;
and if the corruption is in the knuckle of the hand, or in the knuckle of the foot, it is a very strong thing, but nevertheless it is necessary that you inquire into this corrosion, as it appears to you; and clean it in all the ways that you can, but so that the vein or the nerve do not make a counter condition;
and know that the cutting and the bones to be cut are many, according to the size of the bones and the appearance of the bones, and their thickness and thinness, and their largeness and smallness, and their hardness; and for this reason it is necessary to prepare each instrument for its similar work;
and be aware that the work will show you the instrument that you will need, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the manners of the diseases; if you prepare the instrument that you need according to what is necessary for it.
The head may dislocate either from an internal cause or from a cause of heat;
and when you have treated that corrosion with the cure of medicines, and they do not profit, then it is necessary to amputate that member up to where the corrosion comes, so that the patient escapes either from death or from evil, which is greater, the defect of the member;
and the signs are that the members become black, as if they were burned by fire, and after the blackness, there comes a corruption of member into member, and it takes over the whole body;
If you hasten to the copper, and it is due to the percussion of certain venomous beasts, such as the sea scorpion and viper and similar things, if the corrosion is at the head of the pain, then anoint the copper, and do not give space for coming near the hand.
And if it comes near the hand, anoint the copper at the joint, so that the corrosion does not reach up to the arm;
and if it reaches the arm, anoint the copper on the elbow;
and if it passes the elbow, it is death, and there is no remedy stronger than the quantity of its virtue;
and do this for everything when the corrosion reaches the foot: if it reaches the first joint, anoint the copper after the next joint;
and if it reaches the foot, anoint the entire foot; and if it rises to the knee, then cut at the joint of the kneecap.
and if it comes from above the knee, then there is no other remedy except to leave the patient to death;
and the manner of cutting or of sawing the member is that you tie it above and below, and stretch one of your servants with the lower limb, and another servant with the upper limb, and you cut the flesh which is between the two limbs to a spatula wide, until the bone is exposed;
then cut or saw, and put on each part a dressing of linen, so that the saw does not touch the healthy flesh, and comes to the patient another injury and a new abscess.
And if a flow of blood comes when you make an incision, then cauterize the flesh immediately, or apply some powders that restrain.
Then return to your medicine until it is accomplished, then bind the injured limb with a suitable bandage, and treat it until it is healthy;
and I will tell you what happened to the man in his dream:
a blackness appeared to him which seemed to be a burning of fire, and this corruption first came into his right foot, until it had taken over the whole foot;
and when the man saw the corruption, he quickly amputated the foot, and was cured;
and long time after, the corruption returned to the right hand, and he came to me, and I applied to him things that push back after the purification of the body, and I could not stop the corroisons;
and he wanted me to amputate his hand, but I refused, because I had hope of pushing back the matter; and I doubted that if I cut his arm, he would not die, for the virtues of the man were weak;
and he despaired of that, and returned to his land, and hastened to cure his arm, and was healthy;
and I have not seen it told elsewhere that because of this one should make another part, which is in the craft.
Sometimes an abscess comes to the flesh and stays for so long that it makes a large gathering of pus; and then breaks and bursts, and out comes the pus, and stays in the body useless, like a vessel; and the skin that is detached is as thin as a delicate cloth, and does not touch the bone, nor the nerve, and such an illness is called "sain", and not called "fistule";
but if it is so prolonged that it comes right up to the bone in depth, then it is called "fistula";
and the skin is such that you must cut around the whole wound, and likewise when it is subtle, like a delicate cloth; and does not heal because of its corruption.
And if you think that the skin will heal, and the corruption is not deep, and the skin is thick with flesh, then treat it with a cluster:
look if the sins are large, and the belly that is in it is of foul odor, then administer the cluster of Egyptian medicine which is thus made: take aquillity, and oil, and litharge, equally, and put the wound in a vessel over the fire, until the medicine becomes red, and becomes as thick as honey;
and then take from the seat according to necessity, and make it in a strait and in the middle, and narrow the body, and hold the buttocks; and let the medicine be in for 2 hours, then strain while squeezing;
do this many times, until the breasts are reduced, and the pus is removed;
and sometimes the straining is of narrowness from ashes, when this medicine is not present, and it is that you take ashes of the trunk of a vine, and throw narrow ones above, then filter, and strain, until you know that the breasts are well reduced;
and if the patient cannot suffer it, nor the Egyptian medicine nor the narrowness of ashes, then strain with narrowness and middle where it has a little bit of powdered litharge; You anoint with honey and mixed wine, that the honey has properties of purifying and washing, and the wine makes the blood rise.
and when you have done this, and you have ascertained that the blood is well purified, then you anoint with what creates birth of flesh in it, and you take a plaster made with definite gum, and make it with rose oil and wine;
or you anoint it with certain medicines and oils, of which I have spoken the properties or treatment of the oils;
and if the hole in the breast is small, and the cane of the instrument cannot enter, then enlarge it a little with a metal file, and put on it a string of Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment, until it is enlarged;
and if the wound is too large, then sew and leave only as much of it open as the instrument can enter, and if the hole that the bowel is in is above or below where it should be.
and if you cannot cover the belly as you wish, then prepare it in such a way that the bowel runs to the lowest place it is, for when the bowel is deep, do not let it protrude outside and if you cannot cover the belly as you wish, then prepare it in such a manner: that the bowel may run lightly downward, and do not leave anything of the bowel;
that the bowel may run lightly downward, and do not leave anything of the bowel; and take consolidating medicines to put on the wound, and apply a linen cloth that covers the entire wound; then cover the forces of the wound on the right side of the belly a little larger than before, then apply ointment softly on another cloth according to the quantity of the wound, and put it on the wound of the belly to alleviate it, and do not remove the large cloth outside except after many days once;
and he who is above the navel of the back, often breaks to break the bowel, and knows what comes from the bowel, if it is venom or poison or enough, or digested, or undigested;
and take warning if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine is extended in such a manner and you see the nature that moves above the navel of the back, then know that the sins are open, and approach the sinews;
and then loosen it in the morning, or the third day, and when you loosen the wound, if you change the other dressing, and renew the application of oil.
And if subtle poisons cut after long tension, do not despair of the health, for the sinews approach.
For there are men whose tardiness in applying remedies to their wounds, and of those who do the opposite;
and if his navel is indigestible salt after many days, it knows that the breasts are not in agreement;
and if the breasts are slow to agree, and it is prolonged, then we add dry medicines moist in substance and dry in virtue, such as diafinit ointment, for there is a large part of vitriol, and this is the last medicine;
take diafinit ointment, and make it with rose oil, and the extract of old wine equal in substance;
then prepare the conserve and use it;
and this same mixture makes a sweet cooked unguent, when diafinit ointment is not present, or you take myrrh and aloe and incense, and grind it, and powder it on the honey when it is over the fire;
and then apply a plaster, and spread it on the breast, and sometimes administer to them a long aristologist, and roots of celestial herbs, which is as fine as flour of vetches and centaury; and in the use of simple or compound medicines: grind them, and make into powder, and put on the honey that I mentioned, and use;
and if the treatment is prolonged, and it is not cured by this treatment, then know that the corruption is deep-seated, and makes an impression on the bone, or on the hard members, or on the limbs; if it is a matter of treating a fistula, as we have said before.
Painful swelling is an abscess that arises beneath the fingernail of the hand, or of the foot, or by accident arises in other toes;
and when it is inflamed, and no care is taken, then an abscess comes, and a painful swelling that grows as much as it grows to the root of the finger, and by chance it corrupts the whole;
and there comes corrosion to the bone, as far as there is foul-smelling pain, and the head of the sore is wide, and the color is dark brown.
When you treat it as we have said in the section, and the treatment does not profit at all, then it is necessary that you cut with iron all the excess flesh that remains of the finger, then cauterize the wound afterwards. Cautery is great aid if the bone is healthy and the fingernail is sound.
and if the fingernail presses on the flesh and causes discomfort, and swelling, then it is necessary that you put under the fingernail a pointy instrument that touches the flesh, and push upwards, and cut the flesh subtly and lightly, and apply to the remaining flesh burning and corrosive medicines to remove everything; Then heal the joints as long as they are healthy.
And if the corrosion is in the bone, chop it off, and apply force, for as long as the bone is corrupted, it cannot heal;
and if you see the decay spreading, cut it off in the same way as it was said before, then heal it as long as it is healthy;
and if it is broken and swollen, and it causes great pain, then it is necessary that you heal it first;
then cut the narrow part of the spatula with a sharp cutting tool across, and beware that the cut does not reach the flesh that is beneath the nail, for the patient would feel too great pain;
and if it happens, put something on it to soothe it.
The two bones that grow in the hands of some men by accident are all cartilaginous, and by accident one has them where there are bones, and sometimes one has a nail, and none of these grow from the root of the joint, or their growth is in some of the bones of the fingers.
Those that grow on one of the knuckles do not move, and those that grow at the knuckle joint, by accident, do move;
the size of the one that is cartilaginous is slight, in a thin manner: size it at its root to a wide spatulum.
Those that grow at the root of the joint are grievous to cure: if you hold it with copper.
In that which grows on the knuckle of the last finger, it is necessary that you first cut away the flesh down to the bone, then cut the bone to a suitable size for that, then cure it until it is healthy.
The sudden condition that comes to both together comes from birth, or from a sudden wound, or from a burn of fire, or from similar things.
If it happens that you must treat the sudden condition, then you should repair it according to its natural forms; then put between two moist cloths or towels soaked in rose oil, so that they do not become inflamed; or you put between two subtle pieces of soft cloth, as long as the member is swollen, if it is necessary.
If sudden swelling comes to one of them with the palm, then treat that swollen area as it is necessary.
Ulcers are coarse, swollen veins full of melancholic superfluities, that come to many parts of the body;
and they occur more often in the legs of those who walk and work and carry loads, than in others.
It is necessary then that you administer sometimes purging of bile, and then the blood of the basilisk.
The treatment of iron is according to two methods: One is where they are cut, and the black blood is drawn out; and the other method is that you open the vein, and draw it all out.
The cutting is according to this method: raise the first the thigh of a warm and very wet dressing, so that the thick blood becomes subtle, then pull the thigh of the patient from above the knee to the part above the knee joint;
then cut the vein in one of the joints, or in two or in three, with a large incision, then elevate and draw out the black blood to your hand, from one end to the other, as much blood as the virtue of the patient can suffer;
and then the liver, and instruct it to paint itself with black ink of gall.
and recommend evacuation and bloodletting when the veins are full, and annoy the patient.
The elevations of it are in this manner: raise the leg of the patient, if it has many hairs, then put it in a bath, and raise the leg to hot water as long as it becomes red, and swell the veins;
and if you do not have a bath, heat it with fire, and then apply it directly to the vein of the length at the head of the groin, or in the area below the knee;
then open the skin at the ankle, and scratch the vein from each part, as far as it appears when one feels it;
and then it becomes red and black, and when it enters the skin it seems also like a white cord;
then cut the redundant skin, as long as it is elevated from the skin, and then anoint it lightly with oil, then cover it in another skin above, for three days;
then scratch the skin above the vein until it appears, then lift it with the razor, as you have done, and anoint it with another ointment, as you have done previously;
then cut another strip, or several if you are skilled in the profession, then lift it, and cover it with two fingers, then pull and lift it until the second incision;
then extract it piece by piece, as long as it is completely loose, then cover it;
and if you cannot pull and lift it, then thread a strong double needle with thread, and lift and pull it, and cut underneath the skin, and turn your hand from one side to the other, until it comes out; and guard that she does not stumble, for if she stumbles, one cannot draw it out or lift it, and it becomes harmful to the patient;
and when you have drawn it all out, then put on the place of the wound a moistened linen in wine and in rose oil; and heal it until it is healthy.
And if the skin is contracted and twisted and wrapped up together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you should gently stretch it, but do not cover it; and treat it as we have previously stated.
The shape of the iron with which one cuts the skin is curved, and does not cut, so that it does not cut the vein;
and is of a thick curvature, for if it were thin, it would cut the vein, but it should be thick as we have said, and this is its shape:
This vein is inflamed in the legs, in warm areas where no herbs or trees grow, and on land where there is no moisture;
and by chance it grows in another part besides the legs, and this comes from the decay that rises from beneath the skin, just as it comes from within the body of creeping and worms, inflamed between skin and flesh.
And the sign of the beginning of this vein is that it comes in the leg a great inflammation, then its place changes, and the vein starts to come out, just like a root of a plant.
When the wound opens, it is necessary that you wrap around a piece of plaster one and a half inches thick, and the knot, and leave the plaster on the leg, and every time that it becomes loose at the bottom, then rewrap the plaster, and the knot;
and if it is too long, then cut off a part of it, and wrap the remainder, and do not touch it at its root, until it is completely removed; for if you cut it, then it enters into the flesh, and causes an abscess and putridness in the limb, and a very bad disease;
for which thing it is necessary that it be treated little by little until the end, and nothing remains in the body;
and it happens sometimes with this vein when it is treated for the disease of the lungs, or of the chest, and a man comes to me, from whom it issues from the chest, and when you cut it, then push the pipe or the perforation, and pierce it until the bottom, so that everything goes out;
and let the matter that is inside be emptied, and apply to the limb medications that promote putridness for no day, then treat it as with abscesses.
And often at this vein there are pains and aches, and similarly when it opens in the joint of the foot, or the foot itself, and many injuries come from it, and hence the pain increases;
Cure the ills then as we have said before.
of worms that are born between skin and flesh This illness is called in our land "cattle disease", because it often affects cattle, and is a small worm that is born between skin and flesh, and travels throughout the body rising and falling, and can be felt well when moving from limb to limb, until it breaks through the skin where it appears, and causes fever;
and is caused by purulence of certain humors, such as come worms and snakes and earthworms and intestinal worms in the belly;
and one doubts its wickedness, for when it travels through the body, and it rises to the head, and it comes to the eye, by chance enters, and destroys the eye; and this happens many times.
When you see it healed and treated, one cannot believe the way it was:
it is necessary then that you tie the limb above and below with a strong string tightly, then cut above and treat the wound, and if the verse has gone deep into the flesh, and you do not find it, cauterize it with fire, until it dies;
and the greater harm that it does, is that it corrupts the eye, as we have said;
and if you see it coming near the head to the eye, hold back from him the eyelid strongly, then cut above, and treat the wound;
and it is necessary to use on the patient a treatment of bodily medications that loosen the bad humid matters, and beware of greasy food which causes putrefaction.
of the pain which comes from flatulence This illness is called in our land "vakirir", and is a pain that comes in some members, and then moves from member to member;
and I see what I tell you. I was called to a sick woman, and she showed me her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm;
and shortly after, I saw it move up as a worm to the shoulder, swifter than anything, like living silver when it moves from one place to another;
the pain departs from that place, and settles in the shoulder, and then a little while after runs throughout the whole body, until it comes into the other arm;
then she told me that it would turn often around the body, as I had seen it.
I was greatly astonished at how it moved from member to member, for I had never seen this disease in this manner. Nevertheless, I had seen many cases where they moved well with pain from one limb to another, but I had not seen it in this way, as I saw it in the woman;
and I thought that it was because the woman had a dry body and uncovered veins, and for this reason appeared that constrained wind;
and it did not appear according to this reason in those who are delicate, and who have moist bodies and full veins.
And when you treat this disease, and the patient feels that pain, it appears as we have said, if the tongue is lifted up and down hastily, and then cut into it as long as that constrained wind presses on the liver; and cauterize the limb;
and if you do not see it with your eyes, then treat what cures the swollen intestines, such as foul-smelling pills, and pills of serpent's head, and similar others.
The arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and according to the limbs of the body where they stick.
The diversity of them is that there are some which have large points, and small, and barbed, and jagged; and of those which have two edges, and of those which are long, and of those in which there are fragments;
and that which sticks in no member sticks according to two manners: or in a principal member it sticks, such as brain, heart, liver, lung, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar members. When it falls then in any place of these limbs, and the sign of death, which I will tell you later, appears: if it happens that you warn about the extraction of this arrow, because death comes after in many cases; and when a bad sign does not appear to me, and the arrow is not deeply embedded, then I extract it, and treat the wound.
And the sign of the brain when the arrow falls and pierces the bone, and jumps the thread which is on the brain, is when there is confusion and noise and vertigo and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasm and permixtion of understanding, and vomiting of bile; and by chance it is without force to the nostrils, or to the ears; and by chance it affects the speech and the voice; and it jumps from the white moist wound resembling a boil, and it jumps also like a piece of flesh;
and let this be a sign to you, if you hold back from the treatment, and pull out the arrow if it is not inside.
The signs of the arrow when it falls to the heart, are that it is near the left breast, and it feels as if it was fixed in a hard thing, not in an empty space; and by chance the arrow moves like the boil, and cuts out black blood, and brings on coldness and a cold sweat, and fainting: be aware then without doubt that death will follow.
And the signs of the arrow that breaks the thigh bone are that without great effort it jumps out of the wound, and the throat is swollen, and the patient changes color, and breathes deeply and seeks the cold air.
And if the arrowhead remains in the covering of the thigh, then it is lodged between the small ribs; and causes great suffering and great pain and shortness of breath; and it moves all the members of the shoulders.
And if the arrowhead remains in the stomach, by chance, then it jumps from the wound some undigested thing of the flesh.
And if the arrowhead remains in the belly, and it pierces a little through the intestine by way of the rectum, then there is no hope in the cure, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
And if the arrowhead remains in the bladder, and the urine jumps out and comes to flow, and the patient feels strong pain: know that the wound is mortal.
The other members, such as the face and the neck and the throat and the shoulder and the joint and the spine of the back and the arm and the thigh and the legs, and similar members, are safe according to various conditions. When the arrow is in the nerve or artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you what happens to me, so that you do otherwise.
It happens to a man that an arrowhead remains in the arm at the root of the nail: I pulled it out, and drew from another part below the fat of the ear, and was healthy without any mess.
And I drew from a play an arrow that the fat of the shoulder below the nipple below, and the arrow was submerged, and could not be touched except with the point towards the bottom, and it was a large Turkish bow arrow, with all the iron without wings;
The play was finished healthy, and no evil accident came to him.
And I drew an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and it was an Arabic arrow with wings:
I will shave the beards, and make them subtle as I treat them, and the Christians will be healthy.
And I treated an arrow wound in the man, which had entered his belly, and thought he was dying;
and since it had been thirty days, his condition had not changed; I cut around the arrow, and extracted it, and treated the wound firmly, and there was no bad accident.
And I saw the man on whom a spear had fallen to his back, and the wound was swollen above;
and the spear remained inside him, and he did not change his natural disposition, nor did I find any harm in any of his natural functions.
And I saw another man, on whom a shaft had fallen to his face, and the wound was swollen; and therefore he endures without suffering great pain;
and many other similar things.
And he pulled an arrow from the hand of one of the king's princes, which was lodged in his knee, and was slightly leaning to the right side; and the arrowhead was entirely embedded.
I was called to the treatment after it had been lodged for three days. I found the wound very constricted.
I touched it with a subtle thread, and did not feel it; and he felt a piercing and pain below his right ear.
I thought it was from the point of the arrowhead I put on the place a plaster made with attractive and digestive ingredients, so that the flesh would not become inflamed; and the flesh appeared around the arrowhead.
and the flesh appeared around the arrowhead. I put the plaster on the wound, and treated the chief injury, and stayed there with the patient for a long time, until he felt the arrowhead inside his brain;
and it came out of him. I put on the wound caustic corrosive medicine for a long time, until it was covered, and I touched it, and felt the head of the arrow which had adhered to the flesh;
then I adjusted in the opening of the wound with that sharp medicine, until the head of the arrow appeared visibly;
and it surpassed the limits within four months, and then expanded so that the wound which I had closed with stitches, and the flesh on one side and the other, could not come apart;
then I did not cease to refine and contrive devices, until I took the arrow with well-made stitches, according to what its form will appear at the end of this chapter, as I will describe, and restored the wound.
And the doctors judge that the gristle of the nose cannot be restored: I then restored it, and the wound was soothed, and the patient was entirely healed.
Now I have told you the quality of the extraction of certain arrows, so that you put your treatment on what I do not say, for books cannot grasp everything;
but wise masters understand well only a little of great things, and on what is present and deficient, find new work, and new instrument, in the understanding of strange things that happen in this art.
I say that arrows do not issue from the limbs or are fixed unless they are in two ways: or through the flesh where they enter, or on another side;
and that which shoots forth where it enters, is an arrow entering into fleshy flesh, and sometimes comes out now and then.
And if it does not heal now, then let it be until the flesh is purified within, and the discharge is alleviated;
and also if it is fixed in the bone, and it cannot exit, then let it be for some days, and move it each day;
and then it will heal, and if it does not heal, then pierce within to the subtle forest, until the surrounding limbs are enlarged, and then treat it.
And if the arrowhead is lodged in the flesh of the body so that one cannot see it, then search for it everywhere; and if you feel it, then extract it with an appropriate instrument;
and if you cannot due to the narrowness of the wound, and the depth of the arrowhead, and there is no bone or nerve or vein, then probe as far as the wound is large;
and pull the arrow if you can, and if it has ears on the arrow where it is stuck, then remove the flesh that is stuck in two parts from the bone that you pull, and then break or crush the ears of the arrow, until you can pull it out;
and subtly be careful that you do not break the arrow, so that you pull it out more gently.
And if you cannot pull it out at once, then leave it until the surrounding flesh is purified, then pull it, for the extraction will be easier. And if the flow of blood makes you hesitate, then remember what we have said about the treatment in its chapter;
and beware of the incision of the nerve and of the vein, and devise how you can pull the arrow without danger, whether quickly or slowly, or firmly or gently;
and put the patient according to the shape it was when the arrowhead fell in, for that is the greatest aid that it should be, and if you cannot, then put it according to what the signs that they show you.
The arrow that comes from another part, where it appears with something of it, or the skin is swollen in the area if one sees or feels apparently:
cut then upwards, as long as the clamps can grasp, and then extract: if it comes out now.
And if it is held in the bone, turn your hand around, as long as it enters into the bone, and enlarge the bone, then pull it out.
And if it cannot come out, leave it still, and then resume the extraction as long as it comes out;
and if the arrowhead is in the flesh, push it to all the flesh;
and if it is the wooden stick, and you apply a bandage, if you apply the instrument to the head, so that the point of the arrowhead enters into the flesh of the instrument;
and then apply force, and if the arrow is deeply embedded, then you apply the instrument with a pointed end entering in, to ease the extraction.
And if the arrow is poisoned, then it is necessary that you cut out all the flesh around where the venom is, if you can, then treat the wound as it requires.
And if the arrow strikes the foot or the thigh or the belly or the bladder or the ribcage, and it is protruding, and you can cut around it, then you cut;
and beware of cutting the vein and the nerve, and then extract it, and then sew the wound, if it is necessary; and the treatment until she is healthy.
The shape of the tongs with which the arrows are extracted resemble a bird's beak, and see here the shape:
And there are many methods: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the arrow.
The shape of the pointed instrument is like a bird's feather, for pushing to the point of the arrow, thus is the shape:
The veins from which one bleeds are 31, of which there is a main one, to know: Two vessels that are behind the ears, which are called the two "herbech"; and the two arteries that are in the two temples apparent; and there are veins in the arms of the eyes, which are called "aspirations"; and the vein that is between the forehead; and the vein that is at the head of the nostrils; and the two sinews that are in the neck; and the two veins that are on the lips above the mouth, and these are the veins that are called "augeherich"; and the two veins that are under the tongue.
The veins from which one commonly bleeds are 5 in each arm:
one is the cephalic vein, and it is on the left side of the head, and lay people call it "vein of the head"; and the middle one is called "faste", and it is composed of the cephalic and the basilic, and lay people call it "vein of the heart"; and the basilic vein is on the right side, and the lay people call it "vein of the belly", and it is under the ribcage, and it is the one from which they bleed, which appears visibly under the navel.
And the salvatelle is the vein that is between the thumb and the ring finger, and it has two branches;
and in the leg and on the foot there are three veins: one is below the curve of the left hip, and the second is the saphena which is at the knee on the right side; and the vein that is called "nescia", which is in the knee of the other side;
and in the other leg there are three veins below those.
The bleeding of the veins that are behind the ears helps with old catarrhs and with migraines;
and the qualities of the blood, as I tell you, and it is that you reset the head of the patient, and rub the limb where the veins are with a coarse cloth; then constrain the patient's neck to a vice, so that the two veins appear behind the ears in the two limbs hanging from the head: bend your arms at your back, and where you feel the pulse beneath your back, make the sign of the ankle;
then take the lancet, and push it beneath the vein right up to the bone, then lift your hand all along the vein above, and cut and the skin and the vein well, two fingers from the crossing, and make blood come out as much as you see;
then constrict and bind, until it is without blood;
and I have already spoken of the incision and the cautery in the first book.
The blood of the two arteries that are in the two temples, is useful for migraine and old and habitual ophthalmia, and costiveness of the tears to the eyes;
and the qualities of the blood are such as I have said: and it is that the patients strain their neck, so that the two veins appear openly; and feel the pulse at the bottom of the elbow, and then apply a sign of constriction;
then lift the heart on the vein above at your elbow index, and push the lancet below, and lift the vein above, and cut it, as you have done with the other veins, and let the blood flow according to your necessity;
then release the patient, and put your finger on the vein for an hour, then put on a dressing; and then form the abscess, and let it be until it is healed;
and we have already spoken of their treatment and extraction, at the beginning of the book.
The vein of the forehead is as useful as the vein of the head for ancient facial diseases, and for migraines, and for redness;
and this quality is that the patients strain their neck twisting, until the vein appears; then take the instrument which is called "incisor", of which this is the form:
And put the point on the vein, and press with your hand, or another thing, and let the blood flow out according to the quantity that you see; then release to the patient the neck, and leave the vein until it is healed and sometimes close with a wide bandage.
In any case, it is not suitable for the flames to be too sharp; and the vein is pierced across, because the bone is near, and by chance the flame breaks when it is subtle.
The veins of the two arms which are in the two shoulders aid the eyes, and the tongue, and the redness, and the hearing in the ear, and the ailments of the face;
and the quality of their vein is such that the patients stretch their neck twisting from one side to the other, as before;
then the vein, and let the vein be pierced through, a little bit in length of flame a little wide, because there is no point to burn. And if the flames are subtle, by chance they break;
then make an incision of blood, as much as you are able in your profession, and then bind it with a bandage, and bind it well.
The blood of the vein that is born from the humor, and from the sweat, and from facial diseases, such as emigraine and redness that comes in the face, and mainly when it is ancient;
and the quality of the blood is such that the patient strains his neck, then strains his vein to his left hand, and takes the subtle flame long, and puts it in the lip in the space which is between the two nostrils, for the vein does not appear well, and the blood will now begin to flow;
and does not go too deep, and makes the blood flow according to necessity, then leaves it for a night, for it is much easier to restore;
The blood of the two gouttes helps with the stretching of the shoulder, and with the beginning of mixer, and with many diseases, and with empetygine, and with corroding, and with herpes, and with istiomenes;
and the quality of the injury is such that the patient strains their neck to one side and the other, as we have said;
and let the masters be at the head of the patient, and the patient sit on a seat, then feel the vein of the arm a little widely, then draw the blood moderately, as much as is necessary;
then perform another operation on the other vein, then untie the ligature, and hold both veins moderately, so that the patient does not strangle; and let it be until morning, so that the wound may be healed.
of the injury of the liver The injury of the veins of the lips from above is identified by a hole in the mouth, and a corruption of the gums, and fissures of the lips, and pain in the nose and throat.
And the quality of the blood is to make the patient sit before you, and hold his neck as I have said; then turn the lip, and look at the veins, one of which is on the right lip and the other on the left, and recognize them by the fact that they are black, and by the fact that near them there are small black veins:
cut then one and the other, and if you do not recognize them, and you are in doubt, cut the largest of each side, and also make it so for the veins that are above and below, because it is a similar manner.
of the blood beneath the tongue The blood of the veins that are beneath the tongue helps after the blood of the head, and it is for the narrowing of the throat, and for the illnesses of the uvula, and for the illnesses of the mouth;
and the quality of the blood is such that the patient sits between your hands in front of the sun, and lifts the tongue, and looks down at each side to see a dark vein:
feel then one and the other, and do not press too deeply, for beneath are the arteries.
The veins of the arm that are commonly felt are felt in two ways:
or by pricking at the whole flame of the blood, or with subtle olive as if cutting tendons, and it is called "aneuil"; and are coarse and subtle according to the width and narrowing of the veins. The shape of the flame of the blood is very well-known, and is large as you see:
And it is a task to open the veins with thick blood apparently swollen, and which contain thick blood and turbidity; and it is the form of the flame of olive oil:
and it is more subtle and pointed, and it is for purging the subtle veins, where there is subtle yellow blood.
The purging of the basilica vein, which is one of these veins, helps with illnesses that are in the throat, and in the neck, and in the chest, and in the stomach;
and it is necessary for the purger to purge wisely, and that he beware of the artery that is above. And if he cuts the artery, and a flow of blood comes, then it is necessary to staunch it, as I have said; and one should not be touching the flame, but rather cutting like a lancet.
And if the basilica does not appear manifestly, then it is necessary that you dislodge it, and change to another; Or you want any vein of his, or you bleed from the vein in the arm: which appears manifestly; and a blow to the flame of the candle, as we have said.
And if you know the location of the blood, then it is necessary that you stretch the arm, that you touch the spot as long as you feel the pulse; then mark the place of the wound, and then stretch the arm, and strike the vein with the flame of the candle; and beware that you do not hit the artery when you see the spot swollen, for it is an artery: beware of the donation.
And if you see it spurt out high like the urine of a child, and the blood is red and subtle, know that it is blood of an artery: Hasten then, and put your finger on it for a long time, then remove your finger if it is without strain, which often happens; Raise the arm, and let it be, and do not move it, the patient;
and let it be on a poultice, and do not move it until it is healed.
And if it is not strained, and it will heal, and the medicine is not necessary to you, then cut the artery that is open, for the head of the retreat; and strain the joint.
And take a splint of wood, and bind it, and take one of the halves and tie it well just to the other side;
if the joint is strained, it's good; If not, then treat it, as we have said, with powders that constrict blood;
and the stains are not grievous in many dispositions for the small size of the wound, and the position of the joint of the arm.
The vein in the middle aids if it draws blood from the head above, and from the body below, because it is composed of the basile and the cephatic, as we have said;
and it is necessary for the sinew that it be warmed by the nerve which is below, and if it pricks too deeply, and it cuts the nerve, and it swells and the sickness becomes grievous, and by chance it cannot heal;
and this nerve appears many times, and if it does not appear in any men due to its subtlety, then it is necessary that you have the sinews of the instrument near; and beware of the nerve with your hand.
And if it has a vein between the two nerves, thus the finger is of equal length.
The bloodletting of the head helps, which pulls blood from the head, and helps the eyes;
and it is necessary to bleed at the olive vein or at the martian vein, because it is the safest of all veins, for it has neither nerve nor artery. However, it is necessary to seek the lightest place, and not to touch anything that one must do for the first time, and then proceed; and by chance one touches the places of certain men, when one must do it for the first time, but it does not harm.
The quality of the bloodletting is according to the thought.
The first thing that you must know about bloodletting is that bloodletting is not administered for the purpose of preserving health, but to avoid impending illnesses;
and let the bloodletting be done on one of the three veins that are at the elbow: these are to know, cephalic, median, and basilic; and one should bleed at the beginning of spring, and in autumn, and in April after eating, when the sign of repletion appears;
and one should bleed on the first day or the third, after two hours or three times a day.
The bloodletting that is administered for illnesses has no determined hour, but rather when need is of day or night, at all hours and at every tension;
and it is not advisable to bleed children up to thirteen years, nor a woman carrying fruit for less than seven months up to four and a half. Nor should the old who have passed sixty years be bled.
And when some want to purge themselves, in whatever manner that may be, it is necessary that they empty the intestines of a light Clyster, if there are many retained filths, so that the veins do not attract the superfluous and harmful filth from the principal members.
nor does one purge himself if he is too full of food, nor if he is drunk, as long as he is furious, nor dropsical;
and one must beware of purging after colic passion, and vomiting, and decoration of the belly, and multiplying of the travail to a woman, and from childbirth, from waking and from fasting, and that which is all virtue, or by thing of the arm or of the body;
then refine the humors, if they are not gross, through foods and drinks and medicines, so that you have them in a low place;
Then enter into the bath, if nothing prevents it, to subtly let the blood, and the sane from the vein of the foot enter under the third, as we have said;
and protect that day from labor, and from point, and from dislocation, and from similar things;
and be joyful and happy, and let the vein that is being bled be higher than the one being treated, and rub the arm two or three times, then gently pull the string upwards, for when it is too tight or loose, it cannot correct the blood;
and then rub the limb with the hands, until the veins swell, and feel them;
then anoint the vein with a little old oil, then put his right hand on the left hand on the vein below the limb a little where he wants to bleed, so that the vein is not empty and fails to strike.
For there are veins that are as tender as cords in the blood, and if they are of those that are full of windiness, so that when one puts on the flame, it retracts from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus is one of these; and if it opens the vein, the wound is too narrow, because it is necessary that the blood vessels be advised in these things.
And if the vein opens for the first time, it's good; if not, then still recommend a little more of that place or above hastily, if the limbs are not weakened.
And if the limbs are weak, and the patient is frightened, then let be one or two hours, and do not lift the arm: for it may come to be an abscess under the skin;
Do not enter into a bath, then recommend the activity if it pleases them;
and if the wound is small, or the blood escapes subtly and you doubt that not as much blood as you see comes out, then make this same wound right away with all the flesh properly;
and perform it a little hastily, so that the limbs are not weakened; for this often happens, when the wound is small.
If you see the limb weakened, do not recommend the activity, and put on a little of oil of rosé, for it alleviates the body's pain of blood, and is beneficial in this limb where the oil is;
and then administer the oil in each activity that you perform when opening veins, to staunch the flow of blood;
and this same action makes a triangle and bulge of the eyes, when one puts it on the back; if the sensation is subtle and sparse when it is too thick.
And if a large abscess forms, which often happens, especially when it is not well cleaned except for the times when the opening of the vein is small, then hasten, and put on the back a moist sponge in water and in a little warmth, and extract for an hour;
and it is necessary that you do this after the issue of blood from the vein, and if it remains on the back after some hours a black or green color, do not touch it; and if you want, put on something made of garlic or myrrh mixed with juice of calamint, mustard, or similar.
And often there occurs an abscess and swelling at the wound of the basilic vein:
then put your hand on it, and if you find the limb soft to the pressure of the hand, this is the bad swelling. Beware then that you do not put on anything of what we have said, for by chance the artery is cut short without warning;
but make the plaster dry to harden the limb, then treat it with another treatment, until it is healthy.
And draw from each one blood according to the quantity of its virtue, and of the color of the blood.
For if the blood is black, let it flow out until it becomes red; and if you see it thick, let it be until it becomes refined; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
And it is necessary for the one who is pale and weak, and has need of blood extraction, that a larger wound be made, and that the veins be made larger;
and for the one who is weak, do the opposite, and it is necessary to bleed them little and often, and one should bleed them by cutting across, not by pricking;
and this manner of bleeding is free from corruption of blood and congestion of nerves, and is better than the bleeding from the inside or from the depth;
And for the one whose body needs to be bled, it is necessary to give them a drink made with juice of bitter pomgranates; if they are bilious, let blood be taken three or four times; And if they are of a cold complexion, let them take before the bleeding a drink mixed with syrup made from honey and aromatics, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chicory, and well-scented syrup;
And if it comes to the sauce, after the issue of much blood, then it is necessary that he drink broth of meat, and syrup of subtle odor, and use other things that we have said in the division or chapter on syncope, for the evacuation of the vein.
And if he wants to bleed from his arm, and bleed another time, then it is necessary, when he is weakened by great bleeding, that he bleeds a little and a little, according to the quantity of his virtue continuously.
And he who wants to bleed from his arm after the first bleeding, and he has a strong body, then let him bleed seven hours after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.
And he who wants to bleed from another part, then he should bleed on the second or third day.
For there is much blood within the body which is already heated and causes fever; If it happens to pull out a large quantity, and to widen the perforation so that it falls into the stomach; Then you inspect all the conditions of the wound, and put your hand on his belly when it bleeds, so that death does not come into the region of the stomach, and this happens many times, when the bleeder is negligent;
and it happens not rarely that you see the arm become dislocated, and blood comes out a second time, and the perforation is closed, that you press firmly on; nor if it is curved, that he extends the arm suddenly, for that would be bad;
but let it be until it bleeds a second time; or you touch the point of the flame, until the blood that is congealed at the perforation of the vein becomes liquid, and put on the poultice made with oil, and press lightly;
And if the vein is swollen, let it be and do not constrict it, until the abscess has calmed.
And if a second bleeding is necessary, let the blood be taken from the same arm, or from another vein, or from the other arm.
The vein in the middle of the arm is bled from the vein of the head because it is connected.
And the manner of bleeding is that the patient puts their hand in cold water, until the veins become red;
then it should be warmed moderately, so that the vein appears well, then let the blood be taken now from across, neither too broad nor too long;
and let the incision be wide, and let it be bled well near the joint of the hand, and if the blood does not flow, put the hand back in cold water, and let the blood run in the water, until you have enough;
and if it is in this state, do not put the hand in warm water, for they put it more into pain than in the state.
and the blood vessel of this vein is safer than all other veins, for there is neither artery nor nerve.
The blood vessel of the salvation of the right hand is useful for all diseases of the liver, and this is the method:
strain the hand, and put it in warm water, until the vein becomes swollen, so that one can see it; and if it is a transverse blood vessel, and if you cut through it entirely, do not worry about anything;
and do not go too deep in the flesh, for the nerves are often separated from the skin, and then put the hand in warm water, if the blood is congealed in the wound, and cannot flow out.
And when you have bled as much as necessary, put oil on the vein and seal it to stop the bleeding, and do this for each vein.
The vein in the left hand is useful for the illness of the spleen, and do everything just as I told you regarding the right.
The vein of the spleen is useful for all the illnesses that are below the heart, such as illnesses of the liver, and retention of fluids, and illness of the kidneys, and of the thighs and of the old legs, and similar illnesses.
And the quality of its vein is that it makes the illness go down into the cold foot, and rub on the vein until it perspires, and loosen above the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot it goes to many kidneys;
Know then whether the wound is of greater or lesser size, or at the shins, which is of most value.
And if you treat the wound on the foot, beware of the tendons that are underneath, and the tendon which passes across as in a joint.
and let the flames be anesthetized.
And if the blood cannot issue out, put the foot in a sling, and let the vein be well emptied.
And if the first dressing fails, recommend the second at a distance of a little, because the limb is salty.
Do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and thus make of the shin of the other foot equally.
The limb of the sciatic vein is at the shins of the thigh, and its dressing is worth the pain of the hip, when it is for hot blood.
And the quality of his urine is such that the patient urinates between the thighs, and strains upwards from the shinbone four fingers in turning, for otherwise the vein does not appear;
and if it appears, then urinate in all the ways that you can, and while passing through; and it is better that you take it, for the limbs are sound, and it is much put into the hands of men.
and it is better that you take it, for the limbs are sound, and it is much put into the hands of men. And if you do not believe it, then urinate from the vein that appears on the back of the foot, and towards the little toe, and beware of the nerves;
and make an issue of blood as much as you see, and then untie the ligature, and put on cotton and extract; he is now bled.
Discharges are made from horns, or from arsenic, or from pitch;
and ventilation is done according to two methods: either by striking and extracting blood, or without striking.
And this ventilation that is without striking is according to two methods: either it is with all fire, or without fire;
and ventilation that is done by striking and by extraction of blood is done in thirteen places of the body, of which one is all on the summit of the head; and the others are in the neck; and two others in the two sides of the neck; and the ventilation under the chin; and the ventilation of the two shoulders; and the ventilation on the knees; and the ventilations in the two arms; and the ventilations of the two legs; and the fat of the two cheeks;
and the fatty tissue does not release any blood, for it is from the small veins that are scattered in the flesh, and for this reason one does not become weak, as one does with the bleeding of a vein; and it is not necessary that it be administered, nor to apply heat or cold, in any disease that comes from excess, as long as the body is emptied.
And if by necessity of diseases it is necessary to apply fatty tissue, or through habit, then let us administer it every hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in the middle and in every tension;
for there are some who, when they have need to apply fatty tissue, then have a heavy head;
and there are some who experience excess and redness in their face, and in their head, and in the neck, and darkness of the eyes;
and such as spit a mouthful of blood, and have their tongue swollen, and vomit blood; and if it is one of those who dream, and see in their sleep blood and wounds and death and similar things.
And when we see these signs, and especially when it is in the middle of the month, we command to bleed after three hours of the day.
The blood of the nose helps the grief of the head ... that comes to the eyes, and it is not necessary that it be after the evacuation of all the body;
and this bleeding is in the place of the blood of the head, and it is not necessary that it be for one who is of a cold complexion or who has diarrhea, because these things cause them great harm;
and for this reason it is not necessary for the old men to use it, nor those who have cold diseases of the head.
And he who often bleeds himself, becomes oblivious, and for this reason it is necessary to put the cupping glass a little lower due to the doubt of oblivion.
Cupping on the neck is in place of the bleeding from the head and of the basilic vein, and for this reason it is useful for the constriction of the lung, and for the fissure of the chest of the pormon, and for the cough, and for repletion.
and it is necessary to bind little, because if it holds too firmly, it causes oblivion or stomach and heart problems.
Cupping on the two sides of the neck is useful for head pains, and eye problems and migraines, and for strangulation, and for toothache, and it is in place of bleeding from the basilic vein.
and it is necessary that you instruct the bloodletter to press his hand on the spot, that he not cut the artery, and not cause a flow of blood.
The evacuations of the mouth are good for diseases of the mouth, and for corruption of the gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and it is in the healing of the sores of the two lips.
The evacuations of the shoulders are good for a disease that comes from heat and from fullness.
The evacuations of the elbows are as good as those of the three veins of the arm, for it attracts blood from these thick veins;
and instruct the bloodletter not to make too deep an incision, for the limb is near to the flesh, and has many nerves and arteries.
The evacuation that is on the buttocks is good for hemorrhoids of the fundament, and for similar diseases, and it is necessary that the evacuation be large, and be of copper, so that it has the ability to treat well; and by accident, if it was fragile, it would break; and it makes large wounds.
The ulcers of the legs heal openly, for they attract blood from the whole body, and are worth the old pains of the kidneys, and of the liver, and of the bladder, and bring back the flesh;
and they are in place of two hips, and of two knees, and completely weaken the body after long use, and bring about paleness in many conditions.
The way to apply the ulcer treatment is that you put it first on the wound, and suck moderately, and put it firmly, and rub equally, and do not stop doing this, until you see the place red and swollen, and appearing with the redness of blood;
then do it, and put back the ulcers, and take warning in the condition of the body, for there are some who have such hot blood, and clear pores: If it is necessary to cauterize only once, and it is necessary to make large wounds, and a little deep; and suck lightly.
And if the wound is large, then it is necessary to cauterize twice: the first time to subtily the passage of thick blood.
And if the wound is very thick, then it is necessary to cauterize a third time;
and when we want to extract a little blood and a little, then we are sufficient with only one time. And if we want much blood, then we repeat often;
and if the wound is thick, then cauterize deeply, and terminate it only when the blood flow seems to be stopped suddenly, and it is necessary for one who has thick and hard skin, and who have narrow pores, that you anoint the limbs with oil of saxifraga and dissolving; It is an ointment made from violet oil, or from oil of sweet almonds, or from oil of cucumber seed.
and it is in ivy, made from oil of cresson, or of lily, or of chamomile, or other similar things.
And if the superfluity is thick and cold, take oil of marjoram, or of balsam, or oil of anise, and similar things.
And if the skin is tender and has large pores, it is not necessary to apply any oil, but it is necessary to wash it after the application of warm rose water, or cold water, or water of mallow, or cucumber water, or porcelain water, or similar things.
And for one who has a lot of moisture, raise it with aqua vitae, or water of myrtle, and sumach, and similar things.
And those who have thick superfluities rise with old wine, or with water of sew, or with a decoction of anise or chamomile, or other similar things.
and it is not suitable to apply a poultice of warm water before the bath nor in the bath, but after the bath for one or two hours;
and it is not suitable to sleep after the poulticing, and it is necessary that he be warmed, when he must be poulticed and when he is poulticed.
And let those who are bilious beware, and if their blood is too sharp and inflamed; it is necessary that they take cold things, such as pomgranates and endives and lettuce to the stool, and similar things; and a little fat, and flesh of capon, and moist meats.
and a little fat, and flesh of capon, and moist meats. And he who has a cold complexion, should take syrup of honey, and fragrant wine moderately, which is between old and new, and little nuts, and little pork and small birds and pigeons;
and the more he is windy, the more he should drink than eat;
and it is good to give to some men sometimes triaicle or nutmeg before or after the flatulence, to comfort the main limbs; and let the blood be subtle, but it is not good that those who are hot drink it.
The flatulence that is put without piercing are those that are put on the liver, and on the spleen, and on the podagre, and on the belly and the navel and the loins and the thigh, for these members do not suffer from being pierced with a needle, and one does not make them bleed except to attract blood from member to member, as we put on the mameles when there is an excess of blood;
To treat the viscosity which is in the limb, as we apply poultices on the belly and on the thigh to alleviate the limb;
and remove the pain, when there is an obstruction or stone, so remove by its attractive power through adventure the obstruction, or empty the stone from its place;
and let it be done when one applies it to the liver and to the spleen when there is retained viscosity, and these poultices are administered empty to suck as much as possible; and sometimes they are administered together with cautery fire, and sometimes plain or mixed with hot water, as in cases of pleurisy illness, and in such manner that one fills the poultice with warm water, or with water in which one has cooked suitable herbs.
The shape of the poultice administered to fire is this:
And it has two fingers in width and half a palm in depth, and it has or costs on the inside of the middle a small perforation, just as if to push a needle, and let it be from the back so that it does not hurt the patient when putting it on the limb;
and it has in the middle a rod of crossing made of iron or steel, to put a clamp on, and they are both large and small according to the illnesses and the expertise of those who use them;
for the veins of children are different from those of the old, and of the thin from those of the fat.
And one must then put this vein on the limb;
taking the clamp of wax or the plaster, and putting it in the vein across the rod that is in the vein, so that the clarity is at the bottom of the vein so it does not burn the patient;
and then put it on the member, and let your fingers be on the orifice that we have mentioned, so that when one wants, if the vapor goes in, and remove the ventouse;
and take the lining as before, and recommend it often, if you have mastery.
In the ventouse then which is administered in disease of the pleura, to any sharp thing, it has no edge or orifice, and is not administered unless when it is full of water, and is put on the member as gently;
and this is its form:
Without them being administered unless on members where one cannot put ventouses due to their smallness, such as lips and cheeks, and similar places; and in the bare flesh of the body, such as fingers or knees, and other similar things;
and the quality of urine is such that when you find sweet and clear urines which are in narrow passages, take them;
and put them in a narrow sweet tube, as long as they are familiar with it, and have nothing in their stomachs; and then be cured of vein and intestine, then rub the limb until it becomes red, and put on the urines;
and when they are flat, and will discharge, if it is a good place or where one can put intestine, then put it, for it is worth much afterwards.
If not, lift the place of the haunch, and then of the passage, very well, and then squeeze it;
and if the places are too sore afterwards near the body of the urines, then wet a linen cloth in cold passage, and put on, until the urines are constricted;
and if his blood is multiple, then put on a warm broth, or galen, and similar things, until it is stretched;
or you put on the limb moistened warm fava beans, and let them be until they adhere to the limb, it will now stretch;
and if you are in a state of greater expertise, then take other bloodlettings.
And if the bloodlettings do not want to take, then rub the limb with fresh blood, or you stick an needle in as long as the blood comes out, and then put them on, and as soon as they feel the blood, they adhere;
and when you see that they cling, then powder on a bit of aloe and of dried and ground cinder, or of ash, and they will now adhere.
Here begins the book of fractures These chapters are often necessary in the art of medicine, and are for the restoration of fractures and dislocations.
Know, dear son, that foolish people reject this chapter, for they have never seen any of the ancient books, nor have they learned from letters;
and for this reason the science is foreign in our land, because I have never found any good there;
and I know nothing, except that by the science of ancient books, which I have studied so much that I have treated the science, and by experiment, and by the habit of my life;
and I have described to you in this chapter what is contained, and I have abbreviated it at the end, and I have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are needed, as I have done in these two chapters before.
It is necessary then that we say in the prologue of this book the sum of the word and the chapters where the wise man puts his understanding, and remains on the truth, so that those who are experienced know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when fracture or dislocation or torsions or concussion comes to anyone, it is necessary that you hasten to anoint the patient on one side and the other, unless something prevents you from doing so, as weakness of the body, or infants, or old people. or if it is not too hot for him, nor too cold;
and avoid cold and chilled foods, that is to say cold joints, and meat of goat and of pork, and do not drink wine, and avoid fatty and greasy foods, and do not fill oneself too much with foods that fill the veins with blood, until you are no longer in doubt about a hot abscess, or an accumulation of matter in the limb;
if the patient returns to their previous governance, he will have used it.
And when the broken bone begins to mend, it is necessary that the patient be nourished with foods that promote fat gain, or have viscosity, such as cooked broth in water, and pork, and testicles, and feet, and calf liver, and eggs, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things. For a warm nourishment will repair bones and will be very beneficial for the fracture.
And know that the bones of the elderly and decrepit cannot well mend or reunite according to their nature due to the dryness of the members, nor those which are too tender, such as the bones of small children;
but in order to heal, reset the bone that is broken and tie the large tendons which hold the member together, until it becomes strong as it was before; and not the whole point of his work, and for this reason it is necessary to nourish him with thick foods, as we have said.
And be aware that fractures are diverse in many ways.
For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the foot, or of the leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all the ways of fractures. For there are fractures that come from a blow, and another from a fall, such as the cut of a quill pen for writing.
For there are fractures that come from a blow, and another from a fall, such as the cut of a quill pen for writing. And if it is a fracture with a wound, and a fracture with only a small crack.
And each manner has its own technique, and its proper instrument for restoration, according to what memory recalls in its place;
and it is known that the fracture of the bone is by what the joints are twisted, and apparent through swelling, and heard when pressing with the hand;
and when it does not have twisting in its touch, and the patient does not feel great pain, there is no point of fracture;
but it can well have twisting, or a crack, or a small fracture. It is not necessary that you move the limb, but put on medicines that come to it afterwards, and then strain it now subtly.
And know that the fracture which comes from a blow, and are the two parts disjoined, it is necessary now to put them in place equally, just as abscesses of the foot come to life;
and if a hot abscess comes, then let it be until the abscess is appeased, without leaving any pus, as long as the abscess is calm;
then put it equally in the place where you can set it lightly and wisely, and know that the restoration of it is easier than the restorations of a skull or where it has pieces;
Then he tightens, as it is necessary afterwards.
And if it breaks into pieces in the bones, depending on whether it's the hands or feet, or to your hand if it's small members, or to the tendons, or to one tendon and to your hand;
and put the member according to its natural shape, so that when the broken parts of the member are reduced, reset by all means the additions in their places at the joint that you can, and beware that through your work there comes to the patient no injury or pain;
and adjust well the two ends of the bones according to their proper forms.
And feel it well with the hand if it seems to you that it is not quite right:
if the dressing is gentle, and not tightening too much, nor pressing as those do who make it come through their work abscess heat and contraction to the member, as we have seen many times.
And when the limb is at stake, instruct the patient well that they should not move it, neither while awake nor while asleep, nor while turning, nor in any other way; and take care that the limb is so secured that it doesn't feel any pain. For when it feels no pain, then it is not at stake, and it is necessary to put it in such a position that it feels no pain;
and take care that the limb is so secured that it doesn't feel any pain. For when it feels no pain, then it is not at stake, and it is necessary to put it in such a position that it feels no pain; and take care that it is placed straight, so that twisting does not come when it is restored;
and the quality of the broken member is according to what I tell you.
Know that the broken members are diverse in smallness and in largeness and in shape.
For there are small members, such as arms and fingers and similar things: it is necessary to envelop them with soft and subtle bandages; and those which are thick, such as the thigh and leg:
if it is necessary to envelop with a large and hard linen bandage, because the wide bandages press the entire large member, and constrict all sides equally, so that there is no unevenness;
then wrap lightly three or four turns according to the member, and constrict the hand a little on the entire bandage, then go above the fracture and constrict less, than the fracture, then loosen a little the fracture;
and soften the bandage a little and often, as much as you press a large portion of the healthy limb, then take another bandage, and turn around again above the fractured limb;
then return to the part below the fracture, and constrict moderately, neither too strongly nor too loosely, as we have said in the first bandage above;
Then put between the lips of the wound a swab of linen or cloth, as long as it is even and equal, then tie everything with a bandage above, and then put your dressings well made on, if there is no abscess or swelling.
And if there is swelling or an abscess, then put on a thing that appeases the abscess with heat, and which removes the swelling, and leaves it thus for some time;
then strain on your dressings, and let them be of the humor of a large, wisely cut, cainne, or of the wood from which one makes the clubs, or of the roots of palm, and let them be according to this shape:
but it is necessary that the dressing one puts on the fracture be a little thicker and wider than the others;
and let it be as long as it is necessary for the size of the limb, whether small or large; Then hold it steady on the stelae as you did in the first lesson, then tie above a vein similarly as in the first lesson on the bruising. The narrower it is tied above, all the less;
and it is necessary that the thread be moderate, not too thick nor too thin, and be of soft flax;
for if the threads are thick, as I have seen in the work of foolish people who make their ligatures with twisted flax cords, and it is a great error, because the ligature cannot be even if it is too subtle, and it is not necessary that it has between each steel less than two fingers of space.
And if the patient is annoyed by the sides of the stelae after the constriction on their sound limbs, then put on them a bandage of flax or a piece of linen cloth, so that it does not chafe.
When the wound is with the fracture, and the chest is broken, I will tell you about the treatment afterwards.
And be aware that it's not necessary to strain these bones when all the fractured limbs are first broken. For when the limbs are large, it's not necessary to put these [bones] in place until after 5 or 7 days, or more according to the severity of the abscess and the swelling that occurs;
and know this is the manner of the ancient plasterers for restoring fractures, dislocations, and sprains:
and it is that you take the flour that holds at Paris from the mill, and mix it with warm water, and put this mixture, not too clear nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common manner of the plasterer restoring the fracture in many ways, and likewise for women and for small children, for it is neither too hot nor too cold.
Another method of plaster for restoring the fracture and the dislocation and the sprain: Take barberry and lasmine and enula and asafoetida and Arabic gum and moguet, an ounce or so; myrrh and aloe, an ounce and a half; of alichol eight ounces; and make into powder, and mix with oil of beef; if the temperament of the man is cold, use this plaster, for it is of good composition, and restores the broken bones quickly, and is of benefit to many men.
Another method of plaster that is good for sprains: Take moguet and vismalve, an ounce or so; myrrh and aloe, eight ounces; of acacia six ounces; Boil armenic, and bruise well, and mix with water or wine of vinegar, and administer.
Another way to plaster the joints and the bones dislocated from their places, and appease the sudden pain, and the cut of the bone, and the bruising: Take a new wool, and anvil in oil and cooked, and put on the body.
These plasters do not restore, but they are good for appeasing hot abscesses, and properly relieving the pains.
Another way to plaster that restores the broken bones: Take dried fig leaves, and earthy roots of plantain, and bruise them together, and make a plaster.
Another way to plaster for the restoration of the bone fracture and to calm the irritation of the abscess. Take root of violets, camomile, flowers of violets, flour of peas, of each one part;
and pound, and mix with wine, and if the limbs are swollen, mix it with water of moist coriander or with water, and use.
Another kind of plaster stronger than the first, when hard abscess comes to the restoration of the limb. Take roots of violet, and seeds of flax, balaust, melilot, and sage, and flowers of violets and of camomile, of all one part; and pound, and mix with water of salt, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb, and its rest.
Hippocrates says in his book that one should not put on a broken limb for restoration of force except the paste made of wax and oil, and nothing else, and says it should be between two, not too soft nor too hard.
And it seems reasonable to apply to the broken member warm and slightly hot things, such as myrrh and aloes and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Another way of applying a plaster that is good for an injury and pain: Take mugwort and roots of decapitated homes, or feathers of birds, and wormwood, and equal quantities, and pound them, and make a plaster with the glue.
And then undo it a little afterwards, and take care that the patient does not feel any pain, nor is the bone of their body injured; if it does not come undone by itself. And if pain or itching comes to the body, without rest or relief, then hasten, and undo it, and remove the plaster at once;
And take a light cloth, and a sea sponge moistened, and plunge it in water, and lift it up to the limb, until the itching stops, and the pain is alleviated. Then let the limb rest for an hour, then apply to it a dry, or moistened in water or rose oil, linen cloth, and tie it with a nut, until you are sure of the aposteme's heat;
and reduce the inflammation of the limb, and let the pain be eased, then apply a subtle plaster, and a little poultice, and do not constrain it as strongly as before; and treat it gently until it is healthy.
And if you see that the aposteme, heat and redness and pain and swelling are gone from everything, and you have need of poultice and of linen cloth, then apply it again, as you did previously in the same way.
And if it does not come to the limb any of what we have said, do not force the dislocation for three or four or five or seven days; and sometimes let it be twenty days, according to what one sees, until the fracture becomes solid, and approaches the adjustment of the flesh together;
then restrain it more than at first, and bind its vein, as I have said before;
and if you see the limb drying out more than necessary, know that nourishment cannot come to it; raise then the cold and wet dressing, every time that you dislocate it, and let this be on the third day, and loosen a little the ligature;
by this work then cut the nourishment to the limb, and amend immediately what foolish doctors do, who torture the member excessively:
It is harmful, and such practices are to be feared, and I do not see anything other than giving pain and making things worse.
Many kinds of fractures exist, and there are various shapes, and the causes are distinct;
for there are fractures made by the blow of a sword, and the bone is broken all the way to the joint that is next to the surface of the bone, as if done with an axe or club; and for this reason this kind of fracture is called "axing" or "hewing".
When the sword cuts the bone with a blow from below, and it is called this kind of fracture "absolue" or "cutting from underneath";
and the wound from these two fractures is great or small.
And if it has been struck with a blunt object, or cracked, or broken from a fall on stone, or fallen on stone, or similar things.
And if there is a piercing wound, which approaches just to the web that is beneath the bone, or it is on the bone, and this is a wound whether large or small.
And if there is a wound that has grown into the bone as subtle as a goat's hair, and the fissure is small, and for this reason it is called this fracture "capillary";
and if the wound is made by striking with a stone, or by falling, or a similar thing, and it causes the piece of bone to enter inward, and the limbs are twisted as the blacksmiths do when they strike on the anvils; if between the inner bones.
And this happens more to those who have soft or moist bones, such as a child's head;
and it happens in all these manners of fracture that small pieces are dislocated thus; and I will speak of its place.
And we recognize all kinds of fractures through the extraction from them, and the questioning with tents, and by the corrupted flesh that is upon them.
The resemblance of hair is known by that which when one discovers the bone, and one rubs upon it, then appears the black fracture.
In the cure of the fracture, beware of accidents by the patient, and if you see any evil accident, such as vomiting of bile, and loss of understanding, and tension, and palpitations, and acute fever, and the eyes bulging out and reddening, and other similar things in many dispositions, cannot heal without doubt.
And if you do not see a terrifying accident, and you expect health, then begin the cure.
And when the injury comes first to you, and it is in winter, then it is necessary to uncover the bone before the fourteenth day of the month that you can.
And if it is in this state, then hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the bone tissue does not become corrupted, and comes the accident that we have mentioned.
And if the fracture of the bone reaches the membrane that covers the brain, then it is necessary that you suture the affected part thus:
and it is that you take the head of the afflicted patient, and uncover the bone in all the ways that you can, and on the shape of the wound as gently as you can, and if a decrease of blood comes to uncover the bone, or a abscess falls, use what aid is necessary, and it is that you fill the hole with moistened cloths soaked in rose oil; and make the wound rest until the fallen abscess is appeased, and be assured of a decrease of blood; Then it begins between the bone and the flesh, and it is done according to two manners of work:
One manner is that you cut at the narrow tail end in front, and that is its shape:
And then you widen the other end, making it larger than the first.
And the second manner is that you have a number of diverse ends, some narrow and others wide, and they are pointed, and they are made of iron;
and in working lightly, so that you do not harm the head.
And if the bone is strong and hard, it is necessary that you pierce through, in such a way that you administer ends with grooves, not so that they penetrate beyond the bone of the head, and must have on the end a margin or circle, which does not allow the point to pass beyond the bone;
and it is necessary to have several, so that each one comes into his own place in the hope of the bones, so that you have supporters for all tests;
and this is the form of the three manners of supporters:
The quality for piercing through the broken bone is that you put one supporter on the bone, and turn with your hands as long as you know that the bone is pierced;
then put the supporter on another part a little afterwards, and thus do all around, then cut with incisions the space of the bone which is between the parts, and do this more subtly than you can, and gently, as we have said, until you draw the bone to your hand, or to any of the instruments that you have, such as tongs, pincers;
and beware that you do not touch the brain nor the spinal cord.
And when you have pierced the bone, and drawn, it is necessary that you restore the part that has remained of the bone to all other similar instruments resembling an incisor, but it is necessary that it be more delicate and more subtle than the other incisors;
and if there remains nothing of the small bones, or any shells, then lightly touch the bones to one of the instruments; then treat the wound with tenderness and caresses that we have mentioned.
And another manner of work is what the Gauls call, which is more familiar; and it holds very strongly, and this is its effect. It is necessary first that you discover a part of the bone, whether it be broken or bruised, so that when you have discovered that part, then you will put at the head of this instrument, which is called a lenticle, whose form is this:
And do not cut on one side, and the affected part is in two edges, so that the cutting is towards the bone;
then make with a small hammer above, so that you gently cut the bone all around, and take good care of the membrane that is beneath;
if it is close to the bone, gently cut the bone, for one cuts well without harm, and without fear.
And if the break in the bone does not reach to the membrane, and the bone is cut just above, and it has small pieces, then it is necessary to render that asperity, and to remove the scales with a subtle rasp that you must have in different quantities, to apply to each place the most convenient, according to the work and the shape of the break.
Use coarse rasps at first, and afterwards finer ones, and do not stop from doing this until it is well.
In each of the other fine haircuts and subtle fractures, it is necessary that you make adjustments according to its thickness.
and it is something that is not prescribed for one who has devoted their study to this art.
And if the wound is deep, then you must take a cloth of linen, according to the quantity of the wound, and moisten it in rose oil, and put it on the wound; then take another double cloth, in two or three layers, and moisten it in wine and rose oil, and put it on the first cloth; and do this as gently as you can, so that you do not irritate the wound, then apply another linen cloth on top, and do not bind it too tightly, just enough to touch the wound;
and let it be thus for one or two days, until the aposteme abscess is appeased, then undo it, and apply medicines such as roots of lily, and flour of vetches, and powder of incense, and aristolochia, and similar things;
and of these things make powder, and put it on the wound, and administer at the same time medicines without mordication;
and guard that the wound is immediately clean, so you do not leave in it the pus, nor leave to gather filth, for when filth gathers on the cloth of the brain, it corrupts and festers, and brings great evil to the patient;
for when one puts on the affected part a cauterizing thing, it becomes worse through neglect. Take heed then, that no evil accident comes to the patient, as we have said, if it is doubtful without doubt.
And if blackness does not come forth for the medicine that one has put on, which has virtue, then it is necessary that you take a part of honey, and three parts of rose oil and in glue one drag, and put it on the affected place; Then for the treatment of manners of cures that are suitable, as long as he is healthy.
It is known that sometimes both parts of the knee joint are broken, or one of them alone, because they are two bones;
and this cartilage is cartilaginous, and does not break, unless it becomes swollen or twisted, and then becomes diseased.
And if one of the two parts is broken, then it is necessary that you bind your little bandage or splint around the knee, and put equal to this break inside your bandage index, and in the pouchet by default, until the knee regains its natural shape; and do it lightly, and guard that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
And if the break is in the upper part of the knee, and the bone cannot come to its place, then it is necessary that you put it even at the head of a stick somewhat thick.
And if the fracture is of two parts, thus make another, and hasten to restore the first joint, if you can;
If not, after the seventh or tenth, when the abscessed place is cooled, then apply to the head of the fracture a poultice made with bandages of linen, if the fracture is in one part.
Or you apply to the other part, where the fracture is; and let the bandages be so thick that they fill the openings of the fracture.
And some say one should moisten the bandages in butter, and change every joint. It does not seem to me that this is good, but rather that they should be moistened with a concoction of egg and powder of mallow; then leave the bandage on, until the bone is firm, and the cartilage hardened.
And sometimes the button of an abscess is opened with a needle, and if it is loosely wrapped in a bandage, and the fracture is held, and the patient breathes through. For do that which you see.
And if abscesses come to the urine as you urinate, then put a little cotton moistened with rose oil, or in a pouch of hyssop.
And if the abscesses do not come, then apply a plaster made from flour of cypress, and powder of incense, mixed with water, then put on light poultices, and do not tie around the kidneys.
and if the fracture of the kidney is small, and it is broken into tiny pieces, then extract the excrements suitable for that, then sew the wound, and treat the things that cause inflammation and swelling, as with plasters and ointments suitable for that.
and if it has no deep wounds, then the treatment of tents, and he puts bandages of plaster, as long as it is healthy.
When the jawbone is broken apart, and there is no point of the wound to be found, and the breaking is only slightly so, and it is not broken in two, unless the bone is corroded within, then one examines it lightly.
It is necessary, if the breakage is on the right side, that you put your right index finger in the mouth of the patient; and if the breakage is on the left jaw, then put your right index finger, and gently push the breakage from within, and hold the other side with the other hand from outside, and make it even.
And if the breakage of the jaw is separated in two, then it is necessary that you administer extension to the two parts, until it is even.
And if the teeth are shaken by a rupture, or a fracture, then hold them back with a thread of gold or silver or silk, then put on the broken jaw a kerchief, and put on the dressing twice; and put on the dressing a large staple well made, or a piece of leather equal, long and wide according to the jaw, and tie it around the mouth that you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and eat light foods.
And if you see that the fracture is changing, then untie it on the third day, and then put back in place what has changed; and apply a plaster on it, made from powder of millstone with egg white or flour of oats, after you have applied the kerchief;
and put on a light linen plaster, and if the plasters stick, and the condition of the patient does not change, let it be until it is healed; Many times it is healthy in three weeks.
And if abscesses that come, then we will treat them as we have said many times.
And if it has a fracture and wound together, restore the nude piece of bone in being bone; if subtlety of the bone the extracted fragments reunite with that.
And if the wound is narrow, then enlarge it with a flame according to necessity.
And when you have bones all these pieces, and none remain, then sew the wound, if it is large, and put on it some plasters united to that, to bind flesh, until it be healthy.
The fracture breaks many times before, towards the shoulder, and the break is in three manners:
Or when it is broken and dislocated in two places, and there are fragments, and it is more difficult to restore;
or where there is a break with a wound.
And the work is such that when the break is without a wound, you should have two attendants, so that one holds the injured area where the break has occurred; and the other stretches the neck towards the affected part;
then put the break equally between your two hands, so that the shape is as it should be, and there is neither appearance nor deviation.
And if you need to extend it further, then put on the shoulder of the patient a round sphere made of cloth, or of wool, and let its size be according to your necessity; and stretch and lift the injured area, and hold the sphere in your hand, so that you put the break in its proper place;
And if you cannot pull the head of the shoulder out of its joint, because it comes from deep within, then it is necessary that the patient put his hand on his hip, and place the middle of the shoulder on the tip of the elbow, and turn the lower end of the shoulder downwards, until the bone of the shoulder is raised.
And then take the fracture in your hands, and if you pull it straight, it is necessary that you cut into;
and pull the pieces gently, and if the bone cannot join due to any swelling, then cut according to one of the incisions that you have; but that you put on the shoulder this instrument, to guard the skin:
and resembles a spoon, and is not too narrow, and should be as wide as it is necessary, according to the size of the bone and the thickness of the tissue;
and it has two parts, as you see, and let one be large, and the other be narrow, just as is the condition of the wound that you have made when you treated the bones;
and when you are assured of a hot abscess, cut the wound, and if the condition is small, or you doubt the abscess is hot, then fill the wound with dressings and tents, according to its quantity.
And if a hot abscess comes, then moisten the dressing in oil and rose water and vinegar, and apply it.
The strengthening of the bone, when it is without wounds and without surgery, is that you apply to the bone a plaster made from powdered mallow and egg white, and apply light bandages, and put a splint under the dressing, if you have the skill; Then take a very wide bandage of a palm's length, then put a double cloth on the swelling, and apply the plaster. Then take a thin stick of three fingers in width and length, and wrap it around the bandage, so that one end of the bandage hangs down. and put the stick on the fracture, and turn the bandage around the neck, and undo the healthy shoulder, and undo the diseased shoulder; and reset each part, and when you see that the ligaments hold the fracture firmly, and you clearly see that the stick does not move on the broken bone, then check every day, and when the ligaments are relaxed, then restrain it.
and make the patient lie on his back, and put when he sleeps a small pillow under the shoulder, to raise the joint upwards. If the fracture of the upper arm is reduced by the reduction of the shoulder, or you tie the arm to the neck, and no bad accident happens, until twenty days;
then reapply the plaster, if you see that it is needed, and hold it in place and let it be, until it is restored;
and it is most often restored in twenty-eight days, and in less than eight weeks.
of the fracture of the shoulder
It happens that the broken or dislocated shoulder does not heal in the middle, and it is not felt to be out of place except by the touching;
if the bandage conforms to the shape of the fracture, and the dressing conforms to its natural form, in all the ways that you can;
then put on the wound powder of millet with a little water, and light dressings, and put over it a double bandage; Then put on a wide and thin stake, a little wider than the shoulder, and if the stake is dislocated it moves in no place of the shoulder, unless one uses a poultice of hot linen, so that the stake becomes straightened;
and then bind it all with a large bandage firmly, so that the stake does not move from its place, and look at the linen every day;
and every time it becomes dislocated, bind it, and put the stake straight as it was out of its place, and let the patient lie on their side;
and the shoulder is restored in 20 days or in 25.
And when this number of days is accomplished, then untie it, and be careful, for it is not good to keep it tied too long.
And if a piece of bone protrudes forward, and pushes against the heart, then make an incision, and the oste, and do what we have said in the breaking of a false abscess of hot aposteme.
of the fracture of the foot
The feet are sometimes fractured in the middle, but this happens rarely; but it breaks often at the toe
And when it is fractured in the middle, it declines to the toe, and the patient feels great pain, and lack of strength, and weakness, and by chance vomits blood, and opens the bowel in the broken bone, and loses his senses.
And the restoration is that the patient often places on his back, and puts a cushion between the shoulders, then presses the shoulders, and brings together the sides of the two ribs with his hands, and subtly adjusts to make it even in all ways that you can, so that the shape of the bone is as it should be;
then put on plasters and stoppings above the subtle splint of salt, or another light paste, and wrap it in a bandage, and tie it to the broken bone, so that it does not move; and turn the linen bandage around the back, and tighten it firmly, and rewind each hour the bandage, and if it becomes loose, then tighten it;
and if it becomes necessary to loosen it, due to corrosion or itching that comes to the wound, or pain or abscess, then hasten and loosen it, and render the plaster, and address what has come from various methods of treatments;
then reset the plaster, and tighten it as long as it is healthy.
of the fracture of the ribs
It is known that the fracture of the ribs does not come from a blow except when there are large blows on the back, and on the inner chest, and do not cause pain except because they are swollen; and the pain is especially bad at the time of urination.
And the restoration is such that you put even the fracture, as it is necessary. And then apply the plaster, and hold it with a stick, if you have this in your profession.
And if the fracture of the ribs declines inward, then the patient feels great pain and puncture, as with a case of pleurisy, for the bone pierces the membrane; and sharp pains, and coughing and vomiting a great quantity of blood, and it is a grievous condition, and the old men have given much advice.
And if it is one of those who say that it is necessary to administer foods which inflate the stomach, in order to push out the fracture.
We do not make this, because a hot abscess does not come, if it has not come. And if it has come, thus let it be.
And they say that none of the veins should be cut on the body to suck out the humor, and this seems reasonable; Nevertheless, there is doubt that the veins do not attract the excess humors of the body due to the weakness.
And they say that one should cover the body with a warm woolen cloth soaked in hot oil, and put tents between the ribs to equalize the flow within, then it will be cured by the treatment of the cure of pleurisy, of diet and of medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain that they cannot bear the pressure on the bone which points to the lung, and there is doubt in the patient, then it is necessary to cut into the body of the broken rib, and it is necessary to put an instrument inside to guard against the damage.
and then one must cut the bone, and shave lightly, and then sew the two lips of the wound, if it is large, and apply a dressing to it, until it becomes healthy.
And if a carbuncle appears, put on it a moistened cloth soaked in rose oil, and apply it to the body;
and treat the place from which it comes that gives rise to the carbuncle, and apply poultices to the affected area where it should be, until it becomes healthy.
and also to the spine of the back.
And when it happens to anyone, and you want to know if they will be healthy or not, take heed if you see their hands softened and swollen and deadened, and they cannot move or stretch them, and when you prick them with a needle, they do not feel it.
Know that it is mortal in many conditions, and if they move and feel well when one holds them firmly and tightly, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient will be cured, if one applies a cure.
And if a similar thing comes to the spine of the back, and you want to know if it is healthy or not, then take heed if the feet are swollen, and if the accidents that occur are in the hands, and on the back there is sweating and vomiting without desire;
and when one has it seated on their stomach, then there is vomiting without desire. And when it is seated on its back and it wants to sit, then it cannot. Know that it is mortal: if one does not work at his cure.
And if this accident does not come to them, then the thing is lighter.
And the treatment is that you apply if there is a hot abscess, put on the spine oil of rose or oil of mallow's root, until it is appeased;
then apply one of the comforting and drying plasters, and bind it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that side where he feels the pain, until he is healed.
And if some bone becomes dislocated, then it is necessary to sew over the heart; and reduce the bone, then bring together the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a suture, then treat the joint with gum arabic, until he is healed;
and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "head of the elbow", you thrust your fist into your left hand, and place it even with your other hand on your shoulder, then apply the plaster and set it straight, if you have skill;
Then hold it back, and if there is a bone uncovered, make an incision above, and on the bone, and treat the wound until it is healed.
of the fracture of the bone of the thigh
It happens that the bone of the thigh is fractured, and if it happens, then there is not much help from a little manipulation at the head; and it causes lengthwise pain, and decline to the patient, and comes to the sick person pain in the leg, and sharpness, and swells what is broken.
And the restoration is that you put your hand on it, as long as you are above the fracture; and you should know what the breakage and its shape are;
and if the fracture is at the head of the bone, then put equal to that fracture, as long as it is in its natural shape.
And if the break is of long duration, or it declines inwardly, then have the patient lie on their stomach, until the restoration of that break is apparent. And when you have made it even, put on a plaster, then put on a splint of wood or of leather, and hold the break steady, so that it does not move;
and anoint the limb below the ribs, until the injury is even. And instruct the patient that they should sleep on their sound side, or on their back.
And if hot abscesses come, do not touch them, until the hot abscesses are alleviated, and put on what we have previously mentioned; and then return to the restoration, and hold it as is necessary, if there is no other bad accident;
of the fracture of the shoulder
The joints are what is between the elbow and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, thus one must restore it according to one of the two methods:
one of which is that you take a wooden splint of moderate thickness, in this form:
And tie the two joints the two bands, and bend them upwards, and sit the patient on a seat;
then put the arm with the broken bone on the splint, until it comes to the elbow, and have in the middle a curve of wood, then tie above some heavy thing where the minister extends downwards;
then put the mire the fracture even with his hands together, so that the fracture returns as it should.
And the other manner is that one binds the patient to his bed, and ties his hand to his neck, then instructs the servants that one of them takes what is on the bruise in his hands, and the others take below all the linen, and stretches each to its part.
And if you see that the extraction is more forced, then hold the linen below the bruise and on the bruise, and stretch each of the servants to his part.
And if the bruise is near the head of the shoulder, then it is necessary that you put one linen under the armpit, and the other towards the elbow, under the bruise.
and also if the bruise is towards the elbow, then it is necessary to put the linen lightly, without pressure, until the bruise is even on the limb and on the elbow;
Then put even the fracture, if it is necessary, and hold it steady, so that abscesses do not come to the wound.
And if abscesses do come, then do not hold it tight for seven days, and put on a moist cloth and oil of roses, until the abscess is reduced.
Then hold it steady, and the manner of holding is that you put a plaster on the fracture, then assemble the arm with the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the back.
and put on a bandage, and hold to the shoulder, and to the arm, so that the arm is in its place, if nothing can dislodge it, or if the bone is not moved.
And if you doubt that the bone will not move, then use splints, and put on the fracture a splint larger and stronger than the others, and let there be between each splint two fingers' space, and let each splint be so large that it passes the fracture three fingers on each side.
then strain on the stiles, thus as I said at the beginning of the chapter on the fracture, stronger and less in aligning.
And if you see the alignment of the stiles, and the constriction, as we have said, in the work that you restore the broken member, and you suspect hot abscess, let it be until the seventh day, as we have said;
then examine each for three days the ligament, that swelling or inflammation does not come to the limb, or the nourishments cannot come to the member because it is too constricted. If it decreases, as we have said.
And if no such accident comes, then do not force the dislocation further that after three days or more, and let the patient sleep on his back, and put his hands on his stomach;
and put a dislocated shoulder in its proper place with a pillow of wool evenly, and watch each hour of the day or night, that the alignment of the member does not break nor the tendons become slack;
if it adheres by virtue of medicine, and give the food that we have previously mentioned, in such a manner that the food is first subtle; and when it begins to seize, then it should be coarse.
And it is customary that the shoulder and the leg should be seized for 40 days from everything; and then one must dislocate it and administer baths and medicines of anointings for the joint to adhere;
And if the fracture is ugly and swollen, then it will take 40 days or 2 months to disentangle.
of the fracture of the arm
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "radius" and "ulna", one of which is small, and it is the one that connects to the shoulder;
and the other is large, and it is the one that is twisted, towards the little elbow;
by chance, the large radius bone will break alone, or the small one, and by chance they will mend together.
When the small radius bone is broken, the restoration is easy, and the healing;
and when the large one is broken, then the healing is bad, and more troublesome than when they are broken together.
If it is the small radius bone that is broken alone, then it is necessary to set it lightly in place, and make it even.
And if it is the large radius bone, then it is necessary to set it with more force;
and stretch out on the cushion, and pull the pouch of the hand higher than the others, and let the little fingers be lower than the other fingers, and let the patient cross their arms over themselves, and the cushion in front of them higher, so the patient does not suffer any hardship;
then stretch out the ministers like arms to the part below his hand, or to the elbow, and one minister to the other above.
And then put the mire equal, according to its best form.
And if it breaks into pieces, put each one in its place, and if there is no matching piece to join the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, then make a splint and the bone, as we have said before.
And if with the break there is a wound, I have spoken of it in the singular chapter; If you take the treatment.
And if at the beginning of the restoration there appear abscesses and swellings, apply a plaster made from oil and white wax, which should be neither too hard nor too soft; and spread the plaster subtly on it, until the abscesses and swellings are alleviated.
And then remove the wax, and apply a plaster made from powdered millstone with a little water, then put on the splints, and let the splint of the fracture be stronger, and a bit larger than the others;
and know that it must have six splints or arms in various positions: be it that the fracture is in one of the bones, or in two;
and hold more firmly on the fracture than other parts, and all the less so in touching, as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and are the bandages that are on the fracture soft and moist, and not hard nor harsh;
and are the bandages that are on the fracture soft and moist, and not hard nor harsh; and let the thread, from which it is strained, be of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
And bind the limb and the thread after a few hours. And if some evil accident happens to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, then it is necessary that you wrap the limb with warm water, until those itchings are alleviated;
and let the limb not be restrained from resting.
And then restart the tightening, and if the threads are softened and the bones dislocated, and similar things, if it is necessary.
And beware that the numbness cannot come to the limb, because it is too tight, then it is necessary that you loosen it a little, and leave it thus for some hours, until the numbness departs, and then tighten.
And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, then do not untie him for up to twenty days.
Or put a bandage around his neck, then bind his hands to his neck, and let his neck be even, and guard against movement and digestion, and let him sleep on his back;
and know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or in thirty-five, and by chance in twenty days, according to the compositions and complexities of the virtues.
of the fracture of the hand
Know that on the back of the hand and as we have said, there are few fractures, and it rarely comes to a point where there is often splinting.
And when the palm of the hand is fractured or split, then it is necessary that the patient sit cross-legged, and sit upright in front of him evenly;
Then he puts his hand on the extended leg, and extends the mangled bones, and puts the muscles even with the bones, as long as they are well joined;
and applies a plaster and the poultices, if abscesses do not come, then he puts a splint according to the quantity of the defect; and let it be wrapped in a linen cloth.
And if the fracture is on the inner side of the sole of the foot, make a sphere of cloth, and instruct the patient to bind it to his broken foot; and then bind it with a long cloth, and let the splint be of leather soft enough as the palm of the hand, and bind it, as is necessary.
And if the fracture is in the finger, it is necessary that you put a splint on top, and another below on the palm, so that the hand is straight and upright, then tie it all around the hand, and tighten the cloth between the two.
And if the fracture comes to one of the two bones, it is the forearm, set it straight, as it is necessary; and restrain it with a splint, and if you see that a small straight stick is put to lift the fracture, and does not move;
and if the fracture is in the other arm, as in the elbow or one of the others, set it straight, and bind it with the healthy arm that is next to it; or you tie them both together, so that they do not move, or you put a stick on, as on the forearm;
and take care in the restoration and in the treatment of hot abscesses, and heal those that come from it, as I have said.
The bone of the thigh is often broken, and one can see it well when it turns to the front and back;
and the restoration is when one puts a bandage under the fracture, and another above it. And the patient puts his face on it, then each assistant extends his hand to his part equally;
and it is when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
And if the fracture is near the root of the thigh, one of the assistants should be at the groin, and the other assistant above the fracture.
And also if it is near the knee, and then the assistant should be at the knee, and the extension should be below;
then put the bones equal with his two hands, as long as it is according to its natural shape, and then apply the plaster, and the bandage, if abscesses do not come.
And if there is a hot abscess, let it cool, then return to your work and to its treatment; The book is made in such a manner.
It is necessary that you bind the fracture with a bandage doubled in two or three layers, and let the surplus hang over, then turn the leg so that the heels come to the root of the knee, and put a long thread between the thigh and the leg, below the knee, and let the end of the thread come out above.
then turn the bandage on the leg and on the thigh, then put these on the fracture, and put a stake on the bone of the leg;
then fill the empty space between the leg and the thigh with soft cloths to make equal pressure, then begin to bind firmly two or three turns around the fracture; and the more you go up from the fracture, the less it is constricted;
then understand the two heads of the thread that you have placed between the thigh and the hip, and in their place there are three stitches that are detached, then return to the bottom at the head of the thread, until you come up near the foot;
and hold it steady, so that it does not move from its place, then leave it thus, and that there comes neither abscess nor swelling nor any similar thing. And if it happens, then undo it, and treat what has come, as we have said many times;
and if it is a piece of bone that hurts, then make it grow, if one can; and if one cannot, then make the place grow by cutting and scraping; and treat it as we have said, until it is healthy.
And sometimes the hip is broken thus where one puts stitches, as in the shoulder and or arm;
In all ways, during restoration thus made not ringing to the patient.
And it is known that the thigh is restored in a day, or a little less or a little more, according to the diversity of the complications.
It is known that in the hollow of the knee there is little breaking, but it often swells.
And if it breaks, it is nothing but a fissure, or a perforation, and there is a complete wound, and without a wound, and that feels well.
And the restoration is when one puts even what is broken to its two parts, as long as they are assembled as one can.
then apply the plaster, and you put on a round bandage, if you have the skill, and hold it as is necessary, then examine all the treatments that we have said for other fractures, such as abscesses, heat, and similar things; Put to each accident what is suitable for it, as long as it is healthy.
of the fracture of the leg
Be aware that in the leg there are II bones, because of which one is called by right "tibia", and the other is called "fibula";
and it has the same kind of fracture as the arm, and for this reason the restoration is just like that of the arm, and the work is all the same. And if both bones are broken together, then the leg becomes twisted on all sides.
And if the slender bone is broken, then it becomes twisted forwards.
And if the large bone is broken, then one feels great pain, and the swelling is visible; and it becomes deformed.
Then we apply extension, and put it in place, and lay the splints equally;
but however, it is necessary if the fracture is ugly, and it has many pieces, that the extension be smaller and lighter; and the wing according to its strength.
And when you have completed your work, take two pieces of split wood that press against the thigh on one side and the other, and are as long as the thigh from the knee to the buttocks;
then wrap two splints with one bandage above and below, and tie it in the middle, and to this binding the thigh should not turn to the right or left, and thus it is well;
and let someone apply a splint as long as the thigh, and it is of wood, and put it on the thigh to prevent movement, and properly made for the fracture or where there is a wound;
and move each day the leg, to see if it has an abscess or another accident; if you treat him as long as he is healthy.
of the fracture of the bones of the foot
To the ankle comes no fracture, but to the bones of the foot come sometimes fractures and to the two knees, and it does not happen that they are shattered in many different ways.
And if there is a fracture of the bones of the foot, and you see these bones overlapping each other, then put the patient's foot on the ground, just as if he were going to walk, and then put your foot on top of his, where the bones are raised, then press down until they return to their place;
then apply the plaster and bandages above, and put beneath the belly of the foot two flat splints, then bind it to the foot firmly, then you have enveloped the dressing around, and other things that you have need of.
And when three or four days have passed, if you untie the bandage, you will find the bones even, whether they are broken, whether they are dislocated.
And if there are some of the fingers broken, restore them, as we have said about the fingers of the hand; Then put on the broken finger a splint according to the length of the finger, and let it be a little wider, then put next to the foot the tablet that I have spoken of, and bind it tightly;
and if there are two or three, or more, broken, put on each finger a splint according to its quantity, wrapped in a linen cloth, and bind the tablet next to the foot; and let it be placed on top of the tablet across the belly of the foot, so that it holds it well.
And it is necessary that you do not forget the other things that I have said about other fractures, since we have spoken of them. and treat each accident as it is necessary.
of the fracture of the bone of the finger
When the bone in the thigh of the woman is fractured, if it makes her sit with enlargement, then bend her to the back part, and let it be held from behind;
then fill the bath with warmth of the patient's body heat, and put in it as much [water] as [the quantity that is] sufficient;
then undress the woman, and raise her back a little by little, and then press the cloth, until it comes to the entrance of the thigh, and the bone returns with the rest;
and when she wants to urinate, remove the cloth, and when she has urinated, put it back on her, and do this for seven days or inside; If it will be restored the fracture, and you see, take a bladder of goat, and tie to the fractured area a string, and pour all the bladder into the wound; then blow in the string strongly, until the bladder is inflated from within: the wound will then restore the fracture;
then it should be filled with cotton, and left thus for some days, until it is healed.
And when the bone of the shoulder of man is broken, or of woman, thus it should be restored as we have said for the bone of the thigh;
and these nearby fractures are not hidden from one who applies his study and work, and attends to my book.
For the fracture signifies in many ways the right way of restoration: pay attention then.
On the stick, when it is broken, take a handful of ivy and bind the stick; then wrap it with bandages around, and leave it for three days or therein, and it will be healthy soon.
of a fracture with a wound
It is necessary for the one who has a fracture with a wound, especially if it is large, such as the bone of the thigh or shoulder or similar, that it be healed now, so that the healings that we have mentioned bear witness.
And if the wound heals, then anoint with vitriol, if you have nothing else, then recommence to restore the fracture in the same hour, or that day, if abscesses do not come.
And if abscesses come, then leave the restoration until the ninth day, as long as the abscess is alleviated, and do not touch it on the third day nor on the fourth, for you will cause bad accidents to come.
And if the broken bone is visible on the heart of the uncovered wound, then it is necessary that you put it in place lightly with your hands, with small extension.
And if the extension is not prepared to be put in place by your hands, then reset it with this instrument made of iron, which has 7 or 8 fingers in length, and its width is according to the quantity of the wound; and for this reason it is necessary for the master that he take 3 or 4, according to what he needs in each treatment of a fracture;
and let it be rounded and somewhat thick, so that it does not press on the member during your work, and let it be pointed at the front, and thick from the middle forward, thus:
And it is called "palainche", because it is necessary that the curved head be put on the top of the exposed bone; and strike it once, as long as it grows back, and let one be even with the other. And if the fracture is subtle, and the surgeon cannot well grasp the bone, then it is necessary that you cut off the end of the bone, so that the surgeon has possession of it.
And if you cannot reset the bone, as we have said, then cut it with an instrument suitable for that purpose, whether to cut or to scrape, according to your ability.
Then remove what remains in the bone of callus and small spurs.
And when the bone is reset, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place.
Do this until it is in its place, then wrap it in a bandage soaked in black styptic wine, and apply it neatly if it is in a splint. and do not put anything on the wound, such as cerote or other things that have oil, so that it does not cause suppuration and corruption;
then administer these once you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cover it all around, according to the size of the wound, and take good care that the wound is not constricted with the dressing;
and many times foolish physicians have done this, and have caused death or corruption to come upon the patient; and let the dressing be softer and more gentle than other dressings.
And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that a serious accident may occur, as we have said, and you feel pain in the body, then it is not suitable to put these on; but wrap around, on the body of this dressing, a cloth, and tie them.
And when you see after one or two days the wound beginning to fester, then remove what you had applied on top of everything, and put on a healing ointment for wounds, such as ointment called tetrapharmacum and similar things.
And it is necessary that you unbind the limb two times a day, in the morning and in the evening, until it is sound and healthy.
And it is necessary that the limbs be bound in such a way that the wound can flow downwards slightly.
And if many days pass, and it cannot heal but rather discharges continuously, know that there are small pieces of bone, because of which it is necessary that you touch the wound with a probe, and remove all these loose pieces that cause that pain.
And if a fistula or other kind of corruption comes to the limb, then it is necessary that you treat it, according to what is written in its chapter above.
And when the bone is broken, and open on the limb, such as the bone of the thigh or of the shoulder, and other similar ones of the large limbs, do not touch it, because many times death comes from it, but let it be until it becomes calloused;
By chance it will close itself after twenty days or thirty, then treat the wound, if you can;
and if you cannot, then leave it be.
We come many times after the health of the bruising, especially when it is near the joint, and the bad thing is to see the shape of the limb; and by chance it cannot make the limbs do their natural works.
Take care then that the nostrils are fresh: if you administer medicines that dry up, such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and sarcocolla, acacia, and other similar things, so that you prepare one of these things, or all together, and mix them with wine that dries up or with absinthe or with vinegar; and put them on the nutmeg in stops, and constrain it well, and do not untie it with gentle movements;
and put them on the nutmeg in stops, and constrain it well, and do not untie it with gentle movements; and then reset it, and restart another one, until the swelling is reduced;
or you constrain on a well-made piece of plaster; for the property of plaster is that it reduces all the swellings above the limbs;
and if the swelling is already converted into hardness like stone, and it is in need of being cut, then cut above it, and make the excess apparent; or you treat it with some ease, until it is reduced, and the treatment until it is healed.
of the member which is weak after the healing
When the fracture of the bone is restored, and it remains weak and subtle after the healing of the members, this happens for many reasons: because one is for this that it was tied too tight, and was not tied as it was supposed to be or because it had too many ties, and the nourishments could not come to the limb; or because of a multitude of swelling; or because of too great movements, not in its time; or because it has little blood in its body, so is weak.
And the cure is that you make the patient eat, and make the body tender, so that the blood is multiplied in him; and give it a bath, and give joy and happiness;
then put poultice on the limb, so that the poultice attracts great nourishment, and the swelling of the hot water, until the nourishment runs to the limb; and returns to its natural shape.
the member is twisted after the injury When the members are twisted after the restoration, and the broken bones are exposed, and the form of the member is ugly, it does not lose its natural function:
if one does not believe the fools who say that one should break the member anew, and many foolish doctors have done this in our land;
and these practices are to be blamed, and great evils come from them, and death often results;
however, if the nodations and the swellings are fresh, then it is necessary that they be treated with warm water, or that softening herbs be applied, such as leaves of violette, and roots, and melilot, and similar things;
and make a softening plaster, such as a well-made diacaluminum, and take the muscle of violette, and mix it with the fat of a goose or oil of cypress, and apply the plaster;
Or you take fat figs, and crush them with cinnamon powder, and similar medicines that reduce the swelling.
And sometimes the knot is soothed by continually and for a long time rubbing with a moist hand. And restore movement to the limb every hour.
And if the tortured part is inflamed and hardened, like stone, and needs to be operated on with iron, then you should cautiously cut just to the bone, subtly and lightly; and put caution and study into the cure.
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation comes to anyone, if you need to now bring back into alignment.
For if it is delayed, the limbs become swollen, and by chance, one resets them to the right place;
because it is not suitable to move it to the hole where it is swollen: many times it causes spasms and other pains;
in any case, when this happens, make the patient sane, then let him be, until the abscesses and ulcers are appeased;
then raise the limb from the cold and oily water, then reset it gently, and treat each member as the treatment will come into its place.
And I have ordered the chapters on dislocations from the head to the feet.
It happens that the jawbones are dislocated and loose, and the dislocation of both is in two ways: where they are a little loosened from their places, and softened a little; where they are entirely dislocated, and hang towards the pis, and cut the saliva from the mouth so it cannot be held, nor can the mouth be closed, and envelops the tongue with speech.
When the dislocation is small, it returns due to the many arrangements of the body.
And if it is entire and complete, then it is necessary that you reset it quickly, and do not tarry;
and in such a manner that the minister guides the head of the patient, and puts his fingers into the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth with one of his hands, if the dislocation is on both sides; and the other two fingers are placed apart, to make even;
and instruct the patient to soften his jaws, and move them from all sides. And let the mire (mirror or sight) be equal, until it returns to its place.
And if the resetting is difficult, especially when these are the two jaws together, then apply warm oil and oil to them, so that the resetting becomes lighter;
Nor do we speak of resetting, as we have said.
And when they are reset equally, and the patient's mouth closes well without softening, then put on dressings moistened with a mixture made of oil rosat and wax, then tie them lightly with soft bindings;
and let the patient sleep on their back, and their head be steady between two cushions, so that they do not move either to the right or to the left, nor make an effort to chew, but take light food, until the pains are reduced, and the jaws are numb;
and then chew what it wants lightly, and does not labor to open the mouth of the jaw and the drinker, as long as the mandible is well cleaned and healthy.
And if the two jaws cannot be put back in place at one hour, and are not converted to their uses, then come fevers and accustomed sweats, and by chance comes a purging of the belly, and by chance vomiting of pure bile.
And when you see this, then know that it is a sign of a prediction; and many times he whom it happens to, dies within eight days.
The force cannot dislodge what is stuck in the continuity of the chest and the back, and is sometimes dislocated at the thigh, and one can feel it well.
And the restoration is such that the patient lies on their back, and stretches out their arms; and then press the limb firmly with your palm, and it will return;
then put on a plaster and bind it, and make it tight;
and the joint which is turned towards the hip cannot be dislocated; if it does not, and if it dislocates again, reset it to its place, as we have said;
then put on a plaster and bind it, and make it tight, and instruct the patient to rest until they are healthy;
and likewise the head of the shoulder is reset when it is dislocated from its place.
Of the dislocation of the shoulder
Know that the shoulder is dislocated in three ways:
of what is it that the dislocation occurs at the part of the joint at the elbow and the second is at the part of the wrist and by chance it dislocates at the upper part, and that happens rarely;
and not dislocated behind at the shoulder, and not dislocated inward for the kidneys;
and often dislocates downward toward the joint, especially to those who have little flesh, for to them it is a sudden and hasty movement;
to those who have sufficient flesh, it happens with effort, and enters with effort.
And by chance it happens to some men a percussion or fracture, and inflames the shoulder with a hot abscess, and they think that it is dislocated because of this.
It is necessary then that you examine it, until you are certain of it; and then begins the treatment.
And it is known that dislocation occurs when it is downward towards the armpit, and there is a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find between them a noticeable diversity; and you will find at the head of the shoulder a hollow, and below the armpit to the touch the head of the shoulder, as if it were an elbow; and the patient cannot bring his hand to his neck, nor move with any movements;
and also, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, for you will find it manifestly at the touch;
and this kind of dislocation is not difficult to reduce, when it is recent, or if the sinew is sick.
And the method is that the ministers raise the hand of the patient up high, then put your fingers below the armpit, and lift the joint with force upwards to its place; and the minister raises the hand, and stretches it up, then puts on a dressing. if it comes quickly.
And if it does not come as we have said in the mornings after, then it is fitting that the patient be bathed in warm water; and let the anointing be soothing and softening, such as a decoction of dock and fenugreek and melilot in water, and let it be anointed;
then let the patient be laid on their back, and put on a dressing a bandage of equal thickness, not too soft nor too hard, then let the physician place his heel on the bandage, and lift the head of the shoulder gently, and pull the hand of the patient;
and another minister holds the head of the patient, so that it does not move downwards; That swelling returns now, and if you see it reset in this manner:
and have the bone that is larger than the patient's; and be straight towards the ribcage, and push the shoulder down from the patient's armpit, and lift the armpit up high, so that the patient hangs in the air; and another attendant pulls the patient's hand downwards towards the belly. And if the patient is too lightweight, then hang with him something weighted, and the dislocation returns now.
And the resetting is done in another manner:
and it is that you place a stick on the ground, whose thickness is like a pestle, and is neither too large nor too small; then it should be placed under the patient, but so that he has his shoulders draped upwards, and the patient should be standing from the length of the stick;
Then his hand should be extended downwards from the other side of the arm, and the joint will return to its place quickly;
and if it does not want to return for all these things that we have said, then make this treatment: Take a piece of two arms in length and four fingers in width, which has the head bent back to enter inside near the bottom of the shoulder, according to this shape:
Then tie a cloth around the head of the fist, so that the fist does not harm the patient, then put it under the armpit of the patient;
and extend his arm on the fist of the long one, and tie the shoulder to the fist, and the arm to the head of the hand, then put the arm on a stick of a wide chair, and let the hands hang downwards, and let the body hang from the other side: The joint returns to its place now.
And when it is in place, in whatever manner that may be, then you must put under the shoulder a layer of even wool, then put the plaster mixed with powdered millet, with incense and absorbent vinegar, on the entire shoulder and around, then strain under the shoulder strongly, and turn the linen on the plaster, and wrap the arm at the neck, and let the hand remain in place.
And it is necessary that he moves little, so that the limbs are comforted, for it will heal more quickly;
and then move more after 5 or 7 days, and move it; and if it is firm and not loosened, then it is healed.
And if the joint is out of place due to moisture that has come, or for another reason, then it is necessary that you administer cauterizations to three parts, as it is stated before in the chapter on cauterizations.
And if you do all that, and it dislocates after seven days, and the joint does not hold, and cannot lift his arm upwards, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is cut or stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
The dislocation that is towards the chest, and the breasts, or behind, if made by impulse, and stretching of hands, and one administers another ointment;
and cures it until it is healthy.
And if after the healing, stiffness comes to the limb, and slowness in movement, then let the patient bathe many times, until that stiffness is alleviated, and it returns to its first nature.
of the dislocation of the thigh
know that the joint of the thigh is dislocated at the hips, and at the hips it returns;
and it is dislocated on all sides, and likewise in front and behind, and the dislocation is not responded to, for one sees it well and feels it well; and dislocates according to each shape. And when you join the sick joint with the sound one, if you can see it openly. For the joint is strained, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder at all.
And it is necessary that you reset it so that the abscesses of the foot are gone, for if the abscesses of the foot came, it would be grievous to reset;
and by chance it cannot be reset from all at once, likewise when it is behind; if it is worse than the other dislocations, and is of greater pain, and by chance death comes.
And the restoration is such that when it can be brought back, you extend your hand with both hands; and its arms are stretched out, and the hands are placed according to the joint, above and below, and the joint is pushed towards his chest together, or to the root of his palm, until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is in front, then it returns when he doubles his hand on his hand, and strikes from the root of the palm the joint that is dislocated.
And if it does not want to return to its place, then administer a strong extension;
and it is that two ministers extend the arm, and two ministers hold it, so that it does not move during the extension;
then turn the arm from each side, after you have enveloped it in a double cloth that is long and wide;
and when the mire sets a joint in its articulation, if he anoints it with some oil to soften the joint, then warms the joint thoroughly, until it recovers;
and when it is in place, put on a dry plaster with some wool or yarn, and warm thoroughly, and bind the arm to the patient's neck, and leave it for some hours, then undo it.
And if the joint is firm in its place, untie the bandage, and let it be;
and if you see that the joint does not bind well, restart the plaster and the bandage, and let it be for some hours, until it is firmly set; then undo it.
And if he feels grit or gravel after the resetting of the joint, and it moves, then bathe and rub it thoroughly, and press until it is alleviated; Where you put on the joint a plaster of fat wool, then let it be for a day and a night, then remove it, and make it enter into the bath; and when it sweats, rub the joint moderately, then put the plaster on again, and then enter into the bath; and do this two or three times, until it is healthy;
and if you want, put on a piece of moist cloth warmed with butter, and strain it on;
so that it returns to its condition.
The dislocation of the hand
The joint of the hand is dislocated, and its displacement is slight, more than the other joints. However, it is necessary to bring it back to its place quickly, in the same way that it was dislocated, so that the limb is not weakened, or that an abscess does not form.
And the treatment is that you put the bad hand on a table, and extend the good hand, and look at the bad hand equally, so that it puts its palm on the surface of the joint, and bends until it returns.
In any case, it is necessary that you check if it is well in place; Then put the bad hand with the back of its palm on a table for extension and for treatment. And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, then put the bad hand with its back on the table, and look to put the hand on the same surface of the joint.
If it returns now, it's good. If not, then apply a poultice of warm abscesses and let it be without restarting the treatment.
And if it cannot bear it, and you cannot put it back in place after some hours, the joint remains twisted;
and do not touch the patient's arm unless it is swollen, and they cannot stretch any thing at all: then you should know that the nerves are cut, or the arteries;
if there is no other remedy except to stretch by cauterizing the affected part, and it happens by chance that there is nothing else.
And when the arm is in place, put on the plaster that we have mentioned, then stretch it and leave it for 5 hours, then unbind it and leave it thus.
And if it cannot be well moved, and there is some stiffness, then take a warm cloth, and rub it until it is healthy.
of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Sometimes the fingers of the hand are dislocated on each side, sometimes to the back of the palm or to the front;
then take the fingers and push the dislocation to your pouches as far as it will go, then hold the head of the finger, and bend it towards the part where it is dislocated;
and let it be two hours, and then put it even with that hour;
and anoint the limb, as we have said, and the joint of the hour, and make it move, and anoint it again;
and do this often, until it is straight, and also do this, if it is dislocated at the palm of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it is healed;
and also do this, when it is dislocated in another place.
Drop the dislocation of the shoulder bone at the back
When the shoulder bone in the back or neck is dislocated, where there are multiple dislocations, if there is no point of treatment, for death hastens the patient.
And the symptoms are that the evacuations come out spontaneously, cannot be held, and many times some members become weakened, either the two hips or the right arm or the left.
And often the shoulder moves to four parts;
that which moves backwards is called "gilbositez":
the treatment is that you should rewarm the gilbositez when it comes from childhood: if there is no point of cure or healing of the whole.
And that which comes from a fall or blows or similar things, the ancient manners of cure say with great words, but there is not much profit in all of them;
But I have shortened it according to my intention, and have formed treatments in various ways.
I say that in the swelling that comes to the chest before, neither injury nor health;
and also that which comes directly to both sides, and one cannot cure the abscesses that come to the back, as I have said;
and it is that the patient should be stretched out on their face in one position, and have a bandage placed under them, so they do not slip;
then fix one stick to the head on the ground firmly, and another at the feet, and tie a string under the shoulders of the patient, and another at the hips, and at the knees, and at the ankles;
and two attendants hold the strings, one to the head and the others to the feet, between the two sticks;
and are well strengthened, the tendons as we have said, and the muscles put their palms on the spine strongly, until it recovers.
And if it does not recover with this treatment, take a table three bracles in length, and shave the area around it, and let the patient be on the side, and put the head of the table under the area, then put the middle of the table on the spine; and put the master's feet on the other end of the table, and press firmly, until it recovers to its place;
and if you see that it is done, then make it at the turning which turns to the hand. And it is that you attach two tendons at the head of the patient's arm of a great size, and towards the feet two others, and have between each tendon, above and below, a palm of space in length;
and it has in each season a piercing, where the thread passes through, and the season is firmly on the ground, so that it does not move;
and between two seasons it has one season that turns, for which the thread turns, and it has in two turnings two small seasons of a palm's length, to turn the thread.
and then put the thread that is among the bones at the turning towards the head, and the other thread towards the feet at the other turning, and each of the ministers turns its turner for all the thread, and the master puts the spine even as we have said.
And when it is even, then put on a plaster made with a mixture of egg and water, and then the poultices, and then the stake of a tablet three fingers in length, which supports the joint of the hip and the part of the spine, then tie with a thread, as we have said, and use the patient's subtle nourishment, until they are healthy;
and if something comes at the end of the sickness, then it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines, with the steel that we have mentioned before; and sometimes one must administer a piece of plaster, and sometimes the appearance comes in the posterior spine of the back, and it is thought that this is a dislocation; and it is the bone that is exposed, because of which one should not have presumption: by chance sudden death comes.
It is known that the joints of the thigh and the joints of the shoulder only come out in dislocations, nor do they come out like the other joints;
and the joint of the thigh is dislocated according to four parts: downward and upward, and forward and backward;
and further inside the shoulders, and a little dislocated forward and backward.
And the recognition of its dislocation inside is that when one joins the diseased thigh with the sound one, if it is longer, and opens up the patient's knee more than the sound one, and the patient cannot bend their knee to the fire; and the member that is next to the swollen abscess becomes hot, because the head of the thigh comes there.
And the sign of one who has a fever, it is that these accidents are contrary to those before.
And the signs of one who has it in front, it is that their thigh is well according to the accomplishment; In any case, do not bend the knee without pain, and if you want to make it move, then it cannot before, and retains its urine, and swells the groin, and when one walks, it passes over the heel.
And the signs of the one who has a dislocation are that he cannot stretch his knee, nor bend it, and this leg is more twisted than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the head of the thigh is out of place under the ribs.
The reminder of this kind of dislocation is that you should consider whether the dislocation is old, and it remains according to its condition, if there is no prompt treatment; and it does not matter that he has a swelling.
And in the case where the dislocation is fresh, and it is one of the four manners of dislocation, then hasten that you turn the joint, and stretch it from within and without, and move it to the right and left; by chance if it returns, and there is no need for another treatment.
And if it does not return in this manner, then it is necessary that you apply a strong minister, and hold the leg strongly with two hands, or with a bandage that is tied above the knee; and one minister extends his hand upwards in a similar manner that he bends his hands downwards towards his shoulders, then tightens with a soft thread on the thigh; and another ties at the head of the thread;
and they stretch upwards and downwards all at once, until the patient is lifted from the ground at once, and remains hanging.
This manner of stretching is common to four similarities, and if the dislocation has recurred, as we have said, it is good.
If not, then it is necessary to apply a treatment to its similarity.
When the dislocation is in the shoulder joint, then you must place the patient on his healthy side, then put the thread at the root of the thigh, and the limb which is below the hip, then stretch the thread upwards towards the hip, and towards the strength;
Then take another minister of his arms, and embrace the large limb of the hip of the patient, and stretch it to the right side firmly: if it returns to its place now;
and this manner of dislocation is lighter than the others.
And if you cannot constrain it in this manner that we have said, then it is necessary that you tie the two feet of the patient together with a strong soft rope under the two heels, and under the two knees, and let the diseased leg be extended two fingers more than the other;
then let it hang from the head of a pole, and let it be above the ground two arms length;
then command one minister to embrace the head of the hip, and let another minister be hanging with the patient, who firmly embraces the hip, for the joint returns now quickly.
And when the dislocation is in the thigh, instruct the patient, as we have said regarding one who has a deformity, and stretch the tendon above the sick thigh properly, and above the foot also;
Then put two splints, one at the head and the other at the feet, then fix the splint between the groins of the patient in the middle of the form; and let moist cloths be applied inside, so that they do not bother the patient, then extend each minister towards him, and the surgeons put their hands equally on the dislocation.
If it returns, it's good.
If not, put on the table, and press thus as we have said regarding deformity, and instruct the patient to rest on the affected side.
And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to extend the sick thigh immediately, and according to what I have said; and put his right hand on the patient's shoulder, then press with the other hand, and stretch downwards towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is in the thigh, it is not necessary to stretch the patient downwards, or lift him up from the ground, but rather that he should be as if his hip was dislocated upwards, as we have said about lying on the two hips; and let it be on his face, and the leg stretched out as we have said before, and one must press on the joint at the thigh; and it will be perfect when the patient stretches his legs, and they will be even; then join the thighs, and apply a plaster, and bind with a bandage, so that the hip does not move; and let it rest for three or four days, then undo it, and put the plaster on again;
and if you see that they are even, then hold them back, as before, and let them be for three days;
then unbandage it, and make it walk gently, until the limb is comforted.
of the dislocation of the knee joint
The knees are dislocated in three ways: that is to say, inward, outward, and backward;
and not dislocating at all to the front.
And the signs are that you instruct the patient to bend his leg to his thigh, and if it does not adhere to his thigh, know that it is dislocated;
and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit upright, and extend his leg if he can, and put your back against his face, and put his foot on your feet;
Then take your knee in your palms, and pull it between your thighs, then bend the two sides of the knee joint together. and another minister stretches his foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the signs are that it is well for his leg to be lightly put back on his thigh;
and put the plaster on, and make the leg adhere to the thigh, and bind them together strongly for three or four days, then undo it;
and do not exert the patient to go, as long as the limbs are comforted.
And if the limbs are not in place, then minister strongly as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed.
of the dislocation of the ankle
The ankles are sometimes sprained, and sometimes completely dislocated, inwardly and outwardly.
And the signs are that the shin is swollen, and it is pulled towards the part where it is dislocated:
the forearm is lightly moved, and the arm is slightly extended by his hands when it is simply massaged.
And when it is dislocated from the whole, then you must make the patient sit straight, and hold the ankle firmly from behind the leg, above the shin;
then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and then with your left hand twice, then stretch it high, and nicely push the foot upwards;
and do this twice, as we have said, pushing and pulling the foot;
if it returns to its place, that's good;
if not, then resume the work, for it will return;
and if it cannot return in that way, then make the patient lie on his back on the ground, and fix the ankle firmly to the ground between his thighs, and tie the sheets around, so he does not move the limb;
Then let the minister anoint the thigh, and another minister holds the foot in his hands or at his leg, so that he lies on the hill of the foot; Then each minister holds equally, and the straps are repeatedly between the thighs of the patient to hold the patient when they stretch it;
Then put the minister equally to the dislocation in his hands, and another minister anoints the sound thigh above, and the dislocation will return quickly.
And when it is in place, put the plaster and stop up above, and strengthen firmly, and tie the foot to the thigh, and beware of the nerves which are above the knee behind, that the ligaments are not too tight;
Then let it be for two days or three, and if the ligaments become soft, then strengthen them;
then untie it on the third or fourth day, and have the patient urinate for four days; and if it goes beyond this limit, it is not certain that it will not dislocate again.
And if a posthernial abscess comes, then you must treat it, as we have said elsewhere, until it is healed.
of the fingers When the fingers are dislocated, then you must gently extend them without force, and it is an easy thing.
And if the dislocation is in any of the joints of the foot or toes, then you must have the patient sit on a flat surface or on a table with their leg straight, and put your foot on what opens up the joint, then press firmly with your foot until it returns to place;
and when it is even, and does not open at all, then put between the sole of the foot and a board two sticks, then strain firmly, and leave it for three days, then untie it; and have it rest, until it is healthy.
of a wound and of a dislocation together
When a wound comes with the dislocation, and one wants to restore it, often it happens that the patient dies:
if you are not presumptuous in the cure, if you are not wise in the art and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not gentle and merciful and slow, nor harsh;
and apply at the beginning of things that bring about a hot abscess, and leave the patient in the hand of God, if you do not see hope of health; and when you do see hope, then reset the limb in place, so that the hot abscess may come to a head;
and when the limb is in place, then administer things that bring about a hot abscess, and treat the wound, as it requires, with dried and powdered remedies;
and with the dislocation of a fracture, and the bones are out of joint, if they are fractured, and do what we have said in simple illnesses;
and guard yourself from entering into the way of fear, according to what I have said, for this is of value to you according to your Creator, and for the safety of your arm and your body.
